# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89914-8.pdf

## Page 1



# Anthropanin pigments in bean seedlings

Constance Nozzolillo

Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada

18 January 1971, in revised form 26 March 1971

###### Abstract

Delphinidin 3-glucoside is the major pigment in hypocotyls of mung bean seedlings; malvidin and pelargonidin glycosides are present in lesser amounts. Malvidin 3,5-diglucoside is predominant in seedling hypocotyls of two varieties of bush bean and in stems of runner bean seedlings.

_Plants_. Red-pigmented seedlings of mung bean (_Phaseolus aureus_ Roxb.); Royalty and (Black Wax cultivars of bush bean _P. vulgaris_ L.); and Hammond's Dwarf runner bean (_P. coccineus_ L.).

_Previous work_. Effect of aniline on pigmentation of mung bean.1 Nature of pigments in pods, petals, and seed coats of bush and runner bean2 and in cotyledons of mung bean.3

_Present work_. Nature of pigments in mung bean, and effect of aniline on pigmentation in bush and runner bean and nature of pigments in these two species.

_Mung bean_. Hypocotyls of 2-4 week old seedlings grown as before1 excised and extracted with MeOH-1 % HCl. After chromatographic separation, major pigment was identified as delphinidin 3-glucoside by hydrolysis and spectral and chromatographic comparison with authentic material. Traces of malvidin and pelargonidin glycosides were also detected.

_Bush bean and runner bean_. As with mung bean,1 colour development of the seedlings was reduced following imbibition of 0:01 M aniline solution, that of Royalty by 50 per cent, that of Black Wax by 75 per cent. Runner beans were even more sensitive, pigmentation in the stem being 90 per cent reduced by imbibition of 0:01 M aniline. Extracts of all three seedlings yielded the same major pigment, identified by co-chromatography as malvidin 3,5-diglucoside (absorption max. 533 nm; hydrolysis gave malvidin 3-glucoside, malvidin and glucose).

## References

1C. Nozzolillo, _Phytochemistry_**10,** 1011 (1971).

2J. B. Harborne, _Comparative Biochemistry of the Flavonoids_. Academic Press, London and New York (1967).

3J. T. Proctor, _Diss. Abstr._**31,** 10-B (1970).

Phytochemistry, 1971, Vol. 10, pp. 2552 to 2553. Pergamon Press. Printed in England.



## Page 2

Plant. Tipuana tipu_ (Benth.) O. Kuntze, trivial name, 'tipu'.

_Source_. Belo Horizonte, Brasil, where the species is used for street ornamentation.

_Trunk-wood_. The benzene extract (5g, 0*5%) was chromatographed on a silica column. The fractions eluted with hexane-benzene 1:2 yielded initially stearic acid (3 mg) and subsequently b-sitosterol (30 mg). The fractions eluted with CHCl3 afforded common-netin (10 mg). The compounds were identified by direct comparison (co-chromatography, mixed m.ps and i.r. spectra) with authentic samples.

_Root_. The benzene extract of root material yielded the same compounds.

## References

- 1H. Martins, O. R. Gottlieb and M. Taveira Magalhaes, 10, 1379 (1971).

- 1H. Martins, O. R. Gottlieb and M. Taveira Magalhaes, 10, 1379 (1971).

- 1H. Wagner and M. A.



