# 10.1590@S0102-695X2010000100002.pdf

## Page 1

Trypanoicidal activity of flavonoids and limonoids isolated from Myrsinaceae and Meliaceae active plant extracts

Ana C. Leite,1 Artur Placrees Neto,1 Alessandra R. P. Ambrozin,1 Joao B. Fernandes,1 Paulo C. Vieira,1 Maria F. das G. F. da Silva,1 Sergio de Albuquerque2

# Abstract

The activity of crude extracts of three _Rapanca_ species (Myrsinaceae) and _Cipadessa fruticosa_ (Meliaceae) was evaluated _in vitro_ against the trypanostigote forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_. Thirty-three extracts from different organs of these species were assayed and eleven of them showed significant activity (lysis % >50). The fractionation of an active extract from branches of _R. lancifolia_ (99.5%) led to the isolation of two flavonoids: quercetin and taxifolain, which have weak trypanoacid activity. Additionally, one active extract from fruits of _C. fruticosa_ (97.7%) afforded mexicanotide limonoids: cipadesi, mexicanolide, febfirtigugin and cipadesi \(A\), that were slightly active on _T. cruzi_. Moreover, other two flavonoids (flavone and 7-methoxyflavone), previously assayed against _T. cruzi_, were isolated from the hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (100%). The results presented here suggest that the plants evaluated could be a source of new active compounds against _T. cruzi_.

## INTRODUCTION

Chagas' disease (American trypanosomiasis) affects 16-18 million people, mostly from Central and South America, where 25% of the total population is at risk of infection (WHO, 2004). It is caused by a flagellate protozoan, _Trypanosoma cruzi_, and transmitted to humans by blood-sucking trationine insects and by blood transfusion (WHO, 1997). With the control of the insect vector (_Triatoma infestans_), infected blood transfusion is becoming the major cause for the spread of the disease (Dias, 1993). The only trypanoicidal substance currently used to prevent the infection by this route is gentian violet, but its use is limited due to undesirable effects on the patients (Dias, 1993). The treatment of Chagas' disease is still a challenge, since the only current available drug (benzimidazole) has strong side effects (de Castro, 1993). Thus, the search for more efficient and less toxic drugs is needed to control this disease.

In the past years, the study of compounds isolated from plants has received considerable attention in the search for alternative chemotherapy of parasitic diseases (Serrano et al., 2000) and many natural compounds have been identified as trypanocides (Duschak & Couto, 2007;

## Page 2

Guimaraes & Faria, 2007). Several extracts from plants of Meliaceae and Rutaceae families have been showed _in vitro_ activity against _T. cruzi_ (Mafezoli et al., 2000; Vieira et al., 2001; Ambrozin et al., 2004; de Mesquita et al., 2005). Therefore, natural products constitute a promising source of new active compounds for treatment of Chagas' disease.

In this paper, we report the results of the evaluation of _in vitro_ trypanocidal activity of 33 crude extracts from different organs of _Rapanea lancifolia, R. guianensis, R. umbelata_ Myrsinaaceae, and _Cipadessa fruitcosa_ Meliaceae. Moreover, it is showed the trypanocidal activity of flavonoids isolated from hexane extracts from branches of _R. lancifolia_ and _C. fruitcosa_, as well the activity of four limonoids isolated from dichloromethane extract from fruits of _C. fruitcosa_.

## MATERIAL AND METHODS

### Plant material

Plants were collected in different states of Brazil and identified by Dr. Maria Ines Salgueiro Lima from Department of Botany, UFSCar, SP and Dr. Jose Rubens Pirani from Department of Botany, USP, SP (Table 1).

### Extraction and isolation of compounds

The powdered air-dried plant material was extracted three times (72 h) by maceration with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH at room temperature. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure by rotary evaporation and the extracts obtained were assayed against _T. cruzi_.

The hexane extract (9.3 g) from branches of _R. lancifolia_ (fresh weight: 1870 g) was fractionated through column chromatography on silica gel affording hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and methanol fractions. The methanol fraction (1.5 g) was chromatographed on silica gel using hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, giving four fractions. Fraction 4 was fractionated in the same conditions to yield compounds **1** (3.2 mg) and **2** (3.7 mg).

The hexane extract (12.2 g) from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (fresh weight: 1524 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient. The ethyl acetate fraction (6.8 g) was chromatographed on silica gel, eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone gradient to give nine fractions. Fraction 3 was fractionated as above, using hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (6:3:1), affording nine fractions. Fraction 5 was three times chromatographed through column chromatography on silica gel, eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (7:2.5:0.5) to afford compounds 7 (16.7 mg) and **8** (8.2 mg).

The dichloromethane extract from fruits (15.0 g) of _C. fruticosa_ (fresh weight: 180 g), was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, resulting in the fractions: hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:1); CH2Cl2; CH2Cl2/AcOEt (1:1); EtOAc and EtOAc/MeOH (1:1). Fractions CH2Cl2/AcOEt (1:1) and EtOAc/MeOH (1:1) were studied, as following described: the fraction CH2Cl/AcOEt (1:1) (5.0 g) was again submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography on silica gel using a gradient elution (hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc, and MeOH), resulting in the four corresponding soluble fractions. The ethyl acetate fraction (2.3 g) obtained from the last fractionation was several times chromatographed on silica gel and finally submitted to preparative HPLC to afford for limonoids **3** (19.4 mg), **5** (8.1 mg), and **6** (8.5 mg). Limonoid **4** (48.9 mg) was isolated from fraction EtOAc/MeOH (1:1) (4.6 g) of extract through several chromatographies on silica gel.

Compounds **1**-**6 were identified through 'H and '1C NMR spectra, 'H - 'H COSY, HSQC and HMBC experiments and MS. The spectral data of **1** and **2** were in agreement with those published in the literature (Kuo et al., 1998; Moon et al., 2001) as well as the data of limonoids **3** (Luo et al., 2000), **4** (Paula, 1996), **5** (Govindachari & Kumari, 1998) and **6** (Leite et al. 2005a). Additionally, compounds **7** and **8** were characterized by comparison of '1C NMR data with the literature (Kingsburry & Looker, 1975). The _in vitro_ activity on _T. cruzi_ of compounds **3** - **6** is described herein. On the other hand, the activities of compounds **1, 2, 7** and **8** were previously reported (Ambrozin et al., 2004; Tasdemir et al., 2006).

### Bioassay

The bioassays were carried out according to the procedures described by Ambrozin et al. (2008). The activity of crude extracts was evaluated in triplicate at 4 mg/mL and pure substances at 250, 100, and 50 mg/mL. It is expressed as percent reduction of the parasite number (lysis) and IC50 (mmol/L) for compounds **3-6** were calculated using the program GraphPad Prims v.3.0.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline Plant & Herbarium/collected in & Voucher number \\ \hline _Rapanea lancifolia_ & HUFSCar - Department & 6700 \\ (Mart.) Mez. & of Botany, São Carlos, & \\  & SP/03/08/00 & \\ _Rapanea_ & HUFSCar - Department & 6699 \\ _guianensis_ Aubl. & of Botany, São Carlos, & \\  & SP/03/08/00 & \\ _Rapanea_ & HUFSCar - Department & 6698 \\ _umbellata_ (Mart.) & of Botany, São Carlos, & \\ Mez. & SP/03/08/00 & \\ _Cipadessa_ & SPF – Department of & 110.664 \\ _fruticosa_ Bl. & Botany, USP, São Paulo, & \\  & SP/01/20/01 & \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Botanical identification of plants assayed.



## Page 3



## Results and Discussion

In this work, we assessed the trypanocidal activity of 33 extracts of three Myrsinaceae and one Meliaceae species (Table 2). Eleven of them (33%) showed significant activity (lysis %0 > 50) at 4 mg/mL against the trypanastigote forms of _T. cruzi._ The majority of the extracts of _C. fruticosa_ presented relevant activity. The best result was obtained from the hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (CFBH) that reduced 100% of the parasite number. The majority of the extracts of the three _Rapanea_ species assayed did not present significant results, since several extracts led to the total lysis of the parasites and the red blood cells, as well. However, some extracts of these species showed high trypanocidal activity without affecting the red blood cells, such as the hexane extract from branches of _R. lancifolia_ (RLBH).

Similar studies involving the trypanocidal activity of Meliaceae and Rutaceae species have been reported by our group (Mafezoli et al., 2000; Vieira et al., 2001; Ambrozin et al., 2004, 2005a, 2008) showing that these plants can be considered a promising source of active compounds against trypanastigote forms of _T. cruzi._ Thus, the significant results obtained from the extracts of _C. fruticosa_ are consistent with those previously reported for this family.

The investigation of the methanol fraction of the active hexane extract from branches of _R. lancifolia_ (RLBH) led to the isolation of the flavonol quercetin **(1)**

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Plant & Plant part & Solvent extraction & Crude extract & Lysis \% \\  & & hexane & RLFLH & 76.8 \\  & flowers & dichloromethane & RLFLD & 72.2 \\  & & methanol & RLFLM & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & hexane & RLLH & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\ _Rapanea lancifolia_ (Myrsinaceae) & leaves & dichloromethane & RLLD & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & methanol & RLLM & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & hexane & RLBH & 99.5 \\  & branches & dichloromethane & RLBD & 7.0 \\  & & methanol & RLBM & 47.69 \\  & & hexane & RGFLH & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & flowers & dichloromethane & RGFLD & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & methanol & RGFLM & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & hexane & RGLH & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & leaves & dichloromethane & RGD & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\ _Rapanea guianensis_ (Myrsinaceae) & & methanol & RGLM & 68.5 \\  & branches & hexane & RGBH & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & branches & dichloromethane & RGBD & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & methanol & RGBM & 6.94 \\  & & Hexane & RUFRH & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & fruits & dichloromethane & RUFRD & 69.4 \\  & & methanol & RUFRM & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & hexane & RURH & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\ _Rapanea umbrellaa_ (Myrsinaceae) & roots & dichloromethane & RURD & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & methanol & RURM & TL\({}^{\ast}\) \\  & & hexane & CFFRH & 95.5 \\  & fruits & dichloromethane & CFFRD & 97.7 \\  & & methanol & CFFRM & 60.6 \\  & & Hexane & CFLH & 33.7 \\  & leaves & dichloromethane & CFLD & 92.8 \\ _Cipadesaa fruiticosa_ (Meliaceae) & & methanol & CFLM & 40.2 \\  & branches & bicarbonate & CFBH & 100 \\  & & methanol & CFBD & 76.1 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: _In vitro_ activity of the crude extracts (4 mg/mL) of _Rapanea_ species and _Cipadesaa fruiticosa_ on trypanastigote forms of _Typanosoma cruzi._

## Page 4

and the dihydroflavonol taxifolin (**2**). Several biological activities have been reported for these flavonoids. Quercetin (**1**), for example, presented antiprotozoan effect against _Plasmodium falciparum_ (IC\({}_{50}=14\) uM), _Trypanosoma brucei_ (IC\({}_{50}=13.2\) uM), _Leishmania donovani_ (IC\({}_{50}=63.8\) uM) (Camacho et al., 2002), _T. brucei_ and _T. rhodesiense_ (Williamson & Finnigan, 1978). In addition, this compound was described as a constituent of an aqueous extract from _Lychnophora pinaster,_ Asteraceae which showed trypanocidal activity (Silveira et al., 2005). Recently, high leishmanicidal activity was described for such compound (Tasdemir et al., 2006). Compounds **1** and **2** were previously assayed on trypantigote forms of _T. cruzi,_ but showed low activity (Tasdemir et al., 2006). The relevant activity of the original extract (RLBH) is probably associated with the presence of other compounds or mixture of them.

The mexicanolide limonoids **3-6**, isolated from fruits of _C. fruticosa_, showed significant trypanocidal activity (Table 3). They were obtained from the very active dichloromethane extract of fruits (Table 2, CFFRD, 97.7 %). This extract also afforded other limonoids (Leite et al., 2005a,b), which were not assayed herein. Recently, we reported the inhibitory activity of crude extracts of Meliaceae and Rutaceae plants on glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) enzyme from _T. cruzi._ The results showed that crude extracts from _C. fruticosa_ showed high ability to inhibit the enzyme activity (Leite et al., 2009). Thus, this specie could be considered as a promising source of lead compounds against Chagas' disease. In addition, the extracts from _C. fruticosa_ showed high inhibition of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT), a key enzyme from _Leishmania_ that has been proposed as a target for the rational search of new leishmanicidal drugs (Ambrozin et al., 2005b).



## Page 5

The trypanaccial activity of flavone (**7**) and 7-methoxyflavone (**8**), isolated from the active hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (CFBH), was previously published by Ambrozin et al. (2004). They showed that these flavonoids, isolated from an active fraction of _Conchocarpus heterophyllus_ (Rutaceae), presented low activity against trypanastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (\(\text{IC}_{50}=2116\) and 787 mg/mL or 9531 and 1084 mmol/L, respectively) when compared with other flavonoids (Ribeiro et al., 1997; Ambrozin et al., 2004). Probably, the relevant activity obtained from the extract CFBH can be related to other characteristic metabolites of C. _frutticosa._ As limonoids in the present work showed trypanocidal activity, we believe that the activity of CFBH extract may be associated with these compounds.

The trypanaccial activity of flavone (**7**) and 7-methoxyflavone (**8**), isolated from the active hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (CFBH), was previously published by Ambrozin et al. (2004). They showed that these flavonoids, isolated from an active fraction of _Conchocarpus heterophyllus_ (Rutaceae), presented low activity against trypanastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (\(\text{IC}_{50}=2116\) and 787 mg/mL or 9531 and 1084 mmol/L, respectively) when compared with other flavonoids (Ribeiro et al., 1997; Ambrozin et al., 2004). Probably, the relevant activity obtained from the extract CFBH can be related to other characteristic metabolites of C. _frutticosa._ As limonoids in the present work showed trypanocidal activity, we believe that the activity of CFBH extract may be associated with these compounds.

## References

* (1)
* (2) Ambrozin ARP, Leite AC, Silva M, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, Thiemann OH, da Silva MFGF, Oliva G 2005b. Screening of _Leishmania_ APRT enzyme inhibitors. _Pharmacia__60_: 781-784.
* (3) Ambrozin ARP, Mafezoli J, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, Ellena JA, de Albuquerque S 2005a. New pyrone and quinoline alkaloid from _Almeidea rubra_ and their trypanocidal activity. _J Braz Chem Soc__16_: 434-439.
* (4) Ambrozin ARP, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, de Albuquerque S 2004. Trypanoicidal activity of Meliaceae and Rutaceae plant extracts. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz__99_: 227-231.
* (5) Ambrozin ARP, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, de Albuquerque S 2008. Piranoflavona ineditas e atividades tripanocidas das substancias isoladas de _Conchocarpus heterophyllus.__Quin Nova__31_: 740-743.
* (6) Camacho MD, Phillipson JD, Croft SL, Marley D, Kirby GC, Warhurst DC 2002. Assessment of the antiprotozoan activity of _Galphina glauca_ and the isolation of new nor-secofriedelanes and nor-friedelanes. _J Nat Prod__65_: 1457-1461.
* (7) de Castro SL 1993. The challenge of Chagas' disease chemotherapy: an update of drugs assayed against _ Trypanosoma cruzi.__Acta Trop__53_: 83-98.
* (8) de Mesquita ML, Desrivol J, Bories C, Fournet A, de Paula JE, Grellier P, Espindola LS 2005. Antileishmanial and trypanocidal activity of Brazilian Cerrado plants. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz__100_: 783-787.
* (9) Dias JC 1993. Transfusional Chagas disease in Brazil. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz__88_: 63-65.
* (10) Duschak VG, Couto AS 2007. An insight on targets and patented drugs for chemotherapy of chagus disease. _Recent Patents Anti-Infect Drug Disc__2_: 19-51.
* (11) Govindachari TR, Kumari GNK 1998. Tetranortriterpenoids from _Khaya sengedensis_. _Phytochemistry__47_: 1423-1425.
* (12) Guimaraes DAS, Faria AR 2007. Natural compounds with anti-_ Trypanosoma cruzi_ activity. _Rev Bras Farmacogn__17_: 455-465.
* (13) Kingsburry CA, Looker JH 1975. Carbon-13 spectra of methylflavones. _J Org Chem__40_: 1120-1124.
* (14) Kuo Y, Yeh M, Huang S 1998. Anove16-butyl-3-hydroxyflavanone from heartwood of _Bauhinia purpurea. Phytochemistry__49_: 2529-2530.
* (15) Leite AC, Ambrozin ARP, Castillo MS, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, Oliva G, da Silva MFGF, Thiemann OH, Lima MIS, Pirani JR 2009. Screening of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ glycososomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme inhibitors. _Rev Bras Farmacogn__19_: 1-6.
* (16) Leite AC, Bueno FC, Oliveira CG, Fernandes JB, Vieira PC, da Silva MFGF, Bueno OC, Pagnocca FC, Hebling MJA, Bacci Jr M 2005b. Limonoids from _Cipadesa fruitocosa_ and _Cedrela fissills_ and their insecticidal activity. _J Braz Chem Soc__16_: 1391-1395.
* (17) Leite AC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, Vieira PC 2005a. Limonoids from _Cipadesa fruitocosa.__Z Naturforsch B__60_: 351-355.
* (18) Luo XD, Wu SH, Ma YB, Wu DG 2000. Components of _Cipadesa bacclifera. Phytochemistry__55_: 867-872.
* (19) Mafezoli J, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, de Albuquerque S 2000. _In vitro_ activity of Rutaceae species against the trypanastigote form of _Trypanosoma cruzi.__J Ethnopharmacol__73_: 335-340.
* (20)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline \multirow{2}{*}{Compound} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Concentration (μg/mL) x Lysis \% ± \(\text{IC}_{50}\)} & \multirow{2}{*}{\(\text{(mmol/L)}\)} \\  & & & EPM* \\ \cline{2-4}  & 50 & 100 & 250 \\ \hline
**3** & \(6.39\pm 3.2\) & \(50.58\pm 2.9\) & \(80.81\pm 4.1\) & 189.0 \\
**4** & \(16.86\pm 3.4\) & \(69.18\pm 4.6\) & \(65.69\pm 2.9\) & 168.0 \\
**5** & \(11.39\pm 2.5\) & \(28.48\pm 5.7\) & \(77.21\pm 2.5\) & 326.3 \\
**6** & \(36.04\pm 5.8\) & \(55.81\pm 2.



## Page 6

* [2001] Moon J, Tushida T, Nakahara K, Terao J 2001. Identification of quercetin 3-_O_-b-D-glucuronide as an oxidative metabolite in rat plasma after oral administration of quercetin. _Free Radical Bio Med 30_: 1274-1285.
* [1996] Paula JR 1996. _Estudo fitoquimico do encervero de Cedrela odorata sobre Toona ciliata (Melacene)_. Sao Carlos. Tese de doutorado, Programa de Pos-graduacao em Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos.
* [1977] Ribeiro A, Veloso DP, Romanha AJ, Zani CL 1997. Trypanocidal flavonoids from _Trixis vauhtieri. J Nat Prod 60_: 836-838.
* [2000] Sernano SM, Nogal JJ, Diaz RAM, Escario JA, Fernandez ARM, Barrio AG 2000. _In vitro_ screening of American plant extracts on _Tryanosoma cruzi_ and _Trichomonas vaginalis. J Ethnopharmacol 71_: 101-107.
* [2005] Silveira D, Wagner H, Chiari E, Lombardi JA, Assuncao AC, de Oliveira AB, Raslan DS 2005. Biological activity of the aqueous extract of _Lychophophora pinaster_ Mart. _Rev Brasramacao 15_: 294-297.
* [2006] Tasdemir D, Kaiser M, Brun R, Yardley V, Schmidt TJ, Tosun F, Ruedi P 2006. Antitrypanosomal and antileishmanial activities of flavonoids and their analogues: _in vitro, in vivo_. structure-activity relationship, and quantitative structure-activity relationship studies. _Antimicrob Agents Ch 50_: 1352-1364.
* [2001] Vieira PC, Mafezoli J, Pupo MT, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, de Albuquerque S, Oliva G, Pavao F 2001. Strategies for the isolation and identification of trypanocidal compounds from the Rutales. _Pur. Appl Chem 73_: 617-622.
* [1997] WHO 1997. World Health Organization, Weekly Epidemiological Record 1. Geneve.
* [2004] WHO 2004. World Health Organization Division of Control of Tropical Diseases at [http://www.who.int/ctd/chagas/disease.htm](http://www.who.int/ctd/chagas/disease.htm), accessed on May 2004.
* [1978] Williamson J, Finnigan TJS 1978. Trypanocidal activity of antitumor antibiotics and other metabolic inhibitors. _Antimicrob Agents Ch 13_: 735-744.



