# 10.1016@0031-9422(95)00368-H.pdf

## Page 1



# Further Farnesyl-Homogentisic Acid Derivatives from _Otoba Parvifolia_+
Footnote †: Part 38 in the series ‘The Chemistry of Brazilian Myrticaceae’. For Part 37 see ref. [1]. Based on part of the Doctorate thesis presented by A. G. F. to Universidade de São Paulo (1990).

A. Gilberto Ferreira, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira, Otto R. Gottlieb, Hugo E. Gottlieb

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Present address: Departamento de Fisiologia e Farmacodinámica, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, FIOCRUZ, 21045-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.1

###### Abstract

The seeds of _Otoba parifolia_ contain three novel compounds apparently derived from homogentisic acid, _rel_-({1'R,5'R}-2-(1'-farnesyl-5'-hydroxy-2'-oxocyclohex-3'-en-1'-yl)-acetic acid and its acetate as well as _rel_-({1'R,4'S,5'R}-2-(1'-farnesyl-4',5'-dihydroxy-2'-oxocyclohexan-1'-yl)-acetic acid \(\delta\)-lactone. The structure of an additional isolate, previously described as 2-(1'-farnesyl-2'-hydroxy-5'-oxocyclohex-3'-en-1'-yl)-acetic acid \(\gamma\)-lactone was revised to _rel_-(1'R,5'R)-2-(1'-farnesyl-5'-hydroxy-2'-oxocyclohex-3'-en-1'-yl)-acetic acid \(\delta\)-lactone.

23 March 1995

## Introduction

Fruit kernels of _Otoba parifolia_ (Mkfg.) A. Gentry from the Amazon region have been reported to contain, besides sitosterol and the furofuran lignans xanthoxyl and philygenol, some homogentisic acid (1) derived compounds, attributed to structures **2**, **3a**, **4a**, **4b**, **5a** and **5b**[2]. Re-examination of the same material revealed the additional presence of three further compounds, **6a**, **6b** and **7a**. Fruit pericarp was found to contain sitosterol, meridolol, the neoligan hydroxyotobain [3], the furofuran lignans xanthoxyl and forsythigenol [4], as well as **6b**. Meanwhile, in the quest of a model for **3a**, compound **3b** was synthesized [5]. The spectral data for the synthetic product (IRmax 1780 and 1686 cm-1) and the natural isolate (IRmax 1742 and 1683 cm-1) were significantly different (see also Tables 1-3). Thus, the present work required not only the structural determination of the novel isolates **6a**, **6b** and **7a**, but also the structural revision of **3a**, now designated **8**.

## Results

The \({}^{1}\)H (Tables 1 and 2) and \({}^{13}\)C (Table 3) NMR spectra in combination with low resolution mass spectral molecular weight determinations (Table 4) established the formulae C24H36O4 (**6c**), C26H38O5 (**6d**) (the respective methyl esters of **6a** and **6b**) and C23H34O4 (**7a**). Routine examination of the NMR spectra allowed expansion of the formulae to C2H37O2*OH*OMe*Fa (**6c**), C26H1O2*OMe*OMe*Fa (**6d**) and C26H1O3O3*OH*Fa (**7a**) (**Fa**= farnesyl) and led to the conclusion that all three must be closely related to the co-occurring known compound C5H7O3*Fa (**8 = 7a**-H2O). Indeed the mass spectra of all four compounds are closely comparable (Table 4). IR spectral comparisons showed the \(\delta\)-lactone of **7a** (\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) 1741 cm-1), though present in **8** (\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) 1742 cm-1), to be replaced by an ester in **6c** and **6d** (\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) 1732 +- 1 cm-1), and the \(\alpha\beta\)-unsaturated carbonyl of 8 (\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) 1683 cm-1), though present in **6c** and **6d** (\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) 1679 +- 2 cm-1), to be replaced by a saturated carbonyl in **7a** (\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) _ca_ 1712 cm-1). Hydrolysis of the lactone of **8** would generate a hydroxyl at a trisubstituted C-5' as shown in **6c**. Acetylation of this hydroxyl is expected to cause an _ca_ 1 ppm paramagnetic shift of the carbonic proton signal and _ca_ 4 ppm paramagnetic shifts of the C-4' and C-6' signals. These are precisely the relevant \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)CNMR spectral modifications upon passing from **6c** to **6d**, all other features remaining closely comparable. The hydroxyls in **6c** and **6d** are both \(\alpha\)-oriented. Indeed, only for this conformation, but not for the antipodal orientation shown in the model **6e**, observed and

## Page 2



## Page 3



## Page 4



## Page 5

calculated vicinal coupling constants are compatible (Table 2). With respect to position 1', it is the farnesyl substituent which is axial. Only in this case, one of the acetic acid methylene protons lies in the plane of the ring carbonyl, as documented by the corresponding NMR signal an extraordinarily low field (_d_2.9).

No CH=CHCO signals appear in the spectra of 7a where the ketone carbonyl is flanked by a methylene and a quaternary carbon. This locates the hydroxyl, jointly with a sole proton (_d_3.93), at C-4'. In contradistinction such an a,b-unsaturated carbonyl appears again in the additional d-lactone **8**. The rings in both compounds, 7a and **8**, must be _cis_-fused. Hence, only the orientation of the free hydroxyl in 7a remains to be established. This is equatorial. Indeed only for this conformation, but not for the antipodal orientation shown in the model 7b, observed and calculated vicinal coupling constants are compatible (Table 2).

## Discussion

The co-occurrence in _O. parifolia_ of homogenisic acid and of nerolidol rationalizes the formation of the alkylation product **9** as a common intermediate of the oxcyclopentanylpropionic acids **4a**, **b** and **5a**, **b**[2] (via 1',2'-c rearrangement of CH2CO2H and ring contraction) and of oxocyclohexanylacetic acids 6a, b, 7b and **8** (via reduction of the oxo-group).

## Experimental

_Isolation of constituents._ Fruits of _O. parifolia_ were collected by Dr Hipolito Ferreira Paulino Filho in the vicinity of Humaita, Amazonas State. Botanical material 

## Page 6

was identified by Dr William A. Rodrigues, INPA, Manaus. Air-dried fruits were separated into pericarps and seeds.s Ground dry pericarp meal (90 g) was extracted with CHCl3. The extract (19 g) was submitted to CC (240 g Silica gel 60). Elution with CHCl3 gave, in order: fatty material (2 g), neorilold (35 mg), hydroxyotobain (21 mg), forsythigenol (1 g), xanthoxylol (21 mg), sisterol (18 mg) and a crude fraction (903 mg), which was treated with CH2N2 in Et2O. The reaction product was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, hexane-Me2CO, 4:1) into **6d** (60 mg). Nerolidol and hydroxyotobain were purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, hexane-Me2CO, 4:1). All other compounds were purified by crystallization from MeOH. The ground dry seed meal (1100 g) was extracted with CHCl3. The extract (380 g) was crystallized from MeOH to fatty material (165 g). The mother liquor was evapd and the residue (8 g) was submitted to CC (280 g Silica gel 60). Elution with CHCl3 gave, in order: fatty material (556 mg), **8** (60 mg), forsythigenol (16 mg), sitosterol (15 mg) and **7a** (10 mg). Elution with CHCl3-EtOAc gave a crude fr. (186 mg) which was treated with CH2N2 in Et2O. The reaction product was sepd by prep. TLC (silica gel, CHCl3-MeOH. 9:1) into **6d** (18 mg) and **6c** (6 mg).

rel-(1'R,5'R)-2(1'-\(Farnosyl\)-5'-\(hydroxy\)-2'-\(oxocyclohex\)-3'-\(en\)-1'-yl)-acetic acid methyl ester (**6c**). Oil. IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\mathrm{film}}\) cm-1: 3404, 1731, 1677, 1441, 1365, 1193. UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathrm{CHCl}}\) nm: 246 (_e_ 1100). [a]b\({}^{\mathrm{2o}}\) = + 2deg (_c_ 0.4, CHCl3).

rel-(1'R,5'R)-2-(1'-\(Farnosyl\)-5'-\(acetoxy\)-2'-\(oxocyclohex\)-3'-\(en\)-1'-yl)-acetic acid methyl ester (**6d**). Oil. IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\mathrm{film}}\) cm-1: 1733, 1681, 1444, 1371, 1233, 1004, 756. [a]b\({}^{\mathrm{2o}}\) = + 11.5deg (_c_ 0.6, CHCl3).

rel-(1'R,4'S,5'R)-2-(1'-\(Farnosyl\)-4',5'-\(dihydroxy\)-2'-\(oxocyclohexan\)-1'-yl)-acetic acid \(\delta\)-lactone (**7a**). Oil. IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\mathrm{film}}\) cm-1: 1741, 1712.

rel-(1'R,5'R)-2-(1'-\(Farnosyl\)-5'-\(hydroxy\)-2'-\(oxocyclohex\)-3'-\(en\)-1'-yl)-acetic acid \(\delta\)-lactone (**8**). Oil. IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\mathrm{film}}\) cm-1: 1742, 1683, 1440, 1377, 1313, 1206, 1162, 1093, 1040, 986. UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathrm{CHC3}}\) nm: 340 (_e_ 1300). [a]b\({}^{\mathrm{2o}}\) = + 214deg (_c_ 0.07, CHCl3).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are grateful to CNPq and FAPESP for financial support and to the authors of ref. [5] for the unpublished spectral data for compound **3b**.

## References

* [1] Silva, D. H. S., Cavalheiro, A. J., Yoshida, M. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1995) _Photochemistry_**38**, 1013.
* [2] Ferreira, A. G., Motidome, M., Gottlieb, O. R., Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Cojocaru, M. and Gottlieb, H. E. (1989) _Photochemistry_**28**, 579.
* [3] Wallace, R., Porte, A. Z. and Hodges, R. (1963) _J. Chem. Soc._ 1445.
* [4] Pelter, A. and Wards, R. S. (1978) in _Chemistry of Lignans_ (Rao, C. B. S., ed.), p. 227. Andhra University Press, Andhra Pradesh, India.
* [5] Ferreira, J. T. B., Boscaini, R. C. and Marques, F. A. (1993) _Nat. Prod. Letters_**2**, 313.



