# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89244-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Benzofuranoid Neoligans from _Aniba Simulans_+
Footnote †: Part 39 in the series The Chemistry of Brazilian Lauraceae’. For Part 38 see ref. [11]. Taken from parts of the Doctorate thesis presented by O.C.C. (Organization of American States graduate fellow, on leave of absence from Universidad de Costa Rica) and F.M.P. (Coordenacao do Aperleiçamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior, CAPES, graduate fellow, on leave of absence from Universidade Federal de Santa Maria) to the Universidade de Sao Paulo (1977). Sponsored by Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, CNPq, and Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo.

Cacilla J. Aiba, Marden A. De Alvarenga, Oscar Castro C., Astrea M. Giessbrecht, Otto R. Gottlieb and Frida M. Pagliosa

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, c.p. 20780, Sao Paulo, Brasil

###### Abstract

Forteen neolignans, isolated from the benzene extract of _Aniba simulans_ (Lauraceae) trunk wood, included the hitherto undescribed (_2S_, _3S_, _5R_)-5allyl-5,7-dimethoxy-2-(3',4',5'-trimethoxyphenyl)-3-methyl-2,3,5,6-tetra-hydro-6-oxobenzofuran, (_2R_,3S_,5R_)-5allyl-5-methoxy-2-(3'-methoxy-4',5'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-3-methyl-2,3,5,6-tetrahydro-6-oxobenzofuran, (_2S_,3S_)-6-0allyl-5-methoxy-2-(3'-methoxy-4',5'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-3-methyl-2,3-dihydronezofuran, (_2R_,3S_)-6-0allyl-5-methoxy-2-(3'-methoxy-4',5'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-3-methylbenzofuran.

## Introduction

In a previous paper on an _Aniba_ sp. (Lauraceae), the occurrence of the 9 benzofuranoid neoligans **1a**, **1c**, **1f**, **2a**, **2d**, **3a**, **3b**, **4d** and **4f** was described. Inspection of their structures and interconversions by pyrolysis led to the postulate that these compounds belong to series whose representatives can be linked by sequential Cope, retro-Claisen and Claisen rearrangements, e.g. **1a** - **2a** - **3a**, **2d** - **4d**, **1f** - **4f**, and that, consequently, the missing links **3d**, **2f** and **3f** as well as a precursor of **3b**, should occur naturally [2].

One of the objectives of the present re-investigation thus concerned the isolation and description of such compounds. A new examination of the species was desirable anyway, since in the original paper the absolute stereochemistry at C-2 and C-3 had been established with certainty only for the 2,3-_trans_-dihydrobenzofuranoids **1a**, **2a**, **2d**, **3a**, **3b** and **4d**[2]. The relative configuration of the C-3 vicinal chiral centers in compounds of type **1** was since deduced by 13C NMR [3], and thus the absolute stereochemistry of **1a** is now known. The technique proved of no help, however, in the analysis of the chirality at C-5 of compounds of type **2**, and this feature, as well as the absolute stereochemistry of the 2,3-_cis_-dihydrobenzofuranoids **1c**, **1f** and **4f**, remained to be investigated.

## Results

### Structural determinations

Botanical material of the previously studied [2], as well as of three additional specimens, was tentatively classified by Dr. K. Kubitzki, Hamburg, as belonging to _Aniba_ _A_llen. Separate work-up revealed the presence in all trunk wood C6H6 extracts of sitoosterol, benzyl benzoate and benzyl salicylate, common constituents of _Aniba_ species [4], and 6,7-dimethoxycoumarin, recently isolated from another Lauraceae species [1]. The distribution of 14 neoligans (Table 1) shows that the chemical composition of specimens numbered 42 237 [2], 46 796 and 46 800 can be considered identical, six of their neolignans bearing a 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl and 5 a 3-methoxy-4,5-methylenedioxyphenyl substituent. The composition of a specimen 46 798 is peculiar, in so far as all six isolated compounds bear a 3-methoxy-4,5-methylenedioxyphenyl substituent.

Thus, the present work led indeed to the expected intermediates (**3d**, **2f** and **3f**) and precursor (**2b**). Compound 5 was obtained concomitantly. Since it was observed, however, that **4f** (but not **4d**) decomposed into 5 during silica gel TLC, the natural occurrence of this benzofuran derivative is not assured. The constitutions of these five compounds were deduced by spectral comparison with known analogous derivatives. For the compounds of series 1 [1, 2, 5-7], 2 [1, 2, 6, 7], 3 [1, 2, 7] and 4 [2, 7] several models are available. These can be used, inclusively, in conformational and configurational correlations. As has been pointed out [2, 5], and is apparent again in Table 2, the relative shielding of the Me-3 protons by the vicinal Ar reveals the cis relation of these groups. It is in this case (**6**) that H-2 is relatively de-shielded and must, thus, lie closer to the O--C=C--C=O (in 1 and **2**) or O--Ar (in 3 and **4**) plane than in the 2,3-_trans_ isomers (7). The identification of 5 relied only on data of two models [1,7]. The sequence of substituents on

## Page 2



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c}  & \multicolumn{2}{c}{2,3-_trans_-cmpds.} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{2,3-_cis_-cmpds.} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{H-2} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Me-3} \\ H-2 & Me-3 & & & \(\begin{bmatrix} 2,3-cis\text{-cmpds.} \\ H-2 \\ \end{bmatrix}\) & \(\begin{bmatrix} \text{H-2} \\ \end{bmatrix}\) & Me-3 &

## Page 3

the PMR methoxyl frequency (\(\tau\) 6.05) caused a 23 % NOE enhancement of the intensity of the aromatic H singlet at \(\tau\) 3.20.

The proposed structures were confirmed by synthesis. This involved precursors of established structure [2], which were subjected to pyrolysis (**2d** \(\rightarrow\)**3d**, **1f** \(\rightarrow\)**2f** \(\rightarrow\)**3f** \(\rightarrow\)**4f**, **8**) or air oxidation (**4f** \(\rightarrow\)**5). The Cope rearrangement of **1f** \(\rightarrow\)**2f** is of special significance. Indeed, since the relative configuration of **1f** is known [3] and the thermal reaction operates by suprafacial allyl migration, the relative configuration of the product can only be expressed as in **2f**.

In additional interconversions, acid isomerization of **3f** and **4f** (negative Cotton effects at 290 nm) led, as expected, respectively to **3d** and **4d** (positive Cotton effects at 290 nm). Clearly, this reaction proceeds by epimerization only of C-2. Absolute configurations can thus be formulated not only for **3f** and **4f**, but also for the additional 2,3-_cis_-derivatives **1f** and **2f**, on account of the aforementioned conversion to **3f**, and for **1c**, whose ORD curve is superimposable on the analogous curve of **1f**.

Deduction of the absolute configuration of **2a**, **2b** and **2d** will be part of a forthcoming general discussion on the stereochemistry of benzofuranoid neolignans.

## 2 Experimental

_Isolation of the constituents._ All plant material was collected at Dutck Forest Reserve, Manaus, Amazonas. The procedure used for Herbarium (INPA, Manaus) Specimen No 46 798 is typical. Powdered wood (8 kg) was percolated at room temp. with C6H6. The extract (70 g) was freed of fatty esters (2.2 b) by washing with petrol and chromatographed on a Si gel column, giving the following fractions with C6H6-AcOEt mixtures of the indicated oval/vol compositions: A (1.0 b (9:1) C (8:2) D (6:4) E (4:6) A (4:3 b) was separated by TLC (Pcontrol-C6H6: 3:7) into benzyl benzoate and benzyl salicylate. B (2.8 g) was separated by TLC (C6H6- AcOEt, 98:2) in order of increasing \(R_{p}\), into a 7:3 min of 3d and 37 (250 mg) and 5 (30 mg). The mixture was septd by fractional crystal, from MeOH. The initial fractions contained pure **3d**. C (3.6 g) is mainly sitosterol. D (20.6 g) was septd by filtration into crystalline 1f (10 g). The only filtrate was septd by TLC (EtO2) into **1f** (_R_, 0.19) and a 7:3 min of **2d** and **2f** (_R_, 0.58). The mixture was septd by Al2O, TLC (EtO2) into **2d** (20 mg) and **2f** (50 mg). E (9:4 g) was septd by TLC (CHCl4- MeOH 6-6) into a mixture of **1f**. **2d** and **2f** (_R_, 0.64) and a mixture of 6,7-dimethoxycoumarin and bicyclo[3,21 octanol neo-ligans (to be reported). Similar work-up of a C6H6 extract (5 g) from trunk wood of Specimen No 4676 gave, in fraction D, additionally **2b** (50 mg).

(2S,3S,5R,5)-_(4-d),5-dimethoxy-2-(3',4',5'-trimethoxysphenyl-3-methyl-2-3,5,6-tetrahydro-6-oxobenzofuran (2b). Viscous oil (found: M 416.1829, C23H2O, requires 416.1835). UV \(\lambda^{\text{max}}_{\text{1f}}\) nm: 260 nm, 280 s, 335 \(\leq\) 2750, 2000, 40000. IR \(\nu^{\text{min}}_{\text{1f}}\) nm: 1656, 1808, 1455, 1354, 1214, 1311, 0912, H-NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz, t): 3:44 (s, H-2, H-

