# 10.1016@0031-9422(74)80351-1.pdf

## Page 1



# Flavans from _Irvanthera_ Species*
Footnote *: Part III in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Myristicaceae” For Part II see Ref 1 Sponsored by Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazona, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus + Multunattonal Program in Chemistry, Organization of American States, graduate fellow, 1972–1973

Nidia C. Franca

 Pedro P. Diaz Diaz

Gito R. Gottlieb

and Bel de Paula Rosa

Laboratorio de Produtos Naturas da Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brasil

###### Abstract

_Iryanthera coracea_; _I juruensis_, Myristicaceae; (+-)3,4-dihydroxy-5,7-dimethoxyflavan, (+-)2-hydroxy-7-methoxy-4,5'-methylenedioxyflavan

_Iryanthera coracea_; _I juruensis_, Myristicaceae; (+-)3,4-dihydroxy-5,7-dimethoxyflavan, (+-)2-hydroxy-7-methoxy-4,5'-methylenedioxyflavan

_Iryanthera coracea_; _I juruensis_, Myristicaceae; (+-)3,4-dihydroxy-5,7-dimethoxyflavan, (+-)2-hydroxy-7-methoxy-4,5'-methylenedioxyflavan

_Iryanthera coracea_ Duke and _I. juruensis_ Warb. (Myristicaceae) grow in the Amazonian forest near Manaus. From the trunk wood extracts closely related phenols, resp. C17H18O5 and C17H16O5, were isolated. The PMR spectra allowed expansion of these formulae to C15H10O.2OH.2OMeandC15H10O.OH.OMe.O2CH2 and indicated that in each case five of the undefined hydrogens are aromatic, requiring the presence of two aromatic rings, and five are aliphatic. Since the IR spectra do not register carbonyl absorption, the undefined oxygens must participate in ether functions. If these were cyclic, as is most probable, then all hydrogen deficiencies would have been pinpointed in both cases. Indeed, in the PMR spectra of both, signals of one aliphatic proton are completely analyzable (resp. \(t\) 5:17, _dd_, \(J\) 8:5, 3:5 Hz; \(t\) 4:90, \(J\) 7:5, 5:5 Hz) and represent a benzylic axial oxymethine hydrogen which is vicinal to two other hydrogens. These and the additional pair give rise to multplets (resp. \(t\) 8, 7:4 and \(t\) 7:7, \(t\)1), one at a chemical shift value consistent with the benzylic nature of the corresponding methylene group. The combined data show both to be flavans, even if of different aromatic substitution and heterocyclic conformation.

The difference in conformation is portrayed by the difference in chemical shift and coupling constants of the H-2 signals and must, clearly, be due to absence or presence of a hydroxyl at C-2' as depicted resp. in **1** and **2**. In **1**, the aryl group at C-2 is free to avoid interference of the hydrogens at C-6' and C-3. Free rotation is not feasible in the hydrogen bonded derivative **2** and the interference can only be attenuated by diminution of the dihedral angle Heq-C(3)-C(2)-H, expressed by enhanced coupling constants. As expected, acetylation, destroying the H-bridge, equalizes chemical shift and coupling constants of the oxymethine signals of **1** and **2**.

If, as these data indicate, **1** lacks a hydroxyl at C-2', the _ortho_-dihydroxy system of this cmpd. (UV shift upon addition of borate) must occupy C-3',4'. The location of both these hydroxyls on ring B, and indeed, the general distribution of all substituents among the rings was given by MS: By far the most intense peaks appeared at _m/e_ values interpreted to represent the molecular ions **1**: 302 (81%), **2**: 300 (100%), and the retro Dels-Alder ions

## Page 2

incorporating rings A after capture of a hydrogen **1**. 167 (100%), **2** 137 (90%) and **B 1**: 136 (42%), **2**. 164 (80%).

Final proof for these structures was obtained through acetylation With **1** this produced a paramagnetic shift (D 0*43 ppm) of an aromatic 3-hydrogen multiplet in the PMR spectrum. The additional signal in the aromatic region, which was not affected, is located at high field (t 3*92; AB system, \(J\) 3 Hz) and can represent only the _meta_ related protons of the phloroglucinol-type, fully etherified, A-ring. Analogously, acetylation produced a paramagnetic shift (D 0*47 ppm) only of one of the aromatic proton singlets (t 3*55) in the PMR spectrum of **2**. Neither the other singlet (t 3*42) nor the 3 multiplets were affected One of these, an _ortho_ split doublet (t 3*05, \(J\) 8 Hz), appears at considerably lower field than all other signals (t 3*42-3*60) and must, consequently, represent a proton which is _meta_ related to oxyfunctons, a requirement satisfied by H-5 if the methoxyl is placed at C-7

## EXPERIMENTAL

### _subharmonic concurrence_

_subharmonic_ by the harmonic Rohrungs. Email, pro-bukent terms: sowal (3 5 kg) was extd with EtOH The C6H6/CHCl3-soluble portion (22 g) of the extract (180 g) was chromatographed on shag, CHCl3-MeOH 93 5 dunning (+-3',4'-dihydroxy-5',7-dimethyloxy-5'

