# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2009.08.013.pdf

## Page 1



# Methyl angolensate changes in _Khaya ivorensis_ after fungal infection

Karine V.G. Reche, Gezimar D. de Souza, Marilia A. Trapp, Edson Rodrigues-Filho, Sebastiao C. Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira, Manfred W. Muller, M. Fatima das G.F. da Silva

# Abstract

_Khaya ivorensis_ with and without symptoms of stem and branch cankers, caused by _Botryosphaeria rhodina_ were examined in order to determine whether the secondary metabolites in this plant were associated with a chemical defense response. This study provides evidence that the limonoid methyl anogenaste (MA) is present at higher concentrations in \(K\) _i_ _nversin_ with symptoms of stem cankers rather than in the plants without symptoms. A rapid, sensitive and selective HPLC-ESI-MS/MS method (using selected reaction monitoring - SRM - mode) was developed for quantification of MA in all aerial parts of such plants, with a good linearity over a range of 0.1-20.0 g/kg, with \(r^{2}\)\(>\) 0.996 +- 6.1%. The limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LQQ) were less than 0.03 g/kg and 0.08 g/kg, respectively. Relative Standard Deviations (RSDs) ranged from 1.7% to 19.2% for all matrices. While the MA concentration did not change in the stem bark, its amounts increased nearly fourfold in stems and by 20% in leaves, when plants with symptoms were compared with those without symptoms. These data suggest that MA plays a role in plant-pathogen interactions, probably as a phytoanticipin.

## 1 Introduction

Mahogany trees are characterized by having a high quality hard wood, whose color is yellowish to reddish-brown. Its wood is extensively utilized by the timber industry, and historically, mahogany has been highly valued for centuries. Mahogany is directly associated with _Swietenia_ genera (Meliaceae), such as _Swietenia mahogany_ (Cuban mahogany) and _Swietenia macrophyla_ (Brazilian and Honduran mahogany), amongst others (Dunish and Ruhmann, 2006; Zhang et al., 2007; Gasparotto et al., 2001).

However, reforestation programs involving _S. macrophyla_ cultivars for the Brazilian timber industry have been seriously damaged by attacks from the shoot borer _Hynspixida grandella_ (Ferreira et al., 2005). This has resulted in serious economic problems for Brazil which is the 4th leading producer of hardwoods worldwide (FAO, 2008).

In an attempt to avoid such consequences in the future, the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation - Embrapa - has been evaluating changing cultivars of _S. macrophyla_ for trees from the _Khaya_ genus (African mahogany, Meliaceae) over the last decade. Such plants exhibit excellent growth properties, and they are not affected by the shoot borer _H. grandella_ (Ferreira et al., 2005). Recently, however, _Khaya_ trees found in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, were infected by a new microbial pathogen. The probable microorganism involved was identified as _Botryosphaeria rhodina_, based on morphology. DNA sequences (ITS-1, ITS-2; GenBank EU276018) and pathological data (Niekerk et al., 2004; Slippers et al., 2007; Wet et al., 2008). Infection takes place either through wounds, or directly through the stomata and other openings. These fungi can then persist in healthy tissue. Successful infection and susceptibility of infected trees are closely linked to environmental conditions, where high temperatures, water logging and other forms of stress favor infection, causing stem and branch cankers and dieback. Resprouting of the plants, followed by repeated infection, generally results in the development of numerous side branches and consequently in badly formed trees (Fig. 1), unsuitable for timber production, and in some cases tree death.

The _Khaya_ genus is a rich source of limonoids with a wide variety of structural types (Olmo et al., 1996, 1997; Ferreira et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2008). Apart from the limonoids other constituents were also reported for various plants of _Khaya_, as some pentacyclic triterpenes, cycloartanes, sterols, sesquiterpenes, flavonoids and coumarins (Banerji and Nigam, 1984). However, none of these compounds have been implicated in defense responses to a specific disease in _Khaya_ species. In a previous work,

## Page 2

_Khaya iworensis_ with and without symptoms of stem and branch cankers, caused by _B. rhodina_, were examined in order to determine whether secondary metabolites present in the plant were produced or accumulated as chemical defense (Reche, 2007; Marinho, 2007). These studies gave some preliminary evidence that the limonoid methyl anoglucansate (MA **1**, Fig. 2) was present at higher concentrations in _K. iworensis_ with symptoms of stem and branch cankers than in those without symptoms. Therefore, HPLC-ESI-MS/MS by the selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode was employed to develop a specific and sensitive method for quantifying MA (**1**) in all aerial parts of plants.

## Results and discussion

### Method development and specificity

A screening by HPLC-ESI-MS was first carried out to check whether compounds other than MA (**1**) were associated with _K. iworensis_ infection (see Supplementary material). In an attempt to establish a suitable method for detection and quantification of MA (**1**) in different parts of _K. iworensis_, the stems, stem bark, and leaves from plants with and without symptoms of stem and branch cankers, caused by _B. rhodina_, were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using the SRM mode. Investigations, therefore, initially focused on establishing the best extraction and separation conditions for MA (**1**), and the conditions identified included ultrasound bath-assisted extraction for 10 min, using ethanol as extracting solvent. Separation of MA (**1**) was rather difficult, since it often exists as a complex mixture of related limonoids of similar polarity. However, HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using the SRM mode have a number of advantages, including speed of analysis, high sensitivity, wide applicability combined with a good tolerance toward contaminants, and the ability to analyze complex mixtures (Severino et al., 2009). Therefore, the crude ethanol extracts of the stems, stem bark, and leaves from plants with and without symptoms of stem and branch cankers were re-dissolved in methanol and analyzed by LC-APCI-MS/MS. The mobile phase was determined after testing different compositions of solvents. A good chromatographic resolution was achieved using a gradient H2O, MeOH and iso-PrOH, each one supplemented with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. This mobile phase provided both excellent separation between MA (**1**) and related compounds, and good ionization levels under the APCI ion source. The SRM transitions were chosen on the basis of the stability of product ions obtained under collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS/MS and also on the basis of interfering compounds from the matrixes. The standard MA (**1**) used in this study was isolated from the stem of _K. iworensis_, and it was identified on the basis of spectroscopic data, and by comparison of the 13C NMR spectrum with those from the literature (Olmo et al., 1997). The second-generation product ion spectrum of MA (**1**) showed a protonated molecule ([M+H+]) at _m/z_ 471 and some fragments (Fig. 3). Even when the collision energy was high enough to reduce the intensity of _m/z_ 471 to less than 5% of the base peak, no other significant transitions were observed (Fig. 3A). The product ions chosen _m/z_ 471 - 453, _m/z_ 471 - 439, and _m/z_ 471 - 411 (Fig. 3), to perform the transitions in SRM mode during the development and application of this method, provided an excellent specificity of the method as shown by the SRM chromatograms of Fig. 4. The standard addition is recommended for conditions in which the matrix without the analytes cannot be used for preparing the calibration solutions. Thus, calibration curves were made by spiking MA (**1**) in blank tested samples of leaves, stem bark and stems. The most concentrated point in the spiked stem bark analytical curve exhibited a lower ionization level (expressed by SRM peak area) than the same point in leaves or even in stems. Stems also exhibit the lower concentration of endogenous MA (**1**) (Fig. 4).

### Linearity and sensitivity

The calibration curves by spiking MA (**1**) in blank tested samples of leaves, stem bark and stems showed an excellent linearity at a 0.1-20.0 g/kg concentration range, with a correlation coefficient above 0.996 +- 6.1% (Table 1) for all curves (Fig. 5). In addition, homoscedasticity tests were performed on each matrix in order to confirm the above linearity. According to Almeida et al. (2002), this test should be performed in each linear regression analysis. Experimental _F_-values (1.34 x 108 for stems, 4.66 x 109 for stem bark and 5.17 x 107 for leaves) clearly indicated that homoscedasticity was not met for a confidence interval of 99% since these values should be lower than 19 (Almeida et al., 2002). Therefore, it was necessary to employ weighting factors for each calibration curve. Such factors were empirically chosen and they were determined according to the lower values of percentage relative errors, extracted from graphics in which residuals are plotted against concentration. For all blank tested samples of leaves, stem bark and

Fig. 1: Disease evolution on _Khaya iworensis_: (A) After invasion, the pathogen induces formation of small cankers; (B), (C) and (D) during disease progression in the stem, the stem bark sheds off the infected region and new cankers appear; (E) Nodes are created, promoting re-sprouting of the plants.

Fig. 2: Chemical structure of methyl anoglucansate (MA **1**).



## Page 3

stems a weighting factor of 1/_k_2 provided the best results (Fig. 6). Analyzing such plots it is possible to realize that the maximum percentage relative errors were fewer than +-20%. This is in accordance with those results usually accepted for quantification of analytes in vegetal matrices (Gilbert and Anklam, 2002). Therefore, by adjusting weighting factors it was possible to achieve a good linearity over a range of 0.1-20.0 g/kg.

The limits of quantification (LOQ) for MA (**1**) were \(3.37\pm 3.6\), \(3.86\pm 1.0\) and \(4.41\pm 3.9\) ng/mL for leaves, stems, and stem bark, respectively. The limits of detection (LOD) were determined at \(1.01\pm 4.6\), \(1.16\pm 0.9\) and \(1.32\pm 3.8\) ng/mL for leaves, stems, and stem bark, respectively, reflecting high sensitivity of the proposed method (Table 1).

### Precision and accuracy

The intra- and inter-day precisions were assessed using the data of six different concentration of spiking MA (**1**) in blank tested samples of leaves, stem bark and stems, analyzed over a 5-day period. The results are given in Table 2 and are expressed as Relative Standard Deviations (RSDs). The accuracy evaluated from back calculation was determined as the percent deviation between the amount found and the amount added of standard at the six concentrations examined. However, they were expressed in Table 2 as relative errors, whose values should not vary up to +-20% during the quantification process (Gilbert and Anklam, 2002). RSDs values (Table 2) ranged from 1.7 to 19.2% and relative errors from -18.9%

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline Parameters & Units & Matrices & \\  & & Stems & Stem bark & Leaves \\ \hline Slope (a) & & 1689.9 ± 5.6 & 247.8 ± 10.1 & 1894.0 ± 7.6 \\ Intercept (b) & & 96.8 ± 4.8 & 55.2 ± 9.8 & 85.8 ± 8.0 \\ Coefficient of determination (_r_2) & & 0.998 ± 3.0 & 0.996 ± 6.1 & 0.996 ± 5.4 \\ Limits of quantification (LOQ) & ng/mL g/kg & 3.86 ± 1.0 ± 0.08 ± 1.1 & 4.441 ± 3.90 ± 3.6 & 3.37 ± 3.60 ± 3.8 \\ Limits of detection (LOD) & ng/mL g/kg & 1.16 ± 0.9 ± 0.02 ± 1.5 & 1.32 ± 3.8.03 ± 3.9 & 1.01 ± 4.6 0.02 ± 4.9 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Linearity and sensitivity assays for proposed method (values are mean ±-8SD, n = 3).

Fig. 4: SRM chromatograms of both blank samples (with endogenous MA **1**) and spiked points at 20 g/kg (the higher concentration of analytical curves). Leaves are represented in green, bark in red and stems in blue. Numbers on peaks represent retention times and peak areas, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 3: Product ion spectra of MA (**1**) obtained under CID-MS/MS: (A) 25 eV, 471 [M+H]′, Anal. Calc. for C\({}_{2}\)H\({}_{3}\)O\({}_{7}\): C 68.92, H 7.28, 0 23.80x, 470.23+H; (B) 15 eV, Marked peaks represent transitions chosen for SRM experiments (O \(\rightarrow\) ).



## Page 4

to 17.8% for all matrices indicating that the developed method is reproducible and accurate.

### Recovery

Percentage relative recovery of 80.7%, 89.8% and 29.4% for MA (**1**) were acquired in blank tested samples of stems, stem bark and leaves, respectively, and they showed RSD ranging from 4.1% to 10.7%, 7.2% to 18.4% and 6.2% to 18.8% (\(n=5\)), respectively (Table 3). Thus, the proposed method can be considered suitable for quantification MA (**1**) on stems and stem bark. These data suggest that a more selective extraction of MA (**1**) is necessary during its evaluation on leaves of _K ivorensis_. However, the main proposal of this work was to develop a rapid and efficient method for detection and quantification of MA (**1**) in different parts of _K ivorensis_ plants, employing an extraction step which could be used for stems, stem bark and leaves at the same time. Thus, the proposed method can be considered suitable for quantification of MA (**1**) on plant material. Apparently, no ion suppression occurs when leaves are analyzed, since both RSDs and relative errors evaluated during precision and accuracy steps were smaller than those obtained for stems and stem bark (Table 2).

So far, it appears that nothing has been reported on the current literature concerning quantification of MA (**1**) on any plant species. This fact certainly makes difficult a comparison between recovery

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} \hline Matrix & Expected concentration & Intra-day (\(n=5\)) & & & Inter-day (\(n=15\)) \\  & (g/kg) & Measured concentration & RSD & Relative error & Measured concentration & RSD & Relative error \\  & (mean + SD) (g/kg) & (x) & (x) & (mean + SD) (g/kg) & (x) & (x) \\ \hline Stems & 0.10 & 0.11

## Page 5

values obtained in this work with others. Therefore, a concise HPLC-ESI-MS/MS method, in which both time-consuming and labor tasks could be avoided, should be preferred rather than employing different extraction and clean-up procedures for different matrices.

Method application to _K. ivorensis_ plants with and without symptoms of stems and branch cankers, caused by _B. rhodina_

The HPLC-ESI-MS/MS method has been applied to quantification of MA (**1**) in the stems, stem bark, and leaves from plants of _K. ivorensis_ with and without symptoms of stem cankers, caused by _B. rhodina_ (Fig. 7). MA (**1**) in the samples was expressed as g/kg of stems, bark, or leaves. MA (**1**) was found in all samples. The concentration of MA (**1**) in stem bark without symptoms of stem cankers was 1.86 g/kg +-5.5%, and similar proportions were present in those with symptoms, 1.61 g/kg +-16.7%. On the other hand, MA (**1**) was observed in markedly higher concentration in stems with symptoms (1.23 g/kg +-8.0%) than in those without symptoms (0.34 g/kg +-10.4%). These data suggest that MA (**1**) plays a role in plant-pathogen interaction, probably as a phytoanticipin (Griebel and Zeier, 2008; Pedras et al., 2005; Adesogan and Taylor, 1967). Biosynthesis of such a metabolite might represent a plant defense strategy in response to the pathogen attack, since this compound is reported to have antimicrobial activity (Chiruvella et al., 2007; Abdelgaleil et al., 2004).

MA (**1**) was also observed in higher concentrations in leaves with symptoms (4.3 g/kg +-0.44%) than in those without symptoms (3.28 g/kg +-0.294%). Thus, assuming that MA (**1**) acts as a phytoanticipin, such behavior could be understood as a chemical-signaling for the whole plant. Increasing MA (**1**) concentration in leaves, the plant might prevent additional infection by avoiding pathogen penetration into the stomata. However, it is premature to draw any conclusions about the role of MA (**1**) in plant-pathogen interaction until isolated MA (**1**) can be evaluated in direct bioassays with _B. rhodina_, which is currently in progress.

## Conclusions

A HPLC-ESI-MS/MS method was developed and validated for the determination of the limonoid MA (**1**) in different parts of _K. ivorensis_ plants with and without symptoms of stem cankers caused by _B. rhodina_. As expected, stem and leaves of symptomatic plants presented a larger concentration of MA suggesting that this limonoid acts as a good barrier for the growth of _B. rhodina_. These data stimulated an investigation of MA (**1**) as _B. rhodina_ inhibitor. Experiments on the dose-response of _B. rhodina_ to MA (**1**) are in progress.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

All organic solvents used were of analytical grade and purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) and for LC-APCI-MS/MS they were HPLC grade purchased from JT Baker (Ecatepec, Mexico); prior to use they were filtered through a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane Millipore filter (0.45 m) and degassed by sonication for 15 min. Water purified (18 M-OMEGA-) by a reverse osmosis Milli-Q system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) was used for all solutions. All specimens were separately dried in an air circular oven (Tecnal, TE-394/3, Piracicaba, Brazil), powdered using a mill (Tecnal, TE-340, Piracicaba, Brazil) and granular sizes were homogenized using a granular sieve (75 m; 200 mesh), (Tecan TE-631, Sao Paulo, Brazil). Liquid chromatography coupled with atmosphere pressure chemical ionization and tandem mass spectrometry data (LC-APCI-MS/MS) were obtained using an Alliance 2695 liquid chromatography, and mass spectral data were acquired in positive ion mode on a triple quadrupole Micromas Quattro LC spectrometer (Manchester, UK), equipped with a _2_-_S_-P_-APPI ion source and a megaflow electrospray probe. All MS data were acquired and processed using MassLynx V4.1 software (Waters, Cheshire, United Kingdom), with processed charts constructed using Origin 6.0 software (Microcal Software, Northampton, MA, USA). NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance DRX-400 spectrometer (Karlsruhe, Germany) (1H, 400 MHz; 13C, 100 MHz).

### Plant material

_K. ivorensis_ plants with and without symptoms of stem cankers, caused by _B. rhodina_, were collected on October 15th 2006 at the Cacao Research Experimental Unit (CEPLAC), Experimental Forest Station "Sosthenes de Miranda" (ESOMI), located in Sao Sebastiao da Posse city in Baile State, Brazil. Plant collection was supervised by Dr. Manfred Willy Muller from CEPLAC (BH4863).

### Extraction procedure

Individually, stem bark, stems and leaves of _K. ivorensis_ plants with and without symptoms of stem cankers were powdered and granular sizes were homogenized using a granular sieve (75 m; 200 mesh). From homogenized ground stem bark, stems and leaves 50.0 +- 1.0 mg were ultrasound bath-assisted extracted three times for 10 min using ethanol as extracting solvent. Crude ethanolic extracts were obtained after filtration through a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane Millipore filter (0.45 m). The samples were diluted affording solutions of 1 ppm. Aliquot of 60 m of each sample was evaporated to dryness by vacuum (Savant SpeedVac Plus CS 10A, Sao Paulo, Brazil) at 42 degC for two hours, affording the concentrated extract. The dry residues were reconstituted in MeOH (1 mL) for HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Extraction and isolation of methyl angolensate standard

Ground stems (1.4 kg) from healthy _K. ivorensis_ were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH, at room temperature, three times. The concentrated hexane extract (30 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane-EtOAc gradient yielded four fractions. Purification of fraction 4 was carried out

Fig. 7: Variation in the contents of MA (1) in different parts of _Kluaya iorensis_ with (**π**) and without (○) symptoms of stem and branch cankers, caused by _Botryosphaeria_ rhodina.



## Page 6

by applying it to an ODS (C18) SPE cartridge. The solvent was removed from the cartridge under vacuum. The eluent was evaporated and re-suspended in MeOH and subjected to Reversed phase-HPLC (H2O-MeOH 28:72; detection, UV 217 nm, flow rate, 4.7 mL min-1, Phenomenex Gemini C18 column, 250 x 10 mm i.d.) yielding MA **1** (24.8 mg) and other limonoids.

### Calibration standard and analytical curves

A stock solution of MA (**1**) at 1000 mg/mL was prepared in HPLC grade methanol (JT Baker, Ecatepec, Mexico) and working solutions at 5, 10, 50, 100, 500 and 1000 mg/mL were prepared by serial dilution. Individually, stem bark, stems and leaves concentrated extract (prepared as described in Section 4.3) were reconstituted in 1 mL of such working solutions for HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Then, MA (**1**) in the samples expressed as g/kg of stems, stem bark, or leaves were 0.1, 0.2, 1.0, 2.0, 10.0, 20.0 g/kg.

All calibration standard curves were obtained in triplicate. The dynamic range used was from 5 to 1000 ng/mL (0.1-20 g/kg) for all analyzed curves. Calibration curves were obtained by plotting concentration (ng/mL and g/kg) in axis x per area below SRM peaks (arbitrary units) in axis y.

### HPLC and MS parameters

LC-APCI-MS/MS data were acquired using a Luna ODS analytical column (150 x 4.6 mm i.d., 5 m, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA), samples (20 mL) were injected into the analytical column under a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min, the column was maintained at 20 degC in all runnings; the gradient elution system consisted of the following steps (H2O, MeOH and iso-ProOH in lines A, B and C respectively, each one supplemented with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA): a gradient elution starting at 70:30:0 (A:B:C) and varying linearly to 10:90:0 (A:B:C) for 25 min; then, a new linear variation was employed varying from 10:90:0 (A:B:C) to 0:100:0 (A:B:C) for 30 min; the column was then washed with a new linear variation from 0:100:0 (A:B:C) to 0:90:10 (A:B:C) for 35 min, and re-conditioned with 70:30:0 (A:B:C) for 5 min; a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min was used for the analysis; mass spectral data were acquired in positive ion mode; nitrogen was used for nebulization (12 L h-1) and desolvation (820 L h-1): the capillary voltage was set at 3.27 kV and the sample and the extractor cones at 32 and 5 V respectively; argon (Ar) was used for the product ions experiments (CID-MS). For SRM experiments, the cone voltage was maintained using tune parameters previously optimized for all compounds at 32 V, and three transitions were selected: \(m/z\) 471 - 453 and \(m/z\) 471 - 439 (monitoring) and \(m/z\) 471 - 411 (quantification), using a collision energy (CE) of 15 eV. The dwell time was 0.3 s, and the interscan delay was 0.02 s. The collision gas pressure (argon) was set at 1.40 e - 3 mbar for all experiments.

_Software:_ All MS data were acquired and processed using Mass-Lynx V4.1 software (Waters, Cheshire, United Kingdom).

### Limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ)

Individually, stem bark, stems and leaves concentrated extract (prepared as described in Section 4.3) were reconstituted in 1 mL of MeOH and limits of detection (LOD) were performed using the signal-to-noise ratio - 3/1 criterion. Limits of quantification (LOQ) were established analyzing the same standard samples with serial diluted solutions, and were considered as the concentration at which the method is able to quantify the substance with acceptable accuracy and precision, i.e. with relative standard deviation (RSDs) and 20% variability. The limits were tested by injecting standard samples replicating each injection at least three times.

### Specificity, linearity, precision, and accuracy

Specificity was assessed by using three different transitions for quantification of MA (**1**) in the SRM mode.

Linearity was achieved by coefficients of determination (_r_2) of analytical curves prepared as described in Section 4.5. Linearity studies of these curves were also accomplished using homoscedasticity test according to Almeida et al. (2002).

Precision and accuracy were evaluated by individual analyses of stem bark, stems and leaves concentrated extract (prepared as described in Section 4.3) reconstituted in 1 mL of working solutions of MA (**1**) at 5, 10, 50, 100, 500 and 1000 mg/mL were prepared as g/kg of stems, stem bark, or leaves: 0.1, 0.2, 1.0, 2.0, 10.0, 20.0 g/kg). Each concentration was analyzed on five non-consecutive days. The results are given in Table 2 and are expressed as Relative Standard Deviations (RSDs). The accuracy evaluated from back calculation was determined as the percent deviation between amount found and amount added of standard at the six concentrations examined, but expressed as relative errors in Table 2.

### Recovery

A stock solution of MA (1) at 1000 mg/mL was prepared in HPLC grade methanol (JT Baker, Ecatepec, Mexico) and working solutions of 6.0, 600.0 and 900 ng/mL were prepared by serial dilution. Then, aliquots of each solutions (1.0 mL) were added individually to powdered stem bark, stems and leaves (50 +- 1.0 mg) from _K. ivorensis_ plant without symptoms of stem cankers, and dried under N2 flow for 2 h. Thereafter, samples were submitted to solvent extraction as described in Section 4.3. Each sample was evaporated to dryness by vacuum (Savant SpeedVac Plus CS 10A, Sao Paulo, Brazil) at 42 degC for two hours, affording the spiked quality controls (QCs). The dry residues were reconstituted in MeOH (1 mL) for HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Recoveries were calculated by comparing spiked quality controls (QCs) with directly-extracted QCs at same concentrations. SRM areas of each quality control were directly compared with spiked quality controls (fivefold for each one). Concentrations of low (LQC), medium (MQC) and high quality controls (HQC) were set at 6.0 ng/mL (0.16 g/kg), 600 ng/mL (12.0 g/kg) and 900 ng/mL (18.0 g/kg), respectively.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the Brazilian Science Foundations, _Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico_ (CNPq), _Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior_ (CAPES), and _Financialato de Estudos e Projetos_ (FINEP) for financial support for this project. We are especially grateful to the _Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo_ (FAPESP), not only for general financial support but also for fellowships given to Guimaraes KV, de Souza GD, Silva SC and Trapp MA, respectively.

## Appendix A Supplementary material

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.phytochem.2009.08.013.

## References

- Abdelgali _et al._ (2004) Abdelgali, S.A.M., Iwagawa, T., Doe, M., Nakatani, M., 2004. Antifungal limonoids from the fruits of _Rhaya sengelensis_. Fitotetrapa 75, 566-572.
- Adesogna _et al._ (1967) Adesogna, K.E., Taylor, D.A.H., 1967. Isolation of a steroidal hormone from _khaya grandifolia_. Chem. Ind. 1, 356.
- Almeida _et al._ (2002) Almeida, A.M., Castel-Branco, M.M., Falco, A.C., 2002. Linear regression for calibration lines revisited: weighting schemes for bioanalytical methods. J. Chromatogr. 974, 215-222.


## Page 7

* [2004] Danerji, B., Nigam, S.K., 1984. Wood constituents of Meliaceae: a review. Fitoterapia IV (1), 3-36.
* [2007] Chirivenka, K.K., Mohammed, A., Dampuri, G., Ghanta, R.G., Raghavan, S.C., 2007. Phytochemical and antimicrobial studies of methyl angolensate and luteolin-7-0-glucoside isolated from callus cultures of _Soymida febrijtoga_. Int. J. Biomed. Sci. 3 (4), 269-278.
* [2006] Dunsish, O., Ruhmann, O., 2006. Kinetics of cell formation and growth stresses in the secondary xylem of _Sutterina melanogaster_ (L). Jac- and _Kluya iorensis_ A. Chev. (Meliaceae). Wood Sci. Technol. 40, 49-62.
* [2008] Food and Agricultural Organization (PAO). Available on line at: <[http://www.fao.org/cap/statistics/en/](http://www.fao.org/cap/statistics/en/)> (Accessed on June 2008).
* [2009] Ferreira, I.C.P., Cortez, D.A.G., da Silva, M.F.G.F., Rodrigues-Filho, E., Vieira, P.C., Fernandes, J.B., 2005. Astropycal/paced and seco-mercanicolides from stems of _Kluya another_. Int. J. Rep. 68, 413-416.
* [2001] Gasparotto, L., Hanada, R.E., Albuquerque, F.C., Duarte, M.L.R., 2001. Mancha aperada cabasad on _Pmaneethorus caucuriers em mogno africano_. Fitopatol. Res. 26 (3), 660-661.
* [2002] Gilbert, J., Ainkam, E., 2002. Validation of analytical methods for determining mycotoxins in foodsuits. Trends Anal. Chem. 21, 468-486.
* [2008] Griebel, T., Zeier, J., 2008. Light regulation and daytime dependency of inducible plant defenses in _Arabidopsis_: phytochrome signaling controls systemic acquired resistance rather than local defense. Plant Physiol. 147, 790-801.
* [2007] Marino, P.S.B., 2007. Estudo Quimico das Especies _Kluya iorensis_ (Meliaceae) e _Eusylotropic payments_ (Matuceae). Ph.D. Thesis, PROG-UPAT, Sao Carlos, Brazil.
* [2004] van Niekerk, J.M., Oros, P.W., Groenewald, J.Z., Fourie, P.H., Halleen, E., 2004. DNA phylogeny, morphology and pathogenicity of _Botrypsinogenic species_ on grapeneus. Mycologia 96, 781-798.
* [2009] Olmo, L.R.V., da Silva, M.F.G.F., Rodrigues-Filho, E., Vieira, P.C., Fernandes, J.B., Marsaioil, A.J., Pinheiro, A.L., Vilela, E.F., 1996. Rearranged limonoids from _Kluya sengadensis_. Phytochemistry 42 (3), 831-837.
* [2009] Olmo, L.R.V., da Silva, M.F.G.F., Rodrigues-Filho, E., Vieira, P.C., Fernandes, J.B., Pinheiro, A.L., Vilela, E.F., 1997. Limonoids from leaves of _Kluya sengadensis_. Phytochemistry 44 (6), 1157-1161.
* [2005] Pedras, M.S.C., Gadagi, R.S., Jha, M., Sarma-Mamillapalle, V.K., 2005. Detoxification of the phytolacin brissibility by isolates of _leptophoretic naculatus_ pathogenic on brownat insurvales as inducible hydrolase. Phytochemistry 68 (11), 1572-1578.
* [2007] Reche, K.V.G., 2007. Estudo Fitoquimico da Madeira Nobre _Kluya iorensis_ (Melaceae) Imune _Abrysipula grandella_ e sua Adaptacao Quimico a Botryposylserizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadizadiz

