# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000800023.pdf

## Page 1

_J. Braz. Chem. Soc.,_ Vol. 16, No. 6B, 1431-1438, 2005.

Printed in Brazil - 62005 Societable Brasileiro de Quimica

**Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry Screening of Piperidine Alkaloids from _Senna spectabilis_ (Fabaceae) Extracts: Fast Identification of New Constituents and Co-metabolites**

_Marcos Pivatto\({}^{a}\), Antonio E. M. Crotti\({}^{b}\), Norberto P. Lopes\({}^{c}\), Ian Castro-Gamboa\({}^{a}\), Amanda de Rezende\({}^{a}\), Claudio Viegas Jr.\({}^{a}\), Maria Claudia M. Young\({}^{d}\), Maysa Furlan\({}^{a}\) and Vanderlan S. Bolzani\({}^{a,b,a}\)_

\({}^{a}\) _Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14801-970 Araraquara - SP, Brazil_

\({}^{b}\) _Nucleo de Pesquisas em Ciencias Exatas e Tecnologicas, Universidade de Franca, Av. Dr. Armando Salles de Oliveira 201, 14404-600 Franca - SP, Brazil_

\({}^{c}\) _Departamento de Fisica e Quimica, Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Via do Cafe s/n, 14040-903 Ribeirao Preto - SP, Brazil_

\({}^{d}\) _Secao de Fisiologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, CP 4005, 01061-970 Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil_

O padaro de fragmentacao de uma serie homologa de alcaloides piperidinicos isolados de _Sema spectabilis_ fit investigado utilizando-se espectrometrie de massas _tandem_ com ionizacao por _electrospray_ (ESI-EM/EM). A analise dos extratos EtOH e fracces das flores e dos frutos de _S. Spectabilis_ por ESI-EM e ESI-EM/EM permiti euclidar a esturura de quatro componentes pertencentes a una serie homologa destes alcaloides, bem como de quatro co-metabolitos inditos. A elucidacao estustrual dos co-metabolitos, com base no padaro de fragmentacao de alcaloides piperidinicos previamente isolados, e confirmados pelos dados de EM de alta resolucao, demonstra a importancia desta tecnica para a determinacao do "perfil metabolomico" de uma especie de importancia farmacologica.

The fragmentation pattern of a homologous series of piperidine alkaloids isolated from _S. spectabilis_ was investigated using electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). The ESI-MS and ESI-MS/MS analyses of EtOH extracts and fractions from flowers and fruits of _S. spectabilis_ allowed to elucidate the structures of four new compounds. The identification of these co-metabolites, based on the fragmentation patterns of previously isolated compounds, and further confirmed by accurate mass spectrometry defines this technique as a powerful tool to determine the "metabolomic profile" of species which has pharmacological importance.

**Keywords:**_Sema spectabilis_, piperidine alkaloids, metabolomic profile, electrospray, tandem mass spectrometry

## Introduction

_Senna spectabilis_ (synonym of _Cassia spectabilis_) is an arborous species of Fabaceae (subfamily Caesalpiniaceae). In Brazil, many species of both _Cassia_ and _Semna_ are used as ornamental plants due to their beautiful flowers. Some species of are also commonly used in Africa and Asia countries, mainly in India and China, as traditional medicine formulations for treatment of several diseases, alternatively to the conventional allopathic medicine.1,2 Phenolic compounds have been proposed to be responsible for several pharmacological properties attributed to these species, such as anti-inflammatory, analgesic, laxative, antimicrobial and antiulceral.3 Recently, leaves and flowers of _S. spectabilis_ were reported to be valuable sources of bioactive piperidine alkaloids (Figure 1). Recently the cytotoxicity of these metabolites was reported using mutant strains of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_, which is indicative of their potential antitumoral activity.3 Interestingly, further assays with these alkaloids demonstrated significant antinociceptive activity, and also revealed them as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.4,5 Also, it was attributed to piperidine alkaloids, purgative,6,7 and antimicrobial8 activities, as well as the ability for specific inhibition of superoxide macrofages.9 Considering

## Page 2

these remarkable pharmacological properties, there is an interest in searching for further piperidine alkaloids from _S. spectabilis_, including major and minor alkaloid co-metabolites. However, these alkaloids are biosynthesized by this plant species in very small amounts, and it has not been possible to obtain sufficient pure material for full structural determination using NMR techniques. Therefore, no detailed structural information for these alkaloids co-metabolites is available.

In recent years, liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) has been shown to be a powerful tool to separate and identify natural products.10-12 Structural elucidation of natural co-metabolites in complex mixtures has also been possible by use of electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS), even from small quantities of plant material or other biological samples.13,14 The use of this technique has increased substantially nowadays, and ESI-MS/MS experiments can be useful for various studies on natural product chemistry, including biosynthesis,15-18 metabolomic profile19,20 and dereplication.13,21,22 The isolation and characterization of several alkaloids have been reported, however, only a handful of papers describe the use of ESI-MS/MS for the characterization of new natural products.11,23-27 Advances in the development of high-resolution MS and the elucidation of gas-phase fragmentation chemistry is now helping in the analysis of new compounds and new organic reactions.28-32

In this study, we report a ESI-MS/MS spectrometric method for characterization of piperidine alkaloids from flowers and fruits extracts of _S. spectabilis_. This technique is also shown to be an excellent tool for analysis of the different alkaloid isomers co-metabolites as a homologous series, which constitutes the chemical profile or "fingerprint" in whole tissues. Additionally, a simple and rapid method for differentiation and identification of known alkaloid mixtures, and also of new piperidine analogs can be useful to describe the metabolomic design from different part of this plant species.

## Experimental

### Plant material

The flowers and fruits of _S. spectabilis_ were collected in February 2004 from a specimen cultivated at the Institute of Chemistry in A raraquara, Sao Paulo State, Brazil, and identified by Dr. Ines Cordeiro. A voucher specimen (SP 370.917) was deposited at the herbarium of the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil.

### Extraction and sample preparation

Green fruits and dried flowers from _S. spectabilis_ (8.0 kg and 950.0 g, respectively) were powdered and extracted (5 x 5 L) with EtOH. The ethanolic extracts (2.0 g) of both green fruits and dried flowers were re-dissolved in 5% aqueous H2SO4 (30 mL) and the insoluble portion was filtered off. The acid solution was extracted with hexane (3 x 20 mL) to yield a non-alkaloidal portion (14.8 from fruits and 5.7 mg from flowers). The residual acid solution was basified (pH 9) with NH4OH, then extracted with CH2Cl2 (3 x 20 mL). The resulting extracts were dried over anhydrous MgSO4 and concentrated, furnishing a crude alkaloid fraction from fruits (121.6 mg) and flowers (272.7 mg).

An aliquot of each extract was dissolved in MeOH to obtain a concentration of 1 mg mL-1 and decanted during 12 h. The samples were filtered and clean up in a solid-liquid extraction, using a Gelman's polytetrafluorethylene membrane (PTFE) of 0.45 _m_m in diameter.

### Mass spectrometry

Methanol (HPLC grade) and de-ionized water (Mill-Q) was used throughout the whole study. ESI mass spectra, precursor and product ions scans were acquired in positive ion mode at unit mass resolution and recorded on a Quattro-LC spectrometer (Micromass, Manchester, UK) which held a quadrupole, hexapole quadrupole configuration. The instrumental conditions used were: probe electrospray tip voltage 3 kV; cone voltage 25 V; nitrogen was used for both the bath and nebulizing gas flowing at 345 L h-1 and 27 L h-1, respectively. Solutions were infused

Figure 1: Structure of alkaloids isolated from _S. spectabilis_.



## Page 3

into the ESI source at a flow-rate of 5 _m_L min-1, using a Harvard Apparatus model 1746 (Holliston, MA). Compounds and cleaned up extracts were dissolved in 20% aqueous methanol to give a concentration of 0.5 mg mL-1 and 10 _m_L were injected for each analysis. The source temperature was set at 80 degC.

Electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) experiments were carried out in positive ion mode only, using the same conditions described above. The collision cell was filled with Ar gas at pressure of 7 psi and the collision energy was fixed at 25 eV to maximize the formation of diagnostic fragments.

Accurate-mass measurements were performed on a quadrupole-time of flight instrument (UltrOTOF-Q, Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA).

## Results and Discussion

ESI-MS/MS data of the protonated molecule **2**, **3**, **5** and **7** (Figure 1), which were previously isolated,3,5 are shown in Table 1. The product ion mass spectra of **2** (of _m/z_ 326) and **7** (of _m/z_ 368), that only differ in the lateral chain linked at C-6 of the piperidine ring, are very similar. The most abundant fragment ion for both the spectra is that of _m/z_ 308, which results from H2O loss (18 Da) or CH2CO2H loss (60 Da), respectively from the precursor ion. Additionally, less abundant fragment ions at the low _m/z_ region, of _m/z_ 70, 81, 95, are also of very similar abundances for **2** and **7**. Similarly, the predominant process in the fragmentation of **5** (of _m/z_ 342) is the loss of H2O. For **5**, however, further loss of H2O (from [M + H - H2O]+) forms the ion of _m/z_ 306. This difference is likely associated with the hydroxyl group at C-7, thus allowing for the second loss of H2O. In addition, the fragment ion of _m/z_ 280 also can be considered diagnostic for the hydroxyl substituent at C-7, and it is observed only for **5**. Finally, similarities between the fragment ions of the diastereoisomers **2** and **3**, of _m/z_ 326, indicate that the configuration at C-6 has little influence on their dissociation pattern. These data demonstrate that the loss of H2O at C-3 (for **2**, **3** and **5** or CH2CO2H, for **7**) is the predominant process in the fragmentation of protonated piperidine alkaloids. In addition, the fragment ion [M + H - R2OH - H2O]+, together with that of _m/z_ 280, is considered to be also diagnostic of a hydroxyl group at C-7.

ESI-MS of crude alkaloid fraction of flowers and fruits from _S. spectabilis_ are shown in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. In order to investigate the structure of various alkaloid co-metabolites, a series of ions with even _m/z_ relative value, that are usually characteristic for protonated molecules containing odd number of nitrogens,3-34 were analyzed by ESI tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS), as shown in Table 1.

Loss of H2O is the predominant process in the fragmentation of the ion of _m/z_ 298 (**1**). Other minor ions are those of _m/z_ 70, 81, 95 and 109. These ESI-MS/MS data are similar to those of **2** and **3**, with a _m/z_ shift of 28 regarded to the corresponding ions of _m/z_ 298 and 280 (of _m/z_ 326 and _m/z_ 308, respectively). This shift is attributed to two methylenes units at the alkyl side chain at C-6.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c c c c}  & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & **5** & **6** & **7** & **8** & **9** & **10** & **11** & **12** & **13** \\ A [M+H]* & 298 & 326 & 326 & 314 & 342 & 340 & 368 & 300 & 328 & 444 & 47

## Page 4

Therefore, **1** is expected to be homologue of **2** and **3** differing only in the number of CH2 units of the substituent at C-6 (n = 8 for **1**; n = 10 for **2** and **3**). A similar alkaloid was previously isolated from _Cassia excelsa_.35 However, the configuration of the stereocenters of the alkaloid core (C-2, C-3, and C-6) could not be unambiguously assigned as their influences on the fragmentation processes were not evident in this study.

The second most abundant fragment ion of **6,** of _m/z_ 280, is resulting of loss of CH3CO2H (60 Da), as compared to **7.** Further similarities between the ESI-MS/MS data of **6** and **7** (_i.e._, the low mass fragment ions series at _m/z_ 70, 81, 95 and 109), that differ by 28 _m/z_ units, are indicative of the lack of two methylene units for **6,** as compared to **7** (Table 1). It appears to be no previous reports on this compound or on its diastereoisomers. In the same manner, ESI-MS/MS of the ion of _m/z_ 314 (**4**) shows fragment ions of _m/z_ 296 (loss of H2O) and _m/z_ 278 (loss of two H2O molecules) with a mass shift of 28 as for **5** (of _m/z_ 324 and _m/z_ 306, respectively). These data indicated that **4** is a (CH2)s homologue of **5** (Figure 1), previously isolated from _Cassia leptophylla_.5

The two major fragment ions in the ESI-MS/MS spectrum of _m/z_ 328 (**9**), of _m/z_ 310 and _m/z_ 292, result from two consecutive losses of H2O (Table 1). In principle, they could be indicative of a hydroxyl substituent at C-7, similar to **5**. However, for **9** the lack of the fragment ion of _m/z_ 280 (which is diagnostic for the hydroxyl substituent at C-7), as well as the two _m/z_ shift units from the corresponding ion of **3**, are strong evidences for a hydroxyl group bounded in another position of the alkaloid skeleton, most probably formed by the reduction of the carbonyl group on the side chain linked at C-6. This data suggests that **9** is similar to an alkaloid previously isolated from _Cassia spectablilis_.5 Finally, comparison between the ESI-MS/MS of **8** (of _m/z_ 300) and **9** (of _m/z_ 328), that also displays a _m/z_ shift of 28, suggests that **8** exhibits an alkyl side chain with n = 8 instead of n = 10 (for **9**). Such compound (**8**) has been previously isolated from _C. spectabilis_.3,5

The fragment ion of _m/z_ 280 in the ESI-MS/MS of **10** (_m/z_ 444) results from the loss of a 164 Da, likely R2OH (Table 1). An analogous fragment ion is also observed in the spectra of **1** and **6** (n = 8). However, for **10** the ion of

Figure 3: ESI-MS of the alkaloid crude methanolic extract from the fruits of _S. spectabilis._ (ni = not idendified).

Figure 2: ESI-MS of the alkaloid crude methanolic extract from the flowers of _S. spectabilis._ (ni = not idendified).



## Page 5

_m_/z 280 can also be formed by loss of H2O. In addition, the relative abundance of the fragment ion of _m_/z 147 (that was expected to be diagnostic for the R2 substituent group at C-3), is higher than those of the low mass fragment ions series of _m_/z 70, 81, 95 and 109, whose intensity is much lower than that of their corresponding ions in the spectra of **1-9,** thus suggesting a phenylpropanol moiety linked at C-3. The fragment ions of _m_/z 147 and ([M + H - 146]* has been recently used to characterize a _p_-coumaroyl substituent (Figure 1).35 The fragment ion of _m_/z 147 is considered to result from charge-induced fragmentation that forms an acylium ion **E** (pathway **III**, Scheme 1). This process could be initiated by proton shift from the amine group to the carbonyl of the ester group.36 In contrast, loss of _p_-coumaric acid (pathway **II**), as well as the formation of the fragment ion 

## Page 6

of _m/z_ 298 (pathway **I**) requires two different hydrogen shifts that do not involve the charged site.37 A literature search indicates that there are no previous reports for alkaloid **10**.

ESI-MS/MS of the ion of _m/z_ 474 (**12**), shown in Figure 4, differ from that of **10** (_m/z_ 444) only by the product ion of _m/z_ 177, which is 30 _m/z_ units heavier than that for **10** (_m/z_ 147). This difference indicates an additional methoxyl group at the aromatic moiety, that is, a feruloyl group.23 Further evidence of a methoxyl group is given by the diagnostic ion of _m/z_ 145, formed by the loss of CH3OH from **E** (Table 1). In addition, other similarities between the spectra of **10** and **12** (_i.e._, the low mass fragment ion series of _m/z_ 70, 81, 95 and 109) are coherent with the proposed structure **12,** which appears to be novel (Figure 1).

The ESI-MS/MS of the ion of _m/z_ 472 (**11**) shows the fragment ions of _m/z_ 326 and _m/z_ 308 with a 28 _m/z_ shift as compared to the corresponding ions of **10**. However,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Ion & Formula & Exact mass & Actual mass & Mass error (ppm) \\
[**1** + H]+ & C1H2H2NO2+ & 298.2746 & 298.2758 & +4.0 \\
[**2** + H]+ or [**3** + H]− & C3H2H2NO2+ & 326.3059 & 326.3073 & +4.2 \\
[**4** + H]− & C1H2H2NO2+ & 314.2695 & 314.2676 & -6.0 \\
[**5** + H]− & C3H2NO2+ & 342.3008 & 342.2990 &

## Page 7

most of the fragment ions of **11** are the same as those of **10**, including that of _m/z_ 147, which is indicative of the _p_-comuaroyl group. These data strongly indicate that **11** differ from **10** only by two additional CH2 units at the side chain at C-3 (n = 10 for **11** instead of n = 8 for **10**). In fact, comparison between ESI-MS/MS of **12** and **13** (Figure 4) reveals that **13** is similar to **12** differing only in the length of the side chain at C-6 (n = 10). As for **10** and **12**, there are no reports found for **11**.

Aiming to confirm further the structures of all piperidine alkaloids, which were identified in this study, accurate-mass measurements were performed (Table 2). For **10-13**, the fragment ions of _m/z_ 145 (**10**, **11**) and _m/z_ 177 (**12**, **13**) corroborate the presence of a phenylpropanol moiety (feruloyl or coumaroyl) at C-3 for these alkaloid co-metabolite series. All of the measured _m/z_ are in full agreement with those calculated for the proposed formula.

Analysis of _S. spectabilis_ profile's from fruits and flowers extracts revealed a predominance of alkaloids with n = 8, unlike previous results, for which the compounds with n = 10 were the predominant.3 Our results also showed that the co-metabolites identified from flower extracts are more oxidized that those from fruits. The preferential accumulation of co-metabolites exhibiting different oxidation levels is likely to be associated with cellular differentiation in flowers tissues. We believe that this result could be of interest for further biosynthetic studies from this species.

There are, obviously, a number of structural features of the alkaloid skeleton that could not be assigned by mass spectrometry (_i.e._, configuration of the stereocenters at C-2, C-3 and C-6). In the same manner, some minor product ions and mechanistic aspects of the ion fragmentation cannot be explained solely from ESI-MS/MS analysis. To fully elucidate the structures and to understand the ion fragmentation pathways, additional data from NMR and MSa are required. Nevertheless, this work demonstrated the usefulness of ESI-MS and ESI-MS/MS assisting on the preliminary but very fast and considerably reliable identification of novel and potentially bioactive co-metabolite alkaloids from _Sema_ species extracts.

## References

* 1 Samy, R. P.; Ignacimuthu S.; Sen, A.; _J. Elmopharmacol._**1998**, _62_, 173.
* 2 Samy, R. P.; Ignacimuthu S.; _J. Elmopharmacol._**2000**, _69_, 63.
* 3 Viegas, Jr. C. Bolzani, V. S.; Furlan, M.; Barreiro, E. J.; Young, M. C. M.; Tomazela, D.; Eberlin, M. N.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2004**, _67_, 908.
* 4 Moreira, M. S. A.; Viegas Jr., C.; Miranda, A. L. P.; Barreiro, E. J.; Bolzani, V. S.; _Planta Med._**2003**, _69_, 795.
* 5 Bolzani, V. S.; Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Kingston, D. G. I.; _Tetrahedron_**1995**, _51_, 5929.
* 6Sriphong, L.; Sotanaphun, U.; Limsirichalkul, S.; Wetwitayaklung, P.; Chaichantipyuth, C.; Pummangura, S.; _Planta Med._**2003**, _69_, 1054.
* 7 Mendez, A. M.; _Pytochemistry_**1971**, _10_, 2255.
* 8Sansores-Peraza, P.; Rosado-Vallado, M.; Brito-Loeza, W.; Mena-Rejon, G. J.; Quijano, L.; _Fitorcapia_**2000**, _71_, 690.
* 9 Kamo, T.; Maehara, K.; Sato, K.; Hirota, M.; _Heterocycles_**2003**, _60_, 1303.
* 10 Albert, K.; Krucker, M.; Glaser, T.; Schefer, A.; Lienau, A.; Zeeb, D.; _Anal. Bioanal. Chem._**2002**, _372_, 25.
* 11 Pinto, A. C.; Silva, D. H. S.; Bolzani, V. D.; Lopes, N. P.; Epifanio, R. D.; _Quim. Nova_**2002**, _25 suppl._, \(1\), 45.
* 12 Niessen, W. M. A.; _Analisis_**2000**, _28_, 885.
* 13 Fredenhagen, A.; Derrien, C.; Gassmann, E.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2005**, _68_, 385.
* 14 Maurin, A. J. M.; Imamoto, Y.; Lopes N. P.; Lindsay-Smith, J. R.; Bonato, P. S.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2003**, _14_, 322.
* 15 Jung, W.; Yu, O.; Lau, S. M. C.; O'Keefe, D. P.; Odell, J.; Fader, G.; McGonigle, B.; _Nature Biotech._**2000**, _18_, 208.
* 16 Jarvis, A. P.; Schaaf, O.; Oldham, N. J.; _Planta_**2000**, _212_, 119.
* 17 Hertweck, C.; Jarvis, A. P.; Xiang, L. K.; Moore, B. S.; Oldham, N. J.; _Chem. Biochem._**2001**, \(2\), 784.
* 18 Lange, B. M.; Ketchum, R. E. B.; Croteau, R. B.; _Plant Physiol._**2001**, _127_, 305.
* 19 Kite, G. C.; Howes, M. J. R.; Simmonds, M. S. J.; _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._**2004**, _18_, 2859.
* 20 Hall, R.; Beale, M.; Fiehn, O.; Hardy, N.; Summer, L.; Bino, R.; _Plant Cell_**2002**, _14_, 1437.
* 21 Schobel, U.; Frenay, M.; Van Elswijk, V.; McAndrews, J. M.; Long, K. R.; Olson, L. M.; Bobzin, S. C.; Irrh, H.; _J. Biomol. Screen_**2001**, \(6\), 291.
* 22 Vuorela, P.; Leinonen, M.; Saikku, P.; Tammela, P.; Rauha, J. P.; Wennberg, T.; Vuorela, H.; _Curr. Med. Chem._**2004**, _11_, 1375.
* 23 Lopes, N. P.; Stark, C. B. W.; Gates, P. J.; Staunton, J.; _Analyst_**2002**, _127_, 503.
* 24 Fonseca, T.; Lopes, N. P.; Gates, P. J.; Staunton, J.; _J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom._**2004**, _15_, 325.
* 25 Lopes, N. P., Stark, C. B. W.; Hong, H.; Gates, P. J.; Staunton, J. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._**2002**, _16_, 414.



## Page 8

* (26) Crotti, A. E. M.; Lopes, J. L C.; Lopes, N. P.; _J. Mass Spectrom._**2005**, _40_, 1030.
* (27) Gates, P. J.; Kearney, G. C.; Jones, R.; Leadlay, P. F.; Staunton, J.; _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._**1999**, _13_, 242.
* (28) Kearney, G. C.; Gates, P. J.; Leadlay, P. F.; Staunton, J.; Jones, R.; _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._**1999**, _13_, 1650.
* (29) Lopes, N. P.; Fonseca, T.; Wilkins, J. P. G.; Gates, P. J.; _Chem. Commun._**2003**, \(1\), 72.
* (30) Roddis, M.; Gates, P.; Roddis, Y.; Staunton, J.; _J. Mass Spectrom._**2002**, _13_, 862.
* (31) Hong, H.; Gates, P. J.; Staunton, J.; Stinear, T.; Cole, S. T.; Leadlay, P. F.; Spencer, J. B.; _Chem. Commun._**2003**, _22_, 2822.
* (32) McLafferty FW, Turecek F.; _Interpretation of Mass Spectra_, 4\({}^{\rm th}\) ed., University Science Books: Mill Valley, CA, 1993, p. 38.
* (33) Qin, X. Z.; _J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom._**2002**, _13_, 371.
* (34) Highet, R. J.; _J. Org. Chem._**1964**, _29_, 471.
* (35) Bily, A. C.; Burt, A. J.; Ramputh, A. I.; Livesey, J.; Regnault-Roger, C.; Philogene, B. R.; Arnason, J. T.; _Pytochem. Anal._**2004**, _15_, 9.
* (36) Dongre, A. R.; Jones, J. L.; Somogyi, A.; Wysocki, V. H.; _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**1996**, _118_, 8365.
* (37) McLafferty FW, Turecek F.; _Interpretation of Mass Spectra_, 4\({}^{\rm th}\) ed., University Science Books: Mill Valley, CA, 1993, p. 80.



