# 10.1002@pca.902.pdf

## Page 1

Optimisation of conditions for the extraction of caseerins from _Casearia sylvestris_ using response surface methodology

KARIN F. BANDEIRA, ARISTEU G. TININIS, VANDERIAN DA S. BOLZANI and ALBERTO J. CAVALIEIRO

# Abstract

Optimal conditions for the extraction of casearins from _Casearia sylvestris_ were determined using response surface methodology. The maceration and sonication extraction techniques were performed using a 3 x 3 x 3 full factorial design including three acidity conditions, three solvents of different polarities and three extraction times. The yields and selectivities of the extraction of casearins were significantly influenced by acidity conditions. Taking into account all variables tested, the optimal conditions for maceration extraction were estimated to involve treatment with dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide for 26 h. Similar yields and selectivities for casearins were determined for sonication extraction using the same solvent but for the much shorter time of 1 h. The best results for stabilisation of the fresh plant material were obtained using leaves that had been oven dried at 40degC for 48 h. Copyright (c) 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

## INTRODUCTION

_Casearia sylvestris_ is a medicinal plant native to Brazil, Peru, Argentina, Uruguay and Bolivia, where it is known as guacatonga. The leaves of the plant are popularly used as an antiseptic, a topical anaesthetic and an anti-ulcer agent, and also to heal skin wound diseases (Scavone _et al._, 1979; Basile _et al._, 1990). Some of these properties were supported by the studies of Borges _et al._ (2000, 2001), who demonstrated the inhibition of phospholipase A2 by aqueous extracts of the leaves of _C. sylvestris_. Furthermore, these aqueous extracts were also able to neutralise proteases from snake venoms. A fraction obtained from the dichloromethane:methanol extract of leaves of the plant was active against _Bacillus cereus_ (Alves _et al._, 2000), and an ethanolic extract showed anti-ulcerogenic activity and low toxicity (Basile _et al._, 1990). The anti-ulcerogenic property was further investigated and confirmed by Sertie _et al._ (2000).

Phytochemical investigation of _C. sylvestris_ led to the isolation of clerodane diterpene classes, the casearins and casearvestrins (Fig. 1), identified as potential anti-tumour agents (Itokawa _et al._, 1990; Morita _et al._, 1991; Carvalho _et al._, 1998; Oberlies _et al._, 2002). Some of the casearins also exhibited DNA-damaging activity as determined by bioassays involving mutant strains of the yeast _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ (Carvalho _et al._, 1998). In these studies, casearins were obtained from the _n_-hexane fraction of the ethanolic extract (Itokawa _et al._, 1990; Morita _et al._, 1991) or from the dichloromethane:methanol (2:1, v/v) extract (Carvalho _et al._, 1998) of the leaves, whilst caseavervestrins were obtained from the methanolic extract of the leaves (Oberlies _et al._, 2002).

The efficiency of extraction of the bioactive components from the medicinal herb is clearly of fundamental importance if the therapeutic properties of this phytomedicine are to be exploited. The present paper deals with the optimisation of different conditions for the maceration and sonication extraction of casearins from leaves of _C. sylvestris_ using response surface methodology, and an evaluation of the stabilisation procedures to be employed with respect to the plant material harvested. Response surface methodology has previously been used to optimise extraction procedures for secondary metabolites from several plants (Costa and Faria, 1998; Del Valle _et al._, 2000; Liu _et al._, 2000; Moldao-Martins _et al._, 2000; Jones _et al._, 2001).

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Materials._ Leaves of _C. sylvestris_ were collected from different locations in the State of Sao Paulo, including Gaggs Farm in Presidente Venceslau, the State Park Carlos Botelho in Sao Miguel Arcanjo, the Ecological State Park Jureia-Itatins/Nucleo Arpoador in Peruibe Beach, and the Campus of Sao Paulo State University in Araraquara. The authenticities of the collected specimens were verified by Dr. Ines Cordeiro (IB-SMA/SP, Brazil). The collected leaves were bulked, oven 

## Page 2

dried at 40degC for 24 h, finely ground and stored at 25degC until required for experiments designed to determine the optimal conditions for the extraction of the collected materials. The experimental stabilisation procedures were performed with leaves collected in the University Campus in A raraquara. The fresh leaves were immediately submitted to the different stabilisation procedures.

All solvents used in the experimental procedures had been glass distilled. For chromatographic analyses, HPLC-grade solvents (J. T. Baker, Xalostoc, Mexico) were employed. Water was purified immediately prior to use with a Milli \(\uptheta\) plus system (Millipore, Milford, MA, USA).

### Experimental design and statistical analysis

Experiments were conducted in order to evaluate a range of extraction times (12, 24 and 36 h for maceration and 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 h for sonication), and solvent polartites (hexane, dichloromethane, methanol and water) at three acidity conditions (pure solvent, solvent saturated with formic acid and solvent saturated with ammonium hydroxide), in a 3 x 3 x 3 full factorial design. The values of the variables of the study were coded in order to assist with the construction of the experimental design, to remove factorial units, to adjust variable axes to intermediate values, and to define a new scale (Table 1). These coded values enabled facile computational manipulation, and increased accuracy in all estimated coefficients (Taqueda _et al._, 1998). The quadratic response surfaces were estimated by least-square regression. The predicted optimal values for the independent variables were determined from the estimated surface at the maximum stationary point. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the statistical significance of the fitted surface. Additionally, the best extraction condition was tested experimentally, and estimated and experimental values were compared in order to evaluate the accuracy of the response surface.

### Extraction protocol and sample clean-up

Dried and ground leaves of _C. sylvestris_ (0.400 g) were extracted by maceration or sonication with 6.0 mL of solvent in a centrifuge tube. Samples were centrifuged in a CELM (Barueri-SP, Brazil) instrument at 1200 \(\boldsymbol{g}\) for 10 min. An aliquot (1.5 mL) of the supernatant was evaporated to dryness and weighed in order to determine the yield of crude extract. This extract was then dissolved in 1.0 mL of methanol:water (98:2, v/v) and submitted to further clean-up by solid-phase extraction (SPE). Laboratory-prepared SPE-C18 columns (20 x 9 mm i.d.), dry packed with 1.5 g of LiChroprep(r) RP18 (40-63 mm; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), were activated with methanol and conditioned with methanol:water (98:2, v/v). Following application of samples, columns were eluted with 5 mL of methanol:water (98:2, v/v), and the eluates filtered through PTFE membranes (0.45 mm; Millipore) prior to HPLC analysis. All samples were prepared in duplicate.

### HPLC analysis

A Varian (Palo Alto, CA, USA) ProStar liquid chromatograph coupled to a photodiode array detector (PAD) and a ProStar 410 autosampler was used. Instrumental control and data processing were accomplished using a Varian Star chromatography

Figure 1: Casearins A-T and caseaverstrins A-C previously isolated from _Casearia sylvestris_.



## Page 3

workstation 5.52. An aliquot (20 mL) of sample solution was injected onto a Supelcosil(r) C18 (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) column (250 x 4.6 mm, 5 mm), which was eluted with a mixture of acetonitrile (solvent A) and water (solvent B), initially at 48:52 (A:B), changing by linear gradient to 75:25 over 30 min, and then by linear gradient to 100% A over 20 min, and finally isocratically with 100% A for 3 min. The solvent flow rate was 1.0 mL/min. Detection was at 235 nm for all samples; peaks of casearins were identified by analysis of UV spectra, obtained from the PAD detector, with lmax at 235 nm (Fig. 2).

In order to provide a relative comparison among the different samples, the sum of the areas of the casearin peaks (in arbitrary units) was considered representative of casearin content. The predominance of casearins in these samples was confirmed from 1H-NMR spectra (measured on a Varian Inova 500 MHz spectrometer) of leaf extracts, which showed prominent signals at \(d\) 5.2 (_d_, H12), \(d\) 5.6 (_dd_, H14), \(d\) 5.1-5.2 (_d_, H15a and H15b), \(d\) 5.5-6.4 (H18) and \(d\) 6.5 (s, H19) that are characteristic of casearin-type clerodane diterpenes. The ratio of casearin content to the yield of crude extract obtained was employed as an indicator of extraction selectivity.

### _Stabilisation procedures._

The contents of casearins in samples obtained from leaves of a specimen of _C. Sylvestris_ collected at the University Campus in Aarraquara were evaluated as a function of the sample preparation procedure. The leaves were collected and immediately submitted to eight different conditions: freezing with liquid nitrogen followed by either oven drying (40degC for 48 h) or lyophilisation, freezing with dry ice (solid carbon dioxide) followed by either oven drying or lyophilisation, freezing with ice followed by either oven drying or lyophilisation, and direct oven drying or air drying at ambient temperature in the shade. In each experimental procedure, 0.400 g of leaves were extracted by sonication with 6.0 mL of dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide as solvent, followed by centrifugation (1200 \(g\), 10 min). The sample clean-up and HPLC analyses were as described. Statistical significances between mean values were evaluated using Student's _t_-test at the 95% level.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### Effect of extraction parameters

Typical HPLC chromatograms of the extracts of the leaves of _C. sylvestris_ obtained by maceration and sonication extraction are presented in Fig. 2. The influence of extraction time, solvent polarity and acidity conditions on the extraction of casearins from the leaves of _C. sylvestris_ were evaluated through the construction of response surfaces. Such surfaces were fitted separately to each acidity condition. Most of the response variables had maximum stationary points and their critical values were within the experimental range (Figs 3 and 4). The yield and selectivity of the extraction of casearins were greatly influenced by acidity conditions, being reduced under acidic conditions and increased under basic conditions in both the maceration and sonication methods. These results could be indicative of the presence of acid and/or phenolic compounds besides the casearins, which were not extracted by solvents with low polarity such as dichloromethane in alkaline conditions.

### _C_asearin extraction by maceration

The maximum point for yield of crude extract was outside the response surface obtained (Fig. 3), but the response surface of casearin content and extraction selectivity both showed maximum points within the experimental range. The best estimated conditions for

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Extraction technique & Independent variable & Variable code value \\ \cline{3-5}  & Extraction time (h) & 12 & 24 & 36 \\  & Pure solvent\({}^{\ast}\) & Hexane (0.06) & Dichloromethane (3.4) & Methanol (6.6) \\  & Saturated with formic acid\({}^{\ast}\) & Dichloromethane (3.4) & Methanol (6.6) & Water (9.0) \\  & Saturated with ammonium hydroxide\({}^{\ast}\) & Hexane (0.06) & Dichloromethane (3.4) & Methanol (6.6) \\ Sonication & Extraction time (h) & 0.5 & 1.0 & 1.5 \\  & Pure solvent\({}^{\ast}\) & Dichloromethane (3.4) & Methanol (6.6) & Water (9.0) \\  & Saturated with formic acid\({}^{\ast}\) & Hexane (0.06) & Dichloromethane (3.4) & Methanol (6.6) \\  & Saturated with ammonium hydroxide\({}^{\ast}\) & Hexane (0.06) & Dichloromethane (3.4) & Methanol (6.6) \\ \end{tabular} \({}^{\ast}\) Polarity values of solvents shown in parentheses.

\end{table}
Table 1: Code values of variables in the maceration and sonication optimisation experiments

## Page 4

the extraction of casearins from leaves of _C. sylvestris_ by maceration given by the maximum stationary point (i.e. where the partial derivative of the response surface regression equation is equal to zero) involved 26 h extraction with dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide (Table 2).

### Cascarin extraction by sonication

As with maceration, dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide was determined to be the best solvent for the extraction of casearins from leaves of _C. sylvestris_ by sonication (Fig. 4). However, it was predicted that the extraction yield and selectivity of casearins after just 1 h of sonication would be similar to those available after 26 h of maceration (Table 2).

### Verification of the quadratic response surface model

The response surfaces for casearin content and extraction selectivity were statistically significant according to the \(F\) test at the 95% level (Table 3). In order to verify the accuracy of the response surface model, the optimum condition estimated for extraction by sonication was tested. All measured values of the response variables were within the 99% confidence range of predicted values based on quadratic response surface model (Table 4).

Figure 2: Typical HPLC chromatograms of extracts from leaves of _C. sylvestris_ obtained by (A) maceration, and (B) sonication extraction. Peaks marked * are attributed to casearins based on their UV spectra (shown as insert). (For extraction and analytical protocols see Experimental section).



## Page 5

* Estimated values of yield of crude extract, casearin content and extraction selectivity were calculated from the respective response surfaces using optimal conditions.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c}  & & Optimal conditions & & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Estimated valuesa  } \\ Extraction & & & & Yield of crude extract  & & & & \\ technique & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Acidity conditions} & Time (h) & Polarity & Yield of crude extract  & & & & \\ \hline \multirow{2}{*}{Maceration} & Pure solvent & 52.0 & 5.1 & 7.8 & 64.1 & 6.8 \\  & Saturated with formic acid & 18.0 & 5.8 & 25.1 & 49.3 & 2.0 \\  & Saturated with ammonium & 26.2 & 3.4 & 11.4 & 75.3 & 6.8 \\  & hydroxide & & & & & \\ Sonication & Pure solvent & 1.40 & 5.4 & 14.6 & 75.1 & 5.0 \\  & Saturated with formic acid & 1.80 & 7.0 & 35.7 & 57.6 & 1.9 \\  & Saturated with ammonium & 0.92 & 3.4 & 8.4 & 68.2 & 7.1 \\  & hydroxide & & & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Optimal conditions (time and polarity index) for the extraction of casearins from leaves of _Caseara sylvestris as_ determined from the response surface of casearin contents

Figure 3: Response surfaces employed for the evaluation of the optimal conditions for the extraction of casearins by macroeration at different acidity conditions [CE, yield of crude extract (%): CC, casearin content in area units × 10−6; EC, extraction selectivity [CC/CE]].



## Page 6



### Sample stabilization

The yield of crude extract, the casearin content and the extraction selectivity obtained from sonication extraction of leaves of _C. sylvestris_ that had received eight different sample stabilisation procedures are shown (Fig. 5). The extractions were performed under the optimal conditions selected from the response surfaces. The highest yield of crude extract was obtained by extraction of leaves that had been frozen with solid carbon dioxide followed by lyophilisation, whilst the highest casearin content and selectivity were obtained by extraction of leaves that had been dried directly in an oven at 40degC. These results reveal that special treatments are needed in order to stabilise plant material to obtain maximum yield of casearins from the leaves. This finding is reinforced by consideration of the casearin content obtained from leaf samples air-dried in the shade, which was around 15% lower than that obtained from oven-dried materials.

The response surface methodology was effective in optimising conditions for the extraction of casearins from the leaves of _C. sylvestris_, and there was a good correlation between the variables tested and the yield of secondary compound obtained. The casearin content and selectivity were dependent on, and greatly influenced by, polarity and acidity of solvents with the best results obtained following extraction with dichloromethane under alkaline conditions. The extracts obtained by sonication or by maceration under these conditions showed the same chromatographic profiles (Fig. 2), which was indicative of the stability of casearins during the extraction protocol. Sonication extraction showed the advantage of a very much reduced extraction time compared with maceration extraction. The yield of crude extract obtained from leaf samples

Figure 4: Response surfaces employed for the evaluation of the optimal conditions for the extraction of casearins by sonication at different acidity conditions [CE, yield of crude extract (%); CC, casearin content in area units × 10−6; EC, extraction selectivity (CC/CE)].



## Page 7

that had been submitted to various sample stabilisation procedures were quite different, with the best results for casein content and selectivity being obtained with samples dried in an oven at 40degC prior to extraction.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Biota-FAPESP for financial support, to CNPq for a Masters scholarship granted to Karin Fabiana Bandeira, and to CAPES for a PhD scholarship granted to Aristeu G. Tinnis. We would also like to acknowledge the Instituto Florestal for authorizing the collection of _C. sylvestris_ samples at Carlos BotelhoStatePark and Jureia-Itatins Ecological Station.

## References

- Alves TMA, Silva AF, Brandao M, Grandi TSM, Smania EFA, Smania Junior A, Zani CL. 2000. Biological screening of Brazilian plants. _Mem Inst Ossuoldo Cruz_**95**: 367-373.

- _P__utochem. Anal._**17**: 168-175 (2006)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c}  & Casearin content & \\  & (area units × 10 °) & Extraction selectivity \\ Measured values \\ Lower limit of 99\% confidence interval & 51.6 & 5.7 \\ Mean value (\(n\) = 3) & 61.0 & 6.2 \\ Upper limit of 99\% confidence interval & 70.3 & 6.7 \\ Estimated value\({}^{\text{a}}\) & 68.2 & 7.1 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Test of the optimal extraction conditions determined from the response surfaces

Figure 5: Yield of crude extract (CE; %), caseinrin content (CC; area units × 10 °) and extraction selectivity (ES) for different stabilisation treatments of plant material sampled. Key to treatments employed: a, liquid nitrogen followed by lyophilisation; b, liquid nitrogen followed by oven drying; c, dry ice followed by lyophilisation; d, dry followed by oven drying; e, ice followed by lyophilisation; f, ice followed by oven drying; g, direct oven drying; and h, air drying in the shade.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c}  & Pure solvent & \multicolumn{4}{c}{Saturated with formic acid} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Saturated with ammonium hydroxide} \\ \cline{2-7}  & Casearin content & Extraction selectivity & Casearin content & Extraction selectivity & Casearin content & Extraction selectivity \\ \hline _Extraction by maceration_ & & & & & & \\ _p_-value & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 \\ _R_a & 0.97 & 0.96 & 0.97 & 0.97 & 0.99 & 0.99 \\ _Extraction by sonication_ & & & & & & \\ _p_-value & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.05 \\ _R_a & 0.98 & 0.98 & 0.98 & 0.97 & 0.99 & 0.99 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Verification of the quadratic response surface model\({}^{\text{a}}\)

## Page 8

Basile AC, Sertie JAA, Panizza S, Oshiro TT, Azzolini CA. 1990. Pharmacological assay of _Caseeria sufestris_ I: preventive anti-ulcer activity and toxicity of the leaf crude extract. _J Ethnopharmac_**30**: 185-197.
* [30] Borges MH, Soares AM, Rodrigues VM. Andrao-Escarso SH, Diniz H, Hamaguchi A. Quintero A. Lizano S, Gutierrez JM. Giglio JR, Homsi-Brandeburgo MI. 2000. Effects of aqueous extract of _Caseeria sufestris_ (Flacouritaaceaed) on actions of snake and bee venoms and on activity of phospholipases \(\text{A}_{\text{b}}\). _Comp Biochem Physiol_**127B**: 21-30.
* [31] Borges MH, Soares AM, Rodrigues VM, Oliveira F. Fransheschi AM, Rucavado A, Giglio JR, Homsi-Brandeburgo MI. 2001. Neutralization of proteases fromofibros snake venoms by the aqueous extract from _Caseeria sufestris_ (Flacouritaaceaed). Toucon **39**: 1863-1869.
* [32] Carvalho PRF, Furlan M. Young MCM, Ringston DGI, Bolzani VS. 1998. Acycludal DNA-damage dicrdane dicrpenes from _Caseeria sufestris_ _Pittyochemistry_**49**: 1659-1662.
* [33] Costa CML, Faria LJG. 1998. Optimizacao do processo de extracao quimica de doso vegetais utilizando metodologia de superficie de resposta. In: Topics Expecia em Tecnologia de Protudus Naturais. UFPA: Belem: 220-241.
* [34] Del Valle JM, Bello S, Thiel J, Allen A, Chordia L. 2000. Comparison of conventional and supercritical CO2-extracted rosibin _ol. Braz J Chem Eng_**17**: 335-348.
* [35] Itokawa H, Totsuka N, Morita H, Takeya K, Iitaka Y, Schenkel EP, Motidome M. 1990. Anti-tumor principles from _Caseeria sufestris_ Sw (Flacouritaaceae), structure elucidation of new clerodane dicrpenes by 2-D NMR spectroscopy. _Chem Pharm Bull_**38**: 3384-3388.
* [36] Jones NM, Bernardo-Gil MG, Lourenco MG. 2001. Comparison of methods for extraction of tobacco alkaloids. _JAOAc Int_**84**: 309-316.
* [37] Lu FF, Ang CYW, Springer D. 2000. Optimization of extraction conditions for active components in _Hupericum perforatum_ using response surface methodology. _J Agric Food Chem_**48**: 3364-3371.
* [38] Molda-Martins M, Palavra A, Da Costa MLB, Bernardo-Gil MG. 2000. Supercritical CO2 extraction of _Tiprums zugis_ L. subsp. _sufestris_ aroma. _J Supercrit Fluids_**18**: 25-34.
* [39] Morita H, Nakayama M, Kojima H, Takeya K, Itokawa H, Schenkel EP, Motidome M. 1991. Structures and cytotoxic activity relationship of caesaras, new clerodane dicrpenes from _Caseeria sufestris_ Sw _Chem Pharm Bull_**39**: 693-697.
* [40] Oberlies NH, Burgess JP, Navarro HA, Pinos RE, Fairchild CR, Peterson RW, Soejarto DD, Farnsworth NR, Kinghorn AD, Wani MC, Wall ME. 2002. Novel bioactive clerodane dicrpendols from the leaves and twigs of _Caseeria sufestris_. _J Nat Prod_**65**: 95-99.
* [41] Scavone O, Greechi R, Panizza S, Silva RAPS. 1979. Guacatonga (_Casearia sufestris_ Swartz!: aspectos botanicos da planta, ensaios Infotomics o propriedade clcatrimate da folha. _Anals Farm Quinn Sao Paulo_**19**: 73-81.
* [42] Sertie JAA, Carvalho JCT, Panizza S. 2000. Anti-ulcer activity of the crude extract from the leaves of _Caseeria sufestris_. _Pharm Biol_**38**: 112-119.
* [43] Tauqeda MES, Costa CML, Faria LJG. 1998. Planejamento e analise estatistica de experimentos aplicados ao beneficiamento de productos naturalis. In: Costa CML, Faria LJG (eds). _Topicos Especiais em Tecnologia de Producta Naturais_. UFPA: Belem: 205-219.



