# 10.1515@znc-2011-5-607.pdf

## Page 1

Effect of Triterpenoids and Limonoids Isolated from _Cabralea canjerana_ and _Carapa guianensis_ (Meliaceae) against _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (J. E. Smith)

Andre L. F. Sarria, Marcio S. Soares, Andreia P. Matos, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira*, and M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Rodovia Washington Luiz, km 235, CP 676, 13565-905 - Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil. Fax: +55 16 33 51 83 50.

E-mail: paulo@dq.ufscar.br

* Author for correspondence and reprint requests Z. Naturforsch. **66 c**, 245-250 (2011); received September 6, 2010/March 2, 2011

The activities of two triterpenoids, cocotillone and carbaleadiol, and four limonoids, methyl angolensate, 3-\(\beta\)-deacetylfissinolide, 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin, and \(\beta\)-photogedunin, isolated from arillus of _Carapa guianensis_ and fruits and seeds of _Cabralea canjerana_ (Meliaceae), were evaluated against the fall armworm _Spodoptera frugiperda_. Gedunin was used as a positive control. 7-Deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin and \(\beta\)-photogedunin reduced the pupil weight as occurred with gedunin. Cabralacidol, 3-\(\beta\)-deacetylfissinolide, and 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin prolonged the larval phase similar to the control (gedunin) of approximately 1.2 days at 50.0 mg kg\({}^{+}\). The highest insecticidal activity was obtained for \(\beta\)-photogedunin.

## Introduction

In the last decades considerable efforts have been devoted to the discovery of new sources of botanical insecticides and antifeedants. Among the plant families studied, Meliaceae and Rutenceae are perhaps the most promising (Schoonhoven, 1982), at least partly due to the presence of limonoids and triterpenoids characteristic of the Rutales order. The biological activity of limonoids from Rutales has been reviewed (Champagne _et al._, 1992). Some neem-based botanical insecticides have already been developed and marketed (Schmutterer, 1990, 1995, 2005).

_Carapa guianensis_ Aublet, also called andiroba, andiroba-saruva, iandirova, carapa, and nanofiba (Lorenzi and Matos, 2002), is a tall Meliaceae tree growing wild throughout South America, West India, and South Africa. In Brazil, it can be found prevalently in flooded areas of the Amazon rainforest (Ambrozin _et al._, 2006). From the nuts of this plant an oil, called andiroba oil, is extracted, which has a long history of traditional use in South America, as analgesic, anti-inflammatory, insecticide, antibacterial, antiparasitic, and as an anticancer remedy (Bickii _et al._, 2000; Gilbert _et al._, 1999; MacKinnon _et al._, 1997; Moura _et al._, 2002). Andiroba oil is rich in fatty acids such as oleic, palmitic, stearic, and linoleic acids, together with 2\(-\)5% of unsaponifiable material. In addition, from several parts of _Carapa guianensis_ limonoids, triterpenes, steroids, coumarins, flavonoids, and diglycerides have been isolated (Lavie _et al._, 1973; Marcelle and Moto, 1975; Ollis _et al._, 1964, 1970; Qi _et al._, 2003, 2004).

_Cabralea canjerana_ (Vell.) Mart. (Meliaceae) ("canjarana") is a native tree of economic importance in Brazil. It is a dioecious tree with wide-spread distribution in the neotropics, extending from Costa Rica to southern Brazil and northern Argentina. According to Pennington _et al._ (1981), it inhabits mainly nonflooded evergreen lowland or lower hill rain forests.

In the present paper, triterpenoids and limonoids isolated from _C. canjerana_ and _C. guianensis_ were examined for their effects on the fall armworm, _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (J. E. Smith) (Lepidoptera: Notutiade). _S. frugiperda_ is a major pest of many crops in the Americas and one of the most important pests of tropical maize, causing up to 34% reduction in the overall productivity of this crop in Brazil (Cruz _et al._, 1996).



## Page 2



## Material and Methods

### Plant material

_Cabralea canjerana_ was collected at the Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, MG, Brazil, and identified by T. D. Pennington from the Royal Botanic Garden, Kew, UK. A voucher (1842; 1983) is deposited in the herbarium of Departamento de Engenharia Florestal Dendrologia, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, MG, Brazil.

The arillus of the _Carapa guianensis_ seeds were supplied by Cognis Brasil Ltda., Av. Nacoes Unidas 10989, 4deg andar, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

### Compounds isolation

Fruits (460 g) and seeds (200 g) from _C. canjerana_ were extracted with ethanol, at room temperature for three times. The ethanolic extract (88.3 g) of the fruits was submitted to liquid-liquid partition with 120 ml methanol/water (3:1, v/v) solution. This solution was partitioned with different solvents to give fractions in _n_-hexane (fr-Hex, 47.4 g), dichloromethane (fr-CH2Cl2, 5.4 g), ethyl acetate (fr-EtOAc, 4.4 g), and methanol (fr-MeOH, 11.9 g). The fraction fr-Hex (2.8 g) was submitted to a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 4.0 x 16.0 cm i.d., 45 fractions of 50 ml) using _n_-hexane/dichloromethane/ethyl acetate/methanol of increasing polarity as mobile phase, yielding nine fractions (fr-Hex.1 to fr-Hex.10) after TLC analysis. The fraction fr-Hex.2 (102 mg) was re-chromatographed by column chromatography using Sephadex LH-20 as stationary phase (column 3.2 x 64.0 cm i.d., 26 fractions of 10 ml each) with isocratic elution (methanol/dichloromethane, 1:1, v/v), yielding three fractions (fr-Hex.2.1 to fr-Hex.2.3) after comparison by TLC analysis. The fraction fr-Hex.2.2 (88.6 mg) was rechromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 3.0 x 16.0 cm i.d., 10 fractions of 5 ml each) eluted with _n_-hexane/acetone (9:1, v/v) to afford octilolone (**1**, 16.3 mg) and carbaleadiol (**2**, 24.4 mg).

The ethanolic extract (14.3 g) of the seeds of _C. canjerana_ was chromatographed on microcrystalline cellulose-D and silica gel (column 5.0 x 22.0 cm i.d., fractions of 250 ml each) using _n_-hexane (250 ml) followed by dichloromethane (1 l), acetone (1 l), and methanol (1 l) as mobile phases yielding 13 fractions (EES-1 to EES-13). The fraction EES-2 (1.72 g) was chromatographed on a silica gel column (230 - 400 mesh, 4.0 x 16.0 cm i.d., 69 fractions of 10 ml each) using _n_-hexane/acetone/methanol of increasing polarity as mobile phase to yield eleven fractions (EES-2.1 to EES-2.11) which were joined based on TLC. The fraction EES-2.6 (293.4 mg) was rechromatographed by column chromatography using a Sephadex LH-20 column (3.2 x 64.0 cm i.d., fractions of 10 ml each) with isocratic elution (methanol), yielding fifteen fractions (EES-2.6.1 to EES-2.6.15). The fraction EES-2.6.7 afforded methyl anglopensate (**3**, 48.2 mg). The fraction EES-2.7 (230.6 mg) was rechromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 4.0 x 16.0 cm i.d., 35 fractions of 10 ml each), using _n_-hexane/ethyl acetate (8:2, v/v) as mobile isocratic phase, yielding seventeen fractions (EES-2.7.1 to EES-2.7.17). The fraction EES-2.7.9 afforded 3-_b_-deacetylfissinolide (**4**, 63.7 mg).

The arillus ethanolic extract (10.0 g) of _C. guianensis_ was submitted to vacuum chromatography using silica gel as stationary phase (70-230 mesh, column 30 x 5 cm i.d.) and _n_-hexane followed by CH2Cl2, EtOHAc, and MeOH (1 l each) as mobile phases, yielding four fractions (H, D, Ac, Me). The fraction Ac (3.8 g) was submitted to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 30 x 4 cm i.d., _n_-hexane and acetone gradient as eluent, starting with pure _n_-hexane and finishing with pure acetone, 32 fractions of 200 ml each) to give five fractions (Ac1 to Ac5). The fraction Ac3 (3.0 g) was rechromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 10 x 3 cm i.d.) eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (CH2Cl2 to MeOH, 28 fractions of 50 ml each) to yield ten fractions (Ac3.1 to Ac3.10). The limonoids 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**5**, 24.4 mg) and _b_-photogedunin (**6**, 14.4 mg) were isolated from fraction Ac3.2 by recycling HPLC (Asahipack polymeric column; eluent, methanol/dichloromethane, 7:3, v/v; flow, 4 ml min-1).

### Biological activity

Larvae of _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (J. E. Smith) were obtained from the Insect Bioassay Laboratory of Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil, and reared on semi-artificial diets (Kasten _et al._, 1978; Parra, 1986). They were maintained in an incubation chamber with a photoperiod of 12 h light/12 h dark, (70 +- 5)% relative humidity, and (25 +- 1) degC.

For each treatment and control, 30 neonate larvae of _S. frugiperda_ were used. A solution of compound was added to ascorbic acid (1.56 g; an

## Page 3

ingredient of the diet). After evaporation of the solvent, the mixture was incorporated into the semi-artificial diet in which bean and wheat germ are the basic ingredients (Kasten _et al._, 1978) at final contents of 1.0, 10.0, 50.0, and 100.0 mg kg-1 for 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**5**), and 1.0, 10.0, and 50.0 mg kg-1 for coctillone (**1**), cabraleadiol (**2**), methyl angolensate (**3**), 3-_b_-deacetylfissinolide (**4**), and _b_-photogedunin (**6**). The diet for the control was prepared similarly but without the triterpenoids or limonoids. Gedunin (**7**) was used as positive control. The diets were placed in previously sterilized glass tubes (8.5 cm x 2.5 cm), into which larvae of _S. frugiperda_ were introduced individually. The pupae were weighed 1 d after pupation and were transferred to plastics cups, where they stayed until the emergence of adults. Daily observations were made and the following parameters were evaluated: (1) duration of larval and pupal phases, (2) weight of pupae, and (3) percentage of dead insects (mortality) at the end of each phase.

### Statistics

Data were submitted to an analysis of variance ANOVA (Zar, 1974), and the averages were compared applying the Tukey test (_P_ <= 0.05). Each tube containing one insect, independent of the developed phase, was considered as one replicate, therefore, the number of replicates was different for each treatment. For evaluation of the mortality of the larvae and pupae, the experimental unit was constituted by the mean of five tubes containing one larva each, with six replications by treatment.

## Results and Discussion

The triterpenoids **1** and **2** and limonoids **3** and **4** were isolated from the fruits and seeds of _C. canjerana_ and the limonoids **5** and **6** from the arilulus of _C. guianensis_ (Fig. 1). Their structures were confirmed by 1H and 15C NMR spectroscopy and comparison with data from the literature (Braga _et al._, 2006; Ambrozin _et al._, 2006).

Compounds **1**-**6** were incorporated in the semi-artificial diet. **2**, **4**, and **5** affected larval development (Table 1), and only **6** affected pupal development at concentrations of 10 and 50 mg [(8.5 +- 1.64) days and (8.9 +- 1.25) days, respectively, control (10.1 +- 1.45) days]. Larvae fed with

Fig. 1: The triterpenoids coctillone (**1**) and cabraleadiol (**2**), and the limonoids methyl angolensate (**3**), 3-_β_-deacetylfissinolide (**4**), 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**5**), and _β_-photogedunin (**6**) isolated from _Carapa guianensis_ and _Cabralea canjerana_, and of gedunin (**7**).



## Page 4

semi-artificial diet treated with **5** and **6** showed significant reduction in the pupal weight (17.8 and 31.5 mg at 50 mg kg-1, respectively), comparable to the effect of gedunin (**7**, 27.2 mg, Table I). Larvae fed with semi-artificial diet treated with **2**, **4**, and **5** at 50.0 mg kg-1 prolonged the larval time for approximately 1.2 days similar to gedunin, suggesting that these compounds act as larval growth inhibitors (Table I).

Compounds **2** and **4** prolonged the larval phase, although no alteration in pupal weight was observed. Tanzubil and McCaffery (1990) observed that larvae treated with low doses of azadirachtin produced pupae with a weight comparable to that of the controls, suggesting that they did not experience any severe feeding inhibition.

Compound **5** also effected prolongation of the larval phase followed by reduction of the pupal weight. The larvae treated with **5** showed prolongation of the larval phase by 1.4 days (at 50.0 mg kg-1) and 2.6 days (at 100.0 mg kg-1) when compared with the control (14.9 days, Table I). The reduction of the pupal weight was by 17.8 and 25.8 mg at 50.0 and 100.0 mg kg-1, respectively, when compared with the control (262.5 mg, Table I).

Larvae treated with **6** at 1.0, 10.0, and 50.0 mg kg-1 presented reduction of the pupal weight by 30.0, 31.1, and 31.5 mg, respectively, when compared with the control (272.7 mg, Table I). This compound reduced the duration of the pupal phase by 1.2 days and that of the larval phase was increased by 0.6 days, while gedunin affected

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compound or control & Content [mg kg−1] & Larval phase duration [d] (± SD)a & Pupal weight [mg]a & Larvae mortality (\%)a \\
**1** & 1 & 17.6 (± 1.25) a & 259.7 a & 10.0 b \\
10 & 18.0 (± 1.72) a & 255.7 a & 16.7 b \\
50 & 18.1 (± 1.43) a & 253.9 a & 40.0 a \\ Control & 17.4 (± 1.39) a & 260.8 a & 6.7 b \\
**2** & 1 & 18.2 (± 1.61) ab & 271.7 a & 13.3 a \\

## Page 5

only the larval phase by 1.3 days at 50 mg kg-1 (Table 1).

Ocotillone (**1**) isolated from the leaves of _Dysoxylum malabricum_ (Govindachari _et al._, 1994) was tested against _Spodoptera litura_ and showed excellent PFI (percentage feeding index) values comparable to those of azadiradione, epoxyazadriadione, and limonin (Govindachari _et al._, 1995).

Methyl anologensate (**3**) exhibited insecticidal activity against _S. litura_ in no-choice tests (Abdelgaleil and Nakatani, 2003; Suresh _et al._, 2002; Powel _et al._, 1991), and this result agrees with that observed in the present work. Isolated from diethyl ether and acetone extracts of the stem bark of _Khaya senegalensis_ (Meliaceae) **3** showed antidecatal activity by the conventional leaf disc method on the third-instar larvae of _Spodoptera littoralis_ (Boisd., Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) at 500 \(\mu\)g ml-1 (Abdelgaleil and Nakatani, 2003; Suresh _et al._, 2002) in a study examining structure-insect antifeedant relationships of plants belonging to the Rutales order. In a dual-choice antifeedant bioassay against _Spodoptera litura_ L. (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae), methyl anologensate (**3**) showed a PFI of 65.3, near to that of cedrelone (51.5). Two limonoids (sandoricin and 6-hydroxy-sandoricin) isolated from seed extracts of _Sandoricum koetjape_ Merr. (Meliaceae), which possess chemical structures similar to that of methyl anologensate (**3**), showed significant antifeedant activity against the fall armyworm (_S. frugiperda_), incorporated in diet at 25 ppm, and similar activity against the European corn borer (ECB), _Ostrinia nubilalis_ Hubner (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae), at 200 ppm. Toxicity results for both insects indicated that continued feeding on diets containing sandoricin or 6-hydroxysandoricin at the 200 ppm level would result in nearly 100% mortality prior to pupation (Powell _et al._, 1991).

b-Photogedunin (**6**) presented the highest insecticidal activity against _S. frugiperda_ causing mortality of 53.3% in the larval stage and 20.0% in the pupal phase at 50 ppm. These results agree with those of Cespedes _et al._ (2000), who tested an epimeric mixture of photogedunin and their corresponding acetates and observed that these compounds caused significant mortality of _S. frugiperda_ larvae (45% to 100% at 10.0 to 52.0 ppm) after 7 days, as well as growth reduction, and photogedunin acetates showed the highest insecticidal activity at 10.0 ppm with 17% survival.

Compounds **1**, **3**, **5**, and **6** showed moderate insecticidal activity at 50.0 mg kg-1 with 40.0, 40.0, 33.3, and 53.3% mortality, respectively, for the larval phase. Although the compounds tested here were less active than the positive the control gelatin (**7**, 63.3%), the use of these compounds, in particular **6**, is suggested for the control of _S. frugiperda_. Comparison of the activities of **6** and **7** suggests that oxidation of the furan ring led to a decrease in the insecticidal activity.

### Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPQ), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Instituto Nacional de Ciencia e Tecnologia de Controle Biorracional de Insetos Pragas, and Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) for the financial support and scholarships (CNPq).

Braga P. A. de C., Soares M. S., da Silva M. F. G. F., Vieira P. C., Fernandes J. B., and Pinheiro A. L. (2006), Dammarane triterpenes from _Cabralea__an_ (Vell.) Mart. (Meliaceae): Their chemosystematic significance. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **34**, 282-290.

Cespedes C. L., Calderon J. S., Lina L., and Aranda E. (2000), Growth inhibitory effects on fall armyworm _Spodoptera frugiperda_ of some limonoids isolated from _Cedrela_ spp. (Meliaceae). J. Agric. Food Chem. **48**, 1903-1908.

Champagne D. E., Koul O., Isman M. B., Scudder G. G. E., and Towers G. H. N. (1992), Biological activity of limonoids from the Rutales. Phytochemistry **31**, 377-394.



## Page 6

Cruz I., Oliveira L. J., and Vasconcelos C. A. (1996), Efeito do nivel de saturacao de alumino em solos acidos sobre os danos de _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (J. E. Smith) em milho. An. Soc. Entomol. Bras. **25**, 293-297.
* Gilbert _et al._ (1999) Gilbert B., Teixeira D. F., Carvalho E. S., Paula A. E. S., Pereira J. F. G., Ferreira J. L. P., Almeida M. B. S., Machado R. S., and Cascon V. (1999), Activities of the Pharmaceutical Technology Institute of the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation with medicinal, insecticidal and insect repellent plants. An. Acad. Bras. Cienc. **71**, 265-271.
* Govindachari _et al._ (1994) Govindachari T. R., Suresh G., and Krishna Kumari G. N. (1994), Triterpenoids from _Dysoxylum malabarium_. Phytochemistry **37**, 1127-1129.
* Govindachari _et al._ (1995) Govindachari T. R., Narasimhan N. S., Suresh G., Partho P. D., Gopalakrishnan G., and Krishna Kumari G. N. (1995), Structure-related insect antifeedant and growth regulating activities of some limonoids. J. Chem. Ecol. **21**, 1585-1601.
* Kasten _et al._ (1978) Kasten P. J. R., Precetti A. A. C. M., and Parra J. R. P. (1978), Dados biologios comparatives de _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (JE Smith, 1979) em duas dietas artificiais e substrato natural. Rev. Agric. **53**, 68-78.
* Lavie _et al._ (1973) Lavie D., Levy E. C., and Zelnik R. (1973), Constituents of _Carpa guaranensis_ Aubl) and their biogenetic relationship. Biogro. Chem. **2**, 59-64.
* Lorenzi and Matos & de (2002) Lorenzi H. and Matos F. J. de A. (2002) Plantas medicinais no Brasil: nativas e exoticas. Instituto Plantarum de Estudo da Flora Ltda, Nova Odessa, SP, Brazil, p. 512.
* MacKinnon _et al._ (1997) MacKinnon S., Durst T., and Arnason J. T. (1997), Antimalarial activity of tropical Meliaceae extracts and gedium derivatives. J. Nat. Prot. **60**, 336-341.
* Marcelle and Moto (1975) Marcelle G. B. and Moto B. S. (1975), Tetranortriterpoids from heartwood of _Carapa guianensis_. Phytochemistry **14**, 2717-2718.
* Moura _et al._ (2002) Moura M. D., Souza-Silva J., De Oliveira R. A. G., Diniz M. F. F. M., and Barbosa-Filho J. M. (2002), Natural products reported as potential inhibitors of uterine cervical neoplasia. Acta Farm. Bonaerense **21**, 67-74.
* Ollis _et al._ (1964) Ollis W. D., Ward A. D., and Zelnik R. (1964), Andriobin. Tetrahedron Lett. **37**, 2607-2614.
* Ollis _et al._ (1970) Ollis W. D., Ward A. D., Meirelles O. H., and Zelnik R. (1970), Andriobin. Tetrahedron **26**, 1637-1645.
* Parra (1986) Parra J. R. P. (1986), Criacao de insteos para estudos com patogneons. In: Controle microbiano de insteos (Alves S. B., ed.). Editora Manole, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, pp. 348-373.
* Pennington _et al._ (1981) Pennington T. D., Styles B. T., and Taylor D. A. H. (1981), Meliaceae. Flora Neotropica Monograph 28. The New York Botanical Garden, NY, USA, pp. 1-469.
* Powell _et al._ (1991) Powell R. G., Mikolajczak K. N., Zilkowski B. W., Mantus E. K., Cherry D., and Clardy J. (1991), Limonoid antifeedants from seed of _Sandoricum koefjape_. J. Nat. Prot. **54**, 241-246.
* Qi _et al._ (2003) Qi S. H., Wu D. G., Ma Y. B., and Luo X. D. (2003), A novel Havane from _Carapa guianensis_. Acta Bot. Sin. **45**, 1129-1133.
* Qi _et al._ (2004) Qi S. H., Wu D. G., Zhang S., and Luo X. D. (2004), Constituents of _Carapa guianensis_ Aubl. (Meliaceae). Pharmacie **59**, 488-490.
* Schmutterer (1990) Schmutterer H. (1990), Properties and potential of natural pesticides from the neem tree _Azadirachta indica_. Ann. Rev. Entomol. **35**, 271-297.
* Schmutter (1995) Schmutter H. (1995), The Neem Tree _Azadirachta indica_ A. Juss. and Other Meliaeous Plants. VCH, Weinheim, Germany, p. 696.
* Schmutterer (2005) Schmutterter H. (2005), The Neem Tree. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, p. 696.
* Schoonhoonhen (1982) Schoonhoonhen L. M. (1982), Biological aspects of anti-feedants. Entomol. Exp. Appl. **31**, 57-69.
* Suresh _et al._ (2002) Suresh G., Gopalakrishnan G., Wesley D., Pradeep Singh N. D., Malathi R., and Rajan S. S. (2002), Insect antifeedant activity of the tetranortriterpenoids from the Rutales. A perusal of structural relations. J. Agric. Food Chem. **50**, 4484-4490.
* Tanzubil and McCaffery (1990) Tanzubil P. B. and McCaffery A. R. (1990), Effects of azadirachtan and aqueous mem seed extracts on survival, growth and development of the African armyworm, _Spodoptera frugiperda_. Crop. Prot. **9**, 383-386.
* Zar (1974) Zar J. H. (1974), Biostatistical Analysis. Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, pp. 133-139.



