# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)95305-6.pdf

## Page 1



# Prenylated flavonoids from seeds of _calopogonium Mucunoides_

Marijia O. da S. Pereira

Edna C. Fantine

Jose R. de Sousa

Departamento de Quimica da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 30000 -Belo Horizonte. MG. Brazil

16 April 1981

###### Abstract

The seeds of _Calopogonium mucunoides_ furnished 7-O-;g-;dimethylallyl-8-methoxy-3'.4'-dioxymethylene-isofluavone, 7-O-;g-dimethylallyl-3'-hydroxy-4'-methoxyisofluavone, 7-O-;g-dimethylallyl-3'.4'-dimethoxysisofluavone and 2S-di(6'.6'-dimethylpyrano (2'.3'.7;8;2'.3'-3'.4'.3'))-flavanone whose structures were established by spectroscopic means involving the use of 400 MHz 1H NMR with double irradiation and INDOR techniques.

## Introduction

Five isoflavones and three pyranoisoflavones have been isolated from seeds of _Calopogonium mucunoides_ by Vilain and Jadot [1-3]. In the present study we describe the isolation and structural determination of three new isoflavones and a new pyranoflavanone from the seeds of the same plant grown in Brazil, none of them identical with those obtained by Vilain. However, the compounds isolated in each case have similar structural features, being mainly isoflavones but the Brazilian seeds contain compounds mainly with _O_-preparation and no oxygenation at C-5 whereas the isoflavones isolated by Vilain have _C_-preparation and some have C-5 oxygenation.

## Results and discussion

CC on Si gel of the solid and oily material obtained from the concentrated C6H6 extract of _C. mucunoides_ each gave, on elution with hexane containing increasing amounts of CHCl3 and then CHCl3 with increasing amounts of MeOH, two pure compounds together with other constituents not fully studied.

The first component eluted by CC of the solid material analysed for C12O6H20, M + _m/z_ 380. Both the 1H NMR and UV spectra were typical of 7-oxygenated isoflavones showing the H-2 proton at d 7.8,s, and coupled resonances (_J_ = 9 Hz) at d 8.05 and 7.05 for the C-5 and C-6 protons, respectively. The UV spectrum exhibited two absorption maxima at 256 (s) and 295 (_v_) nm [4]. Complete 400 MHz 1H NMR spectrum analysis revealed the presence of two hydrogens on ring A (H-5 and H-6, by use of double irradiation and INDOR techniques) and three hydrogens on ring B (H-2, H-5' and H-6' by use of the same techniques), a dioxymethylene group (d 6.0, _s_),a methyl group (d 4.0, _s_) and a _O_-preplated group (d 1.58, 1.62, 4.71 and 6.52). The MS showed fragments indicating that the preval group was on ring A, the oxygen at position 7 (_m/z_ = 31.1, 100 %) and the dioxymethylene on ring B (_m/z_ = 146, 8 %). From these data structure **I** was assigned to this compound and IR, UV, MS and 1H NMR spectra were in complete agreement.

The second and more polar compound analysed for C12O6H20, M + _m/z_ 352 and was also a 7-oxygenated isoflavone with one hydroxyloxy (formation of a monoaacetate) as shown by UV and 1H NMR (d 7.91, s, associated with H-2 and _i_max, 265, strong, 296 nm, weak) [4]. The OH was located on C-3' as indicated by its UV spectrum in the presence of NaOAc and NaOH and by the distinctive chemical shift of the acetate on H-6' and H-2'. The 400 MHz 1H NMR spectrum showed additionally three protons on ring A (H-5, H-6 and H-8 by double irradiation technique), three protons on ring B (H-2', H-5' and H-6' by the same technique), one methoxyl (d 3.92, s, 3H) and one _O_-prevalylated group (d 1.79, 1.83, 4.62 and 5.52). The preval group was located on the oxygen at position 7 by MS (_m/z_ = 284, 45 %) and by analogy with **I**. From these data structure **2** was assigned to this compound and IR, UV, MS and 1H NMR spectra were in accordance.

The first component eluted by CC of the oily material analysed for C2SO4H24, M + _m/z_ 388, was named xambioona. Both the 400 MHz 1H NMR (d 2.78, 3.02 and 5.36 respectively H-3 _cis_ and H-3 _trans_ to H-2, and H-2, by use of double irradiation technique and coupling constants) and UV spectra (_i_max, 227, strong; 315, weak, and infectious at 255 and 268 nm) were typical of a flavanone. The 400 MHz 1H NMR spectrum showed additionally a set of four one-proton doublets typical of the chromene ring system associated with ring A [1, 2, 5, 6] at 5.57 (H-5', \(J\) = 10 Hz), 6.5 (H-4', \(J\) = 10 Hz), 6.81 (H-6, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz) and 7.75 (H-5, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz); and a set of five one-proton doublets associated with a dimethylchrome ring involving ring B (7) at 5.67 (H-5', \(J\) = 10 Hz), 6.64 (H-4'', \(J\) = 10 Hz), 6.34 (H-5', \(J\) = 9.0 Hz), 7.08 (H-2', \(J\) = 2.5 Hz), 7.21 (H-6', _dd_, \(J\) = 9.0 and \(J\) = 2.5 Hz). The presence of two dimethylchrome rings, one on ring A and one on ring B, was supported by MS fragments (_m/z_ 187 and 171). From these data structure **3** was assigned to xambioona. The absolute stereochemistry is 2\(S\) as illustrated because of the similarity of the CD curve in the n, p,p and p,p region to that of flavanones of established absolute configuration [8]. Xambioona was refluxed for 48 hr with base and gave

## Page 2

the chalcone **4**. The IR, UV, MS and 1H NMR spectra were in complete agreement with the structure **4**.

The second compound eluted by CC of the oily material analysed for C22O8H22, M+ _m/z_ 366 and was a 7-oxygenated isoflavone as shown by UV and 1H NMR (d 7.80, associated with H-2 and _l_max 264, strong, and 292 weak [4]. Its M+ was 14 mm higher than that of **2** and its UV spectrum was also almost identical to that of **2** except that it was not affected by NaOH. The 1H NMR spectrum at 60 MHz showed two OMe groups (d 3.78, \(s\), \(d\), _f_H), the absence of a -O-H proton (no change with D2O) and the same proton aromatic proton pattern as that of **2**. From these data structure **5** was assigned to this compound.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Seeds of _C. mucunoides_ Desv. were collected from Xambioa region, north Goias, Brazil. The whole, dried, finely pulverized seeds (1.1 kg) were successively extd in a Soxhlet with C6H6 and EtOH. After even the C6H6 extract (96 g) afforded a yellow solid (5.6 g) in mixture with an oily material (90 g). The EtOH extract had free amino acids and was not examined in the present work. The solid C6H6 extract was submitted to Si gel CC and afforded isoflavones **1** and **2** eluted with CHCl3-hexane (1:4) and MeOH-CHCl3 (1:19), respectively. I after several purifications by TLC showed a single spot (CHCl3-hexane, 3:50 mg, white needles (hexane), mp 1425*C22O8H2000 (Found: C, 69.27; H, 5.5 requires: C, 69.5; H, 5.3 %) xhex.em-1 1640, 1610, 1595, 1560, 1500; xhex.em-2 229 (10 800), 256 (15 200) and 295 (90 300) which remained unaffected on the addition of NaOH, HCl, NaOAc, AlCl3; 1H NMR spectrum (400 MHz, CDCl3, \(s\), _T_MS int. standard): 1.58 (3 H, \(s\), \(g\), \(m\), 1.62 (3 H, \(s\), \(g\), \(m\), 4), 0 (3 H, \(s\), \(M\), O), 4.71 (2 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8 Hz, _a_-CH2), 5.52 (1 H, \(t\), \(J\) = 8 Hz, \(b\), \(m\) CH=), 6.0 (2 H, \(s\), _OCH2O), 6.88 (1 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8 Hz, H-5), 6.99 (1 H, _dd_, \(J\) = 8 and 1.75 Hz, H-6), 7.05 (1 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 9 Hz, H-6), 7.10 (1 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.75 Hz, H-2), 7.98 (1 H, \(s\), \(d\), 2.85 (1 H, \(d\), _J_

