# 10.1590@S1516-89132011000100008.pdf

## Page 1

Alkaloids and Triterpene from _Almeidea coerulea_ (Nees and Mart.) a. St.-Hil. and Anti-leishmanial Activity

Lucia Elaine Ranieri Cortez1, Izabel Cristina Piloto Ferreira2, Maria Valdrinez Campana Lonardoni3, Antonio Gilberto Ferreira4, Paulo Cesar Vieira4, Maria Fatima das Gracas Fernandes da Silva4, Joao Batista Fernandes4 and Diogenes Aparicio Garcia Cortez2*

Centro de Ensino Superior, Av. Guedner, 1610; Maringua - PR - Brasil. _'Departamento de Farmacia e Farmacologia, 'Departamento de Andis es Clinicas; Universidade Estadual de Maringua; Maringua - PR - Brasil. _'Departamento de Quimica; Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos; C. P.: 676; 13565-905; Sao Carlos - SP - Brasil_

###### Abstract

The dichloromethane extract of Almeidea coerulea stems yielded the (11-hydroxytutacearpine alkaloid reported for the first time from this species) and the triterpene (28-hydroxy-28, 29-dihydrohleped). The dictamine, skimianine, sitoosterol and stigmasterol were also isolated from methanol extract. Extracellular forms of Leishmania amazonensis (promastigotes) was tested with dichloromethane extract and 28-hydroxy-28, 29-dihydrohleped with showed anti-leishmanial activity above 0.1 mg/mL and 75 mg/mL (inhibited 50% promastigotes growth), respectively.

Almeidea coerulea; Hutaceae; indolopyridoquinazoline alkaloid; and anti-leishmanial activity 0.54 0.1

## Page 2

cruzi_ (Mafezoli et al., 2000). The aim of this work to study the isolation and the structural elucidation of one indolopyridoquinazoline alkaloid (**1**), two fluoroquinoline alkaloids (**2** and **3**), one lupane triterpene **4** and one mixture of steroids (**5** and **6**) and to evaluate the activity of the compound **4** against _Leishmania (L.) amazonensis._

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### General

The NMR spectra were obtained in a BRUKER DRX400 (9.4 T) and VARIAN GEMINI300 (7.05T), using deuterated solvent for field homogeneity, TMS as internal standard and temperature constant of 298K. For gHMBC the coupling constants were optimised for 4, 6, 8 and 12 Hz. IR: film NaCl plates; ESI-MSMS: low resolution on a triple quadrupole were recorded on a Micromass Quattro LC instrument equipped with a "Z-spray"ion source, and EI-MS on a CG/EMSHIMADZU QP 2000 A. CC: silica gel 60 (70-230 and 230-400 mesh); TLC: silica gel plates F254 (0.25 mm in thickness).

### Plant Materials

The aerial parts of _Almeidea coerulea_ (Nees and Mart.) A.St.-Hil. were collected from Itacare, Bahia, Brazil, in February 1993. The specimen was identified by Dr. Jose Pirani from the Department of Botany of the University of Sao Paulo (Brazil) and the voucher herbarium specimen (Pirani and Kallunki 2747) deposited in the University of Maringa (Brazil).

### Isolation of Constituents

The dichloromethane extract (8.1 g) and the methanol extract (22.1 g) of the stem the _A. coerulea_ was submitted to vacuum chromatography over an microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel ) support and eluted with n-hexane, n-hexane-CHCl3 (1:1), CHCl3, CHCl3-EtOAc (1:1), EtOAc, and MeOH with gave seven fractions of each extract. The fraction 3 (1,47 g) from dichloromethane extract was chromatographed in silica gel columns using hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-Acetone gradient solvents to 156 fractions. The fractions 30 to 47 (239 mg) were rechromatographed in silica gel (230-400 mesh) successively to fractions 26 (17 mg) and 36 (13 mg). The fractions were purified by gel filtration columns on Sephadex LH-20 with MeOH-ChCl3 (1:1) to obtain the compounds **1** (1.8 mg) and **4** (22.3 mg). The fraction 2 (1.14 g) from methanol extract was chromatographed in silica gel columns using hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-Acetone gradient solvents to obtain the compounds **3** (3mg) and mixture **5** and **6** (3 mg). The fractions 21 to 25 was chromatographed in gel filtration columns on Sephadex LH-20 eluting with MeOH-CHCl3 (1:1) to the fraction 34 and was purified by silica gel column, hexane-acetone (17:3) to obtain the compound **2** (3.8 mg).

### Culture and Maintenance of the Parasites

The promastigotes forms of _Leishmania (L.) amazonensis_ strain MHOM/BR73/M2269 were cultured and tested in the 199 medium (Gibco, BRL) containing 10% fetal calf serum (Cultilab, Brazil), 2 mM L-glutamine, penicillin (100 U/mL), and streptomycin (0.1 mg/mL) (Sigma) at 25 degC. They were then used in the exponential phase of growth (day 4 of culture).

The compound **4** was dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and then diluted in the 199 medium. The final concentration of DMSO did not exceed 0.05%. For promastigotes drug susceptibility determinations, the parasites were placed in each test well of a 24-well micro culture plate (Costar, Cambridge, MA) at 1x105promastigotes/mL of culture medium and incubated in triplicates with various concentration of alkaloids 9 at 25degC for 24, 48, 72 and 96h. The compound **4** was only added at the beginning of the cultivation. Controls cultures were incubated with the same dilution of DMSO or pentamidine istionate (0.7 mg/mL).

Promastigotes were counted using a hemocytometer, after it was passed five times through a 25-gauge needle in order to have separate clumps.

_11-hydroxymethyltaocarpine_ (**1**). Amorphous yellow solid; [UV MeOH  max nm (log ) ]: 240 (3,61), 273 (3,38), 356 (3,81). IV: max. NaCl cm-1: 3443, 2923, 1653, 1580, 1470 and 1045. 13C NMR ((CD3)2SO, 75,5 MHz): Table I. ESI-MSMS, _m/z_ (rel. int. %): 304 [M+H] (100).

_28-hydroxy-28,29-dihydroxydupool_ (**4**) Amorphous yellow solid. 1H NMR ((CD3)2SO, 300 MHz) : 4.26 (1H, d, _J_=5.4 Hz, 3-OH), 2.94-3.04 (1H, m, H-3, H-19), 1.20-2.00 (1H, m, H-5), 1.07 (3H, s, H-23), 0.95 (3H, s, H-29), 0.91 (3H, s, H-27), 0.98 (3H, s, H-26), 0.86 (3H, s, H-30), 0.76 (3H,

## Page 3



## Page 4

It appeared at 9.51 (\(s\)) and hydroxyl group at 11.54 (\(s\)). The nine carbon signals bearing protons were determined by gHSQC experiment, which establishes one bond correlations (Table 1). The remaining eight quaternary carbon signals were assigned based on long range H/C correlations from a \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{13}\)CgHMBC experiment and by comparison with rutaecarpine spectroscopic data[1]. Further analyses of HMBC correlations between the methylene protons at 4.40, \(t\) (\(J=6.9\) Hz, H-7) and and the two quaternary carbons at 119.1 (C-8a) and 125.7 (C-9a) indicated that the junction of partial structures was C-8 C-8a and C-14a C-13a.

Figure 1: Compounds from the aerial parts of _Almeidea coerulea_.



## Page 5

The HMBC correlation between the aromatic proton at 7.12, _dd_ (\(J\) = 8.1,1.2 Hz, H-4) and carbonyl carbon at 161.1 (C-5) confirmed that the junction of partial structures should be C-5

C-4a and H-14 C14a. The correlation of aromatics protons at methylene 7.43, \(d\) (\(J\) = 8.7 Hz, H-9), 6.61, \(d\) (\(J\) = 8.7 Hz, H-10) and 6.82, \(d\) (\(J\) = 1.8 Hz, H-12) and aromatic carbon 125.7 (C-9a), 97.1 (C-12) and 140.8 (C-12a) respectively confirmed the position of hydroxyl group at C-11. Based on the above evidence, the structure of 1 was established as 11-hydroxyrutaecarpine.

Figure 3: Effects of _28-hydroxy-28,29-dihydrolupeol_ (**4**) from _Almeidea coerulea_ and control on the growth of _Leishmania amazonensis_ promastigote forms. The results represent the mean \(\pm\) standard error of at least three independent experiments, which were performed in triplicate. The bars indicate standard deviations. \(\blacklozenge\) positive control; \(\blacksquare\) 10g/mL; \(\blacktriangle\) 25g/mL; \(\times\) 50g/mL; \(\heartsuit\) 75g/mL; \(\blacklozenge\) 100g/mL; \(+\) pentamidine 0.7g.

Figure 2: Effects of dichloromethane extract from _Almeidea coerulea_ and control on the growth of _Leishmania amazonensis_ promastigote forms. The results represent the mean \(\pm\) standard error of at least three independent experiments, which were performed in triplicate. The bars indicate standard deviations. positive control; \(\times\)0.001mg/mL; \(\triangle\) 0.01mg/mL; \(\blacksquare\) 0.1mg/mL; \(\ast\) 1mg/mL; \(\bullet\) 6mg/mL; pentamidine 0.7μg.



## Page 6



## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from CNPq and Fundacao Araucaria. We thank Carlos E. Oliveira for his technical assistance.

## References

* [1] Chakravarty, A.K.; Sarkar, T.; Masuda, K.; Shiojima, K. (1999) Carbazole alkaloids from roots of _Glycosina arboracion. Phytochemistry_, **50**, 1263-1266.
* [2] Chen, S.I.; Wu, S.J.; Leu, L.Y.; Tsai, I.W.; Wu, T.S. (1996) Alkaloids from root bark of _Zanthoxylum simulans. Phytochemistry_, **42**, 217-219.
* [3] Grimaldi, G.; Momen, H.; Naiff, R.D.; McMahon-Pratt, D.; Barrett, T.V. (1991), Leishmaniasis in Baha, Brazil: evidence _Leishmania amazonensis_ produces a wide spectrum of clinical disease. _Am. J. Trop. Hyg._, **44**, 645-661.
* [4] Ikuta, A. Nakamura, T.; Urabe, H. (1998) Indolopyridoquinazoline, furoquinoline and cathinone type alkaloids from _Phellodendron amurenes_ callus tissues _Phytochemistry_, **48**, 285-291.
* [5] Lewis, J. Biological activity of some Rutaceous compounds. In: Waterman, P. G., Grundon, M.F. (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of Rutales, Academic Press, London, 1983; pp. 301-318.
* [6] Mafezoli, J.; Vieira, P.C.; Fernandes, J.B.; Silva, M. F. G.; Alburquerque, S. (2000) In vitro activity of Rutaceae species against the typomastogic form of _Tympanosoma cruzi. J. Ethnopharmacol._, **73**, 335-340.
* Manual de Controle da Leishmaniose Tegumentar Americana, Fundacao Nacional de Saude, 5\({}^{\text{a}}\). ed., 62p. 2000, Brasilia, Brasil.
* [8] Pinto, A.C.; Simoni, M. L. P. S. C.; Socorro, M.P.; Cunha, C.; Coelho, R.B.; Pattiucci, M.L.; Lago, R.C.A. (1994) Misturas Naturais de Esteroides, uma Alternativa para Aplicacao de Padroes em Analises por Cromoragrafia Gasaosa de Alta Resolucao _Quim. Nova_ **1994**, 17, 333.
* [9] Razdan, K.T.; Harkar, S.; Qadir, B.; Qurishi, A.M.; Khuroo, A. M. (1988) Lupene derivatives from _Skimmia lauveola Phytochemistry_, **27**, 1890-1892.
* [10] Silveira, T.G.V.; Arraes, S.M.A.A.; Bertolini, D.A.; Teodoro, U.; Lonardoni, M.V.C.; Roberto, A.C.B.S.; Ramos, M.; Sobrinho, N.A.; Ishikawa, E.; Shaw, J. (1999). Observacoes sobre o diagnostic laboratoriale e a epidemiologia de leishmaniasis tegumentar no Estado do Parana, sul do Brasil. _Rev. Soc. Bras. Med. Trop._, **32**, 413-423.
* [11] Teodoro, U.; Galati, E. A. B.; Kuhl, J. B.; Lozovei, A. L. and Barbosa, O. C. (1998), Controle de llebotominos com DDT, em area endemica de leishmaniasis tegumentar no Estado do Parana, Sul do Brasil. _Braz. Arch. Biol. Technol._, **41**, 359-364.
* [12] Teodoro, U.; Socol, V.T.; Kuhl, J.B.; Rodrigues dos Santos, D.; Silvestre dos Santos, E.; Rodrigues dos Santos, A.; Abbas, M.; Cassia Dias, A.C. (2004), Reorganization and cleanness of peridomiciliar area to control sand flies (Diptera, Psychoididae, Phlebotominae) in South Brazil. _Braz. Arch. Biol. Technol._, **47**, 205-212.
* [13] Wenkert, E.; Baddeley, G.V.; Burfitt, I.R.; Moreno, L.M. (1978) C-13 nuclear magnetic-resonance spectroscopy of naturally-occurring substances: LVII. Trierpenses related to lupane and hopane. _Org. Magn. Reson._, **11**, 337-343.



