# 10.1016@0031-9422(92)80271-F.pdf

## Page 1



# DAMMARANE AND CYCLOARTANE TRITERPENOIDS FROM THREE _rapanea_ species

Ana H. Januario, M. Fatima Das G. F. Da Silva, Paulo C. Vieira and Joao B. Fernandes

# Abstract

An investigation of three species of _Rapanea_, _R.__umbellata_, _R.__lancfolia_ and _R.__guyannesis_, has led to the identification of three terpeno-_p_-hydroxybenzoic acids, 3-geranyl-4-hydroxy-5-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-benzoic acid; 5-carboxy-7-(3',3''-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran and 6-carboxy-8-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-3a-hydroxy-2a-methyl-2-(4'-methylpent-3'-enyl)-3,4-dihydrobenzopyran and two triterpenoids which appear to be novel. The two new compounds were identified on the basis of spectroscopic analysis as 24(_E_)-3-oxo-dammara-20,24-dien-26-al and 24(_E_)-3a-hydroxycycloart-24-en-26-al.

## INTRODUCTION

The family Myrsinaaceae has usually been considered to contain about 33 genera and nearly 1000 species. This plant family is characterized by the presence of a group of 3,6-dihydroxy-2-alkylbenzoquinones and a number of triterpenoids based on the oleanane/ursane skeleton [1-5]. However, many of the species are little known chemically.

Recently, we have described the isolation and identification of 3-geranyl-4-hydroxy-5-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-benzoic acid, 5-carboxy-7-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydro-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydro-benzofuran and 6-carboxy-8-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-3a-hydroxy-2a-methyl-2-(4'-methylpent-3'-enyl)-3,4-dihydrobenzopyran from the dichloromethane extract of the leaves of Myrsinaaceae species _Rapanea umbellata_ Mez. (syn. _Myrsine umbellata_ Mart.) [6]. The three acids were purified as their methyl esters. These compounds represented a novel group of terpeno-_p_-hydroxybenzoic acids.

The isolation of this interesting group of new compounds combined with our taxonomic interest in the Myrsinaaceae stimulated an investigation of other organs of _R.__umbellata_ and other plants of the _Rapanea_ genus, i.e. _R.__lancfolia_ Mez. (syn. _Myrsine lancifolia_ Mart) and _R.__guyannesis_ Algl. (syn. _Myrsine quyannesis_ Kuntze). Two new triterpenoids (1, 2) have now been isolated along with three known terpeno-_p_-hydroxybenzoic acids [6].

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In a continuation of our investigation of the leaves of _R.__umbellata_, we have isolated from the petrol extract a single triterpenoid derivative (1).

Compound **1**, C30H4eO2 (MS), gave rise to an IR spectrum which indicated the presence of a terminal methylene (888 cm-1), a carbonyl (1707 cm-1) and an a,b-unsaturated carbonyl (1653 cm-1) as functional groups. 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed signals for a -CHO group, a vinylic methyl and three olefinic protons, one of which was deshielted, typical of the b position on an a,b-unsaturated aldehyde. A significant fragment at _m_/_z_ 315 [C2H3,O]+ for the tetracycline nucleus required the presence of the terminal methylene at C-21 and -CHO at C-26 or C-27 of the C-17 sidechain. This was corroborated by the fragment _m_/_z_ 123 [C8H11O]+. It is well known that the signal of a b-olfenic proton _cis_ (6.4) to the aldehyde group is significantly more deshielted than the _trans_ (d6.1) [7]. Therefore, the downfield shift of the signal of the b-olfeinic proton in the 1H NMR spectrum clearly suggested the _E_-configuration of the double bond. The identification of the nucleus as a dammara was supported by the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) which agreed closely with published data for capraleone (3) and dammaradenol (4) [8, 9]. The signal of the C-27 methyl (d10.0) supported the _E_-configuration of the double bond as it is shielded by the steric interaction with the C-23 methylene [10]. The new natural product is, therefore, 24(E)-3(x0x0adamara-20,24-dien-26-al (1).

The dichloromethane extract of the stem and fruits of _R.__umbellata_ and leaves of _R.__lancfolia_, gave 3-geranyl-4-hydroxy-5-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-benzoic acid and 5-carboxy-7-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran. The two acids were methylated with diazomethane prior to analysis. They were identified by comparison with authentic samples and published data [6].

From the petrol extract of the leaves of _R.__guyannesis_, four compounds were obtained. Three were characterized as 5-carboxy-7-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran and 6-carboxy-8-(3'',3''-dimethylallyl)-3a-hydroxy-2a-methyl-2(4'-methylpent-3'-enyl)-3,4-dihydrobenzopyran and phytol by comparison with published data and authentic samples [6, 11].

The fourth compound (2) showed the spectral characteristics of a vinylic methyl and a _trans_a,b-unsaturated

## Page 2

carbonyl functional group. In addition, the 1H NMR showed signals for a secondary hydroxyl (63.45, _br s_, H-3_b_) and a cyclopropane methylene (Table 1). The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) revealed resonances for C-1 to C-22 in close agreement with those for isomangiforlic acid (**5**) [10], while signals for two olefinic carbons at \(d\)139.1 and 155.6, -CHO \(d\) 5195.4 and methyl at 91.06 confirmed the presence of the _trans a,b_-unsaturated aldehyde. The mass spectrum gave significant fragments for _m_/_z_ 315 [C22H3sO]+ and 125 [C8H13O]+ requiring the presence of -CH=CMeCHO in the sidechain. The structure of the new natural product is therefore 24(_E_)-3a-hydroxycjectural-24-en-26-el (**2**). The corresponding C-3 epimer (_d_3.23, 3a-H; \(d\) 6.47, H-24) has been reported from _Mangifera indica_, Anacardiacae [12].

If the same enzymes catalyse allylic oxidation in both triterpenoids **1** and **2**, some connection between _R. umbellata_ and _R. guyancnsis_ can be anticipated. This appears to be the first record of dammarane/cycloartane triterpenoids from the Myrsinaceae. We do not know how widely the characteristic _Rapanae_ compounds occur elsewhere in the family as many of the species are little known chemically. It is, therefore, premature to draw any conclusions about the link among _Rapanae_ and its supposed allies in the Myrsinaceae.

## EXPERIMENTAL

NMR: CDCl3 with TMS as int. standard: MS: 70 eV, direct probe insert and elevated temp.

_Plant material._ Aerial parts of _Rapanae umbellata_, _R. lancifolia_ and _R. guyancnsis_ were collected from the Fazenda Canchin, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil and vouchers (No. 1810a, 1810b, 1810c) are deposited at the Herbarium of the Departamento de Biologia. Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, SP.

_Extraction and isolation from leases of_ R. umbellata. Ground leaves (235 g) were extracted with petrol. The petrol extract (4.4 g) was subjected to CC over silica gel eluting with hexane, then hexane containing increasing amounts of CH2Cl2 and finally with EtOAc to give a mixture of fatty acids followed by a fraction which was rechromatographed as above, to afford a fraction containing 1(5 mg). The latter was then purified by prep. TLC on silica gel using a soln of CH2Cl2-EtOAc (19:1).

_Extraction and isolation from stem of_ R. umbellata. Ground stem (652 g) was extracted with CH2Cl2. The CH2Cl2 extract (6 6 g) was subjected to CC over silica gel eluting with CH2Cl2 containing increasing amounts of EtOAc to give more fatty acids followed by 2 fractions which were methylated with CH2N2 yielding the corresponding methyl esters. Both fractions were chromatographed as above, to afford 3-geranyl-4-hydroxy-5(3":3"-dimethylallyl)-benzoic acid methyl ester (133 mg) and <-carbomethoxy-7(3":3"-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2-3-dihydrobenzofuran (385 mg), respectively.

_Extraction and isolation from fruits_ of R. umbellata. Ground fruits (662 mg) were extracted with CH2Cl2 to give 4.2 g 

## Page 3

of extract. The same treatment as for the stem extract gave 5-carbomethoxy-7-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran (500 mg).

_Extraction and isolation from leaves of_ R. lancifolia. Ground leaves (138 g) were extracted with CH2Cl2 to give 4.0 g of extract. The same treatment as for the stem extract of _R. umbrella_, gave 5-carbomethoxy-7-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran (30 mg).

_Extraction and isolation from leaves of_ R. guyanensis. Ground leaves (719 g) were extracted with petrol to give 10.0 g of extract. The same treatment as for the leaves extract of_ R. umbrella_, gave phytol, 2 (31 mg), 5-carbomethoxy-7-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran (30 mg).

_Extraction and isolation from leaves of_ R. guyanensis. Ground leaves (719 g) were extracted with petrol to give 10.0 g of extract. The same treatment as for the leaves extract of_ R. umbrella_, gave phytol, 2 (31 mg), 5-carbomethoxy-7-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran (165 mg) and finally 6-carbomethoxy-8-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-3-hydroxy-2a-methyl-2-(4'-methylpent-3'-enyl)-3,4-dihydrobenzopyran (3 mg).

Compound 2 was purified by prep. TLC on silica gel using a soln of CH2Cl2-EtOAc (19:1). Terpeno-_p_-hydroxybenzoic acids were methylated as above prior to analysis. Both were purified by the usual prep. TLC procedure (CH2Cl2-EtOAc, 1:1).

3-_Geranyl-4-hydroxy-5-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-benzoic acid methyl ester, 5-carbomethoxy-7-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-2-(1'-hydroxy-1',5'-dimethylhex-4'-enyl)-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran, 6-carbonethoxy-8-(3',3'-dimethylallyl)-3-hydroxy-2a-methyl-2-(4'-methylpent-3'-enyl)-3,4-dihydrobenzopyran, phytol. All were identified by direct comparison with authentic samples (IR, 1H, 13C NMR, MS) [6, 11].

24(E)-3-_Oxo-damnara_-20,24-_dien_-26-_al_ (1). Obtained as a gum from CH2Cl2-EtOAc, [a]D + 19.1 (CHCl3; \(c\) 1.0). IR _v_max (liq. film) cm - 1: 1707, 1653, 1646, 1637, 888, 786; 1HNMR (200 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR (50.32 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; MS _m/z_ (rel. int.) 438 [M] + (6), 315 (15), 314 (15), 206 (36), 205 (100), 204 (12), 203 (27), 124 (17), 123 (56), 122 (24), 121 (72), 95 (95).

24(E)-3a-_Hydroxycycloari_-24-_en_-26-_al_ (2). Obtained as a gum from CH2Cl2-EtOAc, [a]D + 10.6 (CHCl3; \(c\) 1.0). IR _v_max (liq. film) cm - 1: 3448, 1687, 1636; 1HNMR (200 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR (50.32 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; MS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 440 [M] + (2), 315 (3), 125 (8), 84 (8), 81 (45), 55 (97), 53 (13), 43 (100), 41 (62).

###### Acknowledgements.

 We are grateful to Jose Rubens Pirani (Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade dc Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil) for the identification of plant material. The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq). Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projectos (FINEP).

## References

* (1) Ogawa, H. and Natori, S. (1968) _Phytochemistry_**7**, 773.
* (2) Rao, K. V. (1964) _Tetrahedron_**20**, 973.
* (3) Ahmad, S. A., Catalano, S., Marsili, A., Morelli, I. and Scartorni, V. (1977) _Planta Med._**32**, 162.
* (4) Kubo, I., Kamikawa, T. and Miura, I. (1983) _Tetrahedron Letters_**3825**.
* (5) Breuer, M., Leeder, G., Proksch, P. and Budzikiewicz, H. (1986) _Phytochemistry_**25**, 495.
* (6) Januario, A. H., Vieira, P. C., Silva, M. F. das, G. F. da and Fernandes, J. B. (1992) _Phytochemistry_ (in press).
* (7) Jackman, L. M. and Wiley, R. H. (1960) _J. Chem. Soc._**2881**.
* (8) Waterman, P. G. and Ampofo, S. (1985) _Phytochemistry_**24**, 2925.
* (9) Bianchini, J. P., Gaydou, E. M., Rafaralahitsimba, G., Waegell, B. and Zahra, J. P. (1988) _Phytochemistry_**27**, 2301.
* (10) Anjavuzulu, V., Ravi, K., Prasad, K. H. and Connolly, J. D. (1989) _Phytochemistry_**28**, 1471.
* (11) Ahrens, E. H., Williams, D. C. and Battersby, A. R. (1977) _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin 1_ 2540.
* (12) Mincione, E., Iavarone, C. and Corsano, S. (1968) _Sci. Chim._**38**, 537.



