# 10.1016@S0031-9422(97)00238-0.pdf

## Page 1



# Iridoids from _Tocoyna formosa_

Vanderlan Da S. Bolzani, Clara M. Izumisawa, M. Claudia M. Young, Lidia M. V. Trevisan, David G. I. Kingston, A. Leslie Gunatilaka

# Abstract

The leaves of _Tocoyena formosa_ afforded two antifungal iridoids, _a_- and _b_-gardiol, and the new iridoids, mollugoside methyl ester and formosinoside. Formosinoside was characterized as its hexaacetyl derivative. (c) 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd

## 1 Introduction

_Tocoyena formosa_ (Cham. et Sch.) K. Shun, a small ornamental tree growing in dry regions of Central Brazil, is commonly known as 'genipapo do campo' and has very impressive yellow-green flowers [1]. In the course of our continuing search for bioactive constituents from rubiaceous species that grow in 'Cerrado Regions' of Brazil [2-4], we investigated the ethyl acetate-soluble fraction of the 60% aqueous ethanol extract of leaves of _T. formosa_. In our mechanism-based bioassay for potential anticancer agents utilizing genetically-engineered yeast (_Saccharomyces cerevisiae_) strains [5], this extract exhibited moderate and nonselective activity on all the mutant strains tested suggesting the presence of antifungal agents rather than potential anticancer agents. Subsequent confirmation of its antifungal activity using _Cla-dosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. esphaerospermum_[6] followed by bioassay-guided fractionation afforded four iridoids **1**-**4**. Of these, _a_-gardiol (**1**) and _b_-gardiol (**2**) which were obtained as an inseparable mixture [7] exhibited antifungal activity. The third iridoid, mulugoside methyl ester (**3**), is being described here for the first time from a natural source. The fourth iridoid found to be new and hence named formosinoside (**4**), was characterized as its hexaacetate derivative (**5**). This paper deals with the structure elucidation of **5** and the antifungal activities of **1** and **2**.

## 2 Result and discussion

The 60% aqueous ethanol extract of the leaves of _T. formosa_ was concentrated to half its original volume and was extracted successively with hexane and ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate fraction on silica gel chromatography afforded three pure compounds identified as _a_-gardiol (**1**), _b_-gardiol (**2**) [5] (see Experimental) and mollugoside methyl ester (**3**) [8], and an inseparable mixture (3:1) of two compounds. These two compounds which were suspected to be isomers from NMR spectra of the mixture were separated via their peracetates to obtain the hexaacetate (**5**) of the major compound (**4**). Besides the iridoids, the ethyl esters of ferulic and caffeic acids were also isolated. Both are probably artifacts of aqueous ethanol extraction.

The molecular formula of **5**, mp 144-146deg, [a]D0 + 36.1deg, was deduced as C28H36O17 by HRMS and 13C NMR spectroscopy. The IR spectrum indicated the presence of a carbonyl ester function (1710 cm-1)

## Page 2

and a carboxylic acid group (3378 and 1695 cm-1). The 1H NMR spectrum of **5** (Table 1) exhibited the presence of two olefinic protons at \(d\) _5.55_ and \(d\) _5.80 (each 1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 6.0; 1.5 Hz, H-7 and _dd_, \(J\) = 6.0; 2.0 Hz, H-6). In addition, the 1H NMR spectrum showed signals at \(d\) 5.00 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 5.8 Hz), \(d\) _5.92 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.6 Hz), \(d\) _4.22 and 4.90 (2H, _dd_, \(J\) = 11.0; 8.0 and 11.0; 3.0 Hz), which were attributed to protons at C-1, C-3 and C-10, respectively. The remaining doublet at \(d\) _5.93 (1H, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) could be assigned to theomeric proton from sugar moiety present in the molecule of **5**. The 1H NMR also supported the presence of six acetyl groups as broad signals at \(d\) 1.98 (corresponding two acetyl groups), 2.01, 2.02, 2.05 and 2.09. The 13C NMR of **5** (Table 1) showed signals due to two olefinic carbons at \(d\) _d_ 134.62 and 136.57; a hexopyranose moiety (_d_ \(d\) 99.28, 76.08, 74.10, 73.70, 69.08 and 65.01); six acetyl groups; two hemicatalic carbons at \(d\) _91.52_ and 98.06 and one --CH2--carbon at \(d\) _67.18. Detailed analysis of chemical shifts, with the aid of 2D NMR, mainly 1H-1H COSY spectrum led us to suggest that this compound also had an iridoidal structure. It could belong to a structural type quite close to apodanthroside [9] with a double bond between C-6, C-7 and hydroxyl function at C-10. By assuming a iridoidal skeleton, and by comparison with carbon assignments of known iridoids, it was possible to assign the carboxyl group (_d_ 180.29 _s_) to C-11. The structure of the iridoidal aglycone and the position of glycosidic linkage of **5** were further elucidated, as follows, by an extensive use of 2D NMR methods (1H-1H COSY, HETCOR and COLOC). By COSY correlation it was possible to observe that a doublet at \(d\) 5.00 (_J_ = 5.8 Hz) was coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 3.00 (_J_ = 9.0; 5.8 Hz) and a doublet at \(d\) 5.92 coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 2.98 (_J_ = 7.6; 2.0 Hz). In addition, the COSY-45 spectrum showed that the olefinic methine H-7 at \(d\) 5.55 was correlated with methine H-8 at \(d\) 3.08 (_J_ = 9.0; 1.5 Hz); and an ABX system at \(d\) 4.22 (_J_ = 11.0; 8.0 Hz) and 4.90 (_J_ = 11.0; 3.0 Hz) were due to the hydroxymethylene H-10. The HETCOR spectrum of **5** revealed that the methine at \(d\) 99.28 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.93 _d_), while the signal at \(d\) 98.06 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.00 _d_). The correlations between methines \(d\) 99.28, 76.08, 74.10, 73.70, 69.08 and 65.01); six acetyl groups; two hemicatalic carbons at \(d\) 91.52 and 98.06 and one --CH2--carbon at \(d\) 67.18. Detailed analysis of chemical shifts, with the aid of 2D NMR, mainly 1H-1H COSY spectrum led us to suggest that this compound also had an iridoidal structure. It could belong to a structural type quite close to apodanthroside [9] with a double bond between C-6, C-7 and hydroxyl function at C-10. By assuming a iridoidal skeleton, and by comparison with carbon assignments of known iridoids, it was possible to assign the carboxyl group (_d_ 180.29 _s_) to C-11. The structure of the iridoidal aglycone and the position of glycosidic linkage of **5** were further elucidated, as follows, by an extensive use of 2D NMR methods (1H-1H COSY, HETCOR and COLOC). By COSY correlation it was possible to observe that a doublet at \(d\) 5.00 (_J_ = 5.8 Hz) was coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 3.00 (_J_ = 9.0; 5.8 Hz) and a doublet at \(d\) 5.92 coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 2.98 (_J_ = 7.6; 2.0 Hz). In addition, the COSY-45 spectrum showed that the olefinic methine H-7 at \(d\) 5.55 was correlated with methine H-8 at \(d\) 3.08 (_J_ = 9.0; 1.5 Hz); and an ABX system at \(d\) 4.22 (_J_ = 11.0; 8.0 Hz) and 4.90 (_J_ = 11.0; 3.0 Hz) were due to the hydroxymethylene H-10. The HETCOR spectrum of **5** revealed that the methine at \(d\) 99.28 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.93 _d_), while the signal at \(d\) 98.06 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.00 _d_). The correlations between methines \(d\) 99.28, 76.08, 74.10, 73.70, 69.08 and 65.01); six acetyl groups; two hemicatalic carbons at \(d\) 91.52 and 98.06 and one --CH2--carbon at \(d\) 67.18. Detailed analysis of chemical shifts, with the aid of 2D NMR, mainly 1H-1H COSY spectrum led us to suggest that this compound also had an iridoidal structure. It could belong to a structural type quite close to apodanthroside [9] with a double bond between C-6, C-7 and hydroxyl function at C-10. By assuming a iridoidal skeleton, and by comparison with carbon assignments of known iridoids, it was possible to assign the carboxyl group (_d_ 180.29 _s_) to C-11. The structure of the iridoidal aglycone and the position of glycosidic linkage of **5** were further elucidated, as follows, by an extensive use of 2D NMR methods (1H-1H COSY, HETCOR and COLOC). By COSY correlation it was possible to observe that a doublet at \(d\) 5.00 (_J_ = 5.8 Hz) was coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 3.00 (_J_ = 9.0; 5.8 Hz) and a doublet at \(d\) 5.92 coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 2.98 (_J_ = 7.6; 2.0 Hz). In addition, the COSY-45 spectrum showed that the olefinic methine H-7 at \(d\) 5.55 was correlated with methine H-8 at \(d\) 3.08 (_J_ = 9.0; 1.5 Hz); and an ABX system at \(d\) 4.22 (_J_ = 11.0; 8.0 Hz) and 4.90 (_J_ = 11.0; 3.0 Hz) were due to the hydroxymethylene H-10. The HETCOR spectrum of **5** revealed that the methine at \(d\) 99.28 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.93 _d_), while the signal at \(d\) 98.06 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.00 _d_). The correlations between methines \(d\) 99.28, 76.08, 74.10, 73.70, 69.08 and 65.01); six acetyl groups; two hemicatalic carbons at \(d\) 91.52 and 98.06 and one --CH2--carbon at \(d\) 67.18. Detailed analysis of chemical shifts, with the aid of 2D NMR, mainly 1H-1H COSY spectrum led us to suggest that this compound also had an iridoidal structure. It could belong to a structural type quite close to apodanthroside [9] with a double bond between C-6, C-7 and hydroxyl function at C-10. By assuming a iridoidal skeleton, and by comparison with carbon assignments of known iridoids, it was possible to assign the carboxyl group (_d_ 180.29 _s_) to C-11. The structure of the iridoidal aglycone and the position of glycosidic linkage of **5** were further elucidated, as follows, by an extensive use of 2D NMR methods (1H-1H COSY, HETCOR and COLOC). By COSY correlation it was possible to observe that a doublet at \(d\) 5.00 (_J_ = 5.8 Hz) was coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 3.00 (_J_ = 9.0; 5.8 Hz) and a doublet at \(d\) 5.92 coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 2.98 (_J_ = 7.6; 2.0 Hz). In addition, the COSY-45 spectrum showed that the olefinic methine H-7 at \(d\) 5.55 was correlated with methine H-8 at \(d\) 3.08 (_J_ = 9.0; 1.5 Hz); and an ABX system at \(d\) 4.22 (_J_ = 11.0; 8.0 Hz) and 4.90 (_J_ = 11.0; 3.0 Hz) were due to the hydroxymethylene H-10. The HETCOR spectrum of **5** revealed that the methine at \(d\) 99.28 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.00 _d_). The correlations between methines \(d\) 99.28, 76.08, 74.10, 73.70, 69.08 and 65.01); six acetyl groups; two hemicatalic carbons at \(d\) 91.52 and 98.06 and one --CH2--carbon at \(d\) 67.18. Detailed analysis of chemical shifts, with the aid of 2D NMR, mainly 1H-1H COSY spectrum led us to suggest that this compound also had an iridoidal structure. It could belong to a structural type quite close to apodanthroside [9] with a double bond between C-6, C-7 and hydroxyl function at C-10. By assuming a iridoidal skeleton, and by comparison with carbon assignments of known iridoids, it was possible to assign the carboxyl group (_d_ 180.29 _s_) to C-11. The structure of the iridoidal aglycone and the position of glycosidic linkage of **5** were further elucidated, as follows, by an extensive use of 2D NMR methods (1H-1H COSY, HETCOR and COLOC). By COSY correlation it was possible to observe that a doublet at \(d\) 5.00 (_J_ = 5.8 Hz) was coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 3.00 (_J_ = 9.0; 5.8 Hz) and a doublet at \(d\) 5.92 coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 2.98 (_J_ = 7.6; 2.0 Hz). In addition, the COSY-45 spectrum showed that the olefinic methine H-7 at \(d\) 5.55 was correlated with methine H-8 at \(d\) 3.08 (_J_ = 9.0; 1.5 Hz); and an ABX system at \(d\) 4.22 (_J_ = 11.0; 8.0 Hz) and 4.90 (_J_ = 11.0; 3.0 Hz) were due to the hydroxymethylene H-10. The HETCOR spectrum of **5** revealed that the methine at \(d\) 99.28 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.93 _d_), while the signal at \(d\) 98.06 was correlated with H-1' (_d_ 5.00 _d_). The correlations between methines \(d\) 99.28, 76.08, 74.10, 73.70, 69.08 and 65.01); six acetyl groups; two hemicatalic carbons at \(d\) 91.52 and 98.06 and one --CH2--carbon at \(d\) 67.18. Detailed analysis of chemical shifts, with the aid of 2D NMR, mainly 1H-1H COSY spectrum led us to suggest that this compound also had an iridoidal structure. It could belong to a structural type quite close to apodanthroside [9] with a double bond between C-6, C-7 and hydroxyl function at C-10. By assuming a iridoidal skeleton, and by comparison with carbon assignments of known iridoids, it was possible to assign the carboxyl group (_d_ 180.29 _s_) to C-11. The structure of the iridoidal aglycone and the position of glycosidic linkage of **5** were further elucidated, as follows, by an extensive use of 2D NMR methods (1H-1H COSY, HETCOR and COLOC). By COSY correlation it was possible to observe that a doublet at \(d\) 5.00 (_J_ = 5.8 Hz) was coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 3.00 (_J_ = 9.0; 5.8 Hz) and a doublet at \(d\) 5.92 coupled to a double doublet at \(d\) 5.93 (_J_ = 7.6; 2.0 Hz). In addition, the COSY-45 spectrum showed that the olefinic methine H-7 at \(d\) 5.55 was correlated with methine H-8 at \(d\) 3.08 (_J_ = 9.0; 1.5 Hz); and an ABX system at \(d\) 4.22 (_J_ = 11.0; 8.0 Hz) and 4.90 (_J_ = 11.0; 3.0 Hz) were due to the hydroxymethylene H-10. The 

## Page 3

as in Fig. 1. Particularly, irradiation of the signal for \(\beta\)/H at \(\delta\) 3.00 produced significant enhancement of the H-10 (\(\sim\)20%) methylene and methine 5\(\beta\)-H (\(\sim\)35%). Furthermore, irradiation of 1a-H showed simultaneous enhancement of the signals at 8a-H (12%) and 3a-H (15%). These findings suggest that the acetoxyl group at C-3 and the hydroxymethylene at C-8 are in \(\beta\) disposition.

From iridoids derivatives isolated from \(T\). _formosa_ only the epimeric mixture of \(\alpha\)- and \(\beta\)-gardiol showed antifungal activity (Table 2). The fungicide properties of some iridoidal aglycones have already been observed in the case of _Alibertia macrophylla_[4] and seem to be an interesting feature of Rubiaceae growing in 'Cerrado Regions'.

## Experimental

_General_. Mp: uncorr.; IR: KBr; NMR: 200, 400 MHz (\({}^{\text{t}}\)H) and 100 MHz (\({}^{\text{t}}\)C) in: CDCl\({}_{\text{i}}\); EIMS: at 70 EV Finnigan Mat 4610; HREMS: at 70 EV VG 7070E-HF. CC: silica gel 60; TLC: silica gel Gel GF\({}_{\text{254}}\). _Plant material_. Leaves of _Tocoyena formosa_ were collected in the Estacao Ecologica e Experimental de Mogi-Guacu, Sao Paulo State, Brazil in July 1991 by Dr M. C. M. Young and identified by Dr S. L. J. Mendaodil, Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo. A voucher specimen (SP1787979) has been deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo, Brazil.

_Biological screening procedures_. The experimental methods utilized in the screening procedures with S. _cerevisiae_ mutants [5] and _C. cladosporioides_[6] have been described elsewhere. The procedure used for _C. esphaerospermum_ was similar to that of _C. cladosporioides_.

_Extraction and isolation_. Air-dried and powdered leaves (800 g) of \(T\). _formosa_ were extracted with 60% aq. EtOH. The resulting extract was concd to half its original vol. and extracted with hexane followed by EtOAc. Evapn afforded hexane (3.00 g) and EtOAc (5.5 g) extracts. The EtOAc fr. was submitted to CC on silica gel and eluted with mixts of CHCl\({}_{\text{i}}\) and MeOH. A total of 28 frs were collected. Frs 9-11 were further purified by prep. TLC [silica gel, C\({}_{\text{b}}\)H\({}_{\text{b}}\)-EtOAc (2:3) containing 3% HOAc] yielding an epimeric mixt. of **1** and **2** (42.5 mg) [5] and ethyl ferulate (19.4 mg). Frs 12-14 yielded, after prep. TLC (as described for 9-11) ethyl caffeoate (20 mg). Mollugoside methylester **3** (40 mg) [8] was isolated by prep. TLC [silica gel, C\({}_{\text{b}}\)H\({}_{\text{e}}\)-EtOAc (1:1)+1.5% HOAc], after purification of fr. 15.

Fractions 17-18 were purified by prep. TLC [silica gel, EtOAc-MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O (77:15:8). TLC and \({}^{\text{t}}\) NMR investigations of this purification indicated that the resulting fr. was of interest and looked to be constituted of only one product. However, \({}^{\text{t}}\)C NMR of this compound indicated an inseparable mixt. (3:1) which was subjected to acetylation (Ac2O/pyr. 25\({}^{\circ}\), 12 Hs). The acetyl derivatives obtained, were subjected to prep. TLC (silica gel, CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc (2:3)+1% HOAc), which afforded the major compound **5** (23 mg).

_Formosinoside-l-hexaacetate_ (**5**). Amorphous powder, mp 144-146\({}^{\circ}\), [_z_]o = + 36.1\({}^{\circ}\) (CHCl), \(c\) 3.17). Found: C, 52.68; H, 4.92% C\({}_{\text{b}}\)H\({}_{\text{a}}\)O\({}_{\text{t}}\), requires C, 52.17; H, 5.59%; IR \({}^{\text{v,c}}_{\text{max}}\) 3780, 1710, 1695, 1630, 1270, 1055 cm\({}^{-1}\); EIMS \(m/z\) (rel int.) [M]\({}^{\text{t}}\) 644 (8), 331 (89), 314 (35), 296 (15), 253 (9) 251 (50), 209 (5), 233 (100), 43 (70); HREIMS 644.4374 (caled for C\({}_{\text{2s}}\)H\({}_{\text{30}}\)O\({}_{\text{17}}\) 644.4321); \({}^{\text{t}}\)H NMR 200, 400 MHz and \({}^{\text{t}}\)C NMR 50 MHz, CDCl\({}_{\text{j}}\) see Table 1.

_Acknowledgements_--We thank Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) for financial support, to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico for fellowships to V. de S. Bolzani, M. C. M. Young and C. M. Izumisawa. We are also grateful to Ms Nina Jo Baj of

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c} Crude extract, fractions and compounds & \multicolumn{4}{c}{Organisms\({}^{\text{s}}\)} \\ RS321 & RS167N & RS322N & RS188N \\
60\% aqueous EtOH extract & 980 & 950 & 650 & 680 \\ Fractions 9–11 & 250 & 210 & 180 & 200 \\ \(\alpha\)- and \(\beta\)-Gardiol & 120 & 126 & 90 & 105 \\ Camptotecin & — & 8.7 & 0.6 & — \\ Streptonigrin & — & 2.4 & 0.4 & — \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Bioactivity data of crude extract, fractions, \(\alpha\)-, \(\beta\)-gardiol and the standards\({}^{\ast}\)

Fig. 1: Particularly, irradiation of the signal for \(\beta\)/H at \(\delta\) 3.00 produced significant enhancement of the H-10 (\(\sim\)20%) methylene and methine 5\(\beta\)-H (\(\sim\)35%). Furthermore, irradiation of 1α-H showed simultaneous enhancement of the signals at 8α-H (12%) and 3α-H (15%). These findings suggest that the acetoxyl group at C-3 and the hydroxymethylene at C-8 are in \(\beta\) disposition.



## Page 4

the Department of Chemistry of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University for expert technical assistance and Mr Kim Harich of the Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, of the same Institution for recording MS data.

## References

* [1] Goodland, R., and Ferri, M. G., _Ecologia do Cerrado_, 1st edn. EDUSP-Ed, Sao Paulo, 1979, p. 173.
* [2] Bolzani, V. da S., Trevisan, L. M. V. and Young, M. C. M., _Phytochemistry_, 1991, **30**, 2089.
* [3] Bolzani, V. da S., Trevisan, L. M. V. and Young, M. C. M., _Revisto Latinoamericana Quimica_, 1991, **22**, 20.
* [4] Young, M. C. M., Braga, M. R., Dietrich, S. M. C., Gottlieb, H. E., Trevisan, L. M. V. and Bolzani, V. da S., _Phytochemistry_, 1992, **31**, 3433.
* [5] Gunatilaka, A. A. L., Samaranayake, G., Kingston, D. G. I., Hofmann, G. and Johnson, R. K., _Journal of Natural Products_, 1992, **55**, 1648.
* [6] Homans, A. L. and Fuchs, A., _Journal of Chromatography_, 1970, **51**, 325.
* [7] Jensen, S. R., _Phytochemistry_, 1983, **22**, 1761.
* [8] Iavarone, C., Sen, A., Trogolo, C. and Villa, S., _Phytochemistry_, 1983, **22**, 175.
* [9] Bailleul, I., Delaveau, P. and Koch, M., _Phytochemistry_, 1980, **19**, 2763.
* [10] Gunatilaka, A. A. L., Kingston, D. G. I. and Johnson, R. K., _Pure and Applied Chemistry_, 1994, **66**, 2219.



