# 10.1021@np1007476.pdf

## Page 1



# An Unprecedented Neolignan Skeleton from _Chimarrhis turbinata_

Carmen L. Cardoso, Ian Castro-Gamboa, Giovana M. Bergamini, Alberto J. Cavalheiro, Dulce H. S. Silva, Marcia N. Lopes, Angela R. Araujo, Mayas Furlan, Hugo Verli, Vanderlan da S. Bolzani

# Abstract

A lignan with a new skeleton named elimarthinin (**1**) was isolated from an extract of the leaves of _Chimarrhis turbinata_, a Rubiaceae plant species. 13C NMR spectrometric techniques including 1D and 2D experiments and HRESIMMS provided unequivocal structural confirmation of this new C6C3 skeleton type. The relative configuration of **1** was established by 2D 1H-H analysis and \(J\) couplings, while its conformation was evaluated through molecular modeling using the RM1 semiempirical method, with the aid of coupling constants obtained by NMR analysis. The antioxidant activity of the new derivative **1** and two known and previously isolated phenolic derivatives (**2** and **3**) was investigated. An IC50 value of 7.50 +- 0.5 _m_mol L-1 was obtained for the new derivative **1**, while **2** and **3** showed IC50 values of 18.60 +- 0.4 and 18.50 +- 0.6 _m_mol, respectively.

As part of our research project focusing on the photochemical investigation of new biologically active compounds from Amazonian plant species, the constituents of the leaves and banks from _Chimarrhis turbinata_ DC Prodr. (Rubiaceae) have been examined.1-5 Previous photochemical studies of C. _turbinata_ established the presence of indole alkaloids with weak anticholinesterase activity2 as well as several phenolic compounds with antioxidant properties.3,5 Herein, the isolation, structural elucidation, and conformational analysis of a new C6C3 ligand skeleton type (**1**) are reported.

We have previously described the isolation of the two known phenolic compounds **2** and **3**.4,6 Herein, their antioxidant properties along with those of compound **1** are reported and compared with those of the commercially available antioxidant BHT. Evaluation of the parameters related to the antioxidant activity was accomplished by measuring the free radical scavenging ability of the compounds toward DPPH.7

The liquid-liquid partitioning of the EtOH extract of air-dried leaves of C. _turbinata_, followed by a sequence of size exclusion chromatography of the EtOAc-soluble fraction on Sephadex LH-20 and further purification using C18 HPLC, eluted with a CH3CN/H2O (18:88 v/v) isocratie elution using a Phenomene Luna column (25.0 mm x 21.20 mm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 10 mL min-1 and UV detection at 280 nm, afforded compound **1**.

Compound **1** was obtained as an amorphous, pale brown powder, \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{2}\)35-204 (_c_ 0.01, MeOH), which was analyzed for C29H28O12 by a combination of HRESIM5 and 13C NMR data. The molecular formula of **1** was determined from the \(\left[ {\text{M} - \text{H}_{2}\text{O}} \right\rbrack^{+}\) peak at _m_/_z_ 550.6433 (caled for C29H26O11.550.1475). The IR spectrum with absorption bands at 3403, 1705, 1657, and 1627 cm-1 suggested the presence of phenolic and carboxylic groups. The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** (Table 1) displayed signals for nine aromatic hydrogens, which indicates the presence of three aromatic ring systems with different substitution patterns. The signals at \(J\) = 2.0 Hz), 7.33 (ddbr, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz), 2.0 Hz), and 7.23 (s) corresponded to the aromatic hydrogens of a 1,3,5-trisubstituted ring. Additionally, the signals at \(d\) 6.78 (d_, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz), 6.69 (d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz), 6.61 (_J_ = 8.0 Hz), 6.67 (dd_, \(J\) = 8.0; 2.0 Hz), 6.55 (sbr), and 7.32 (d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) were attributed to six aromatic hydrogens from 1,3,4 = substituted rings. These 1H NMR data clearly confirm the presence of three distinct aromatic moieties in **1**.

The 13C NMR spectrum of **1** showed signals for 29 different carbons: 11 quaternary (sp2), two of which are carbonyls (d 176.5, C-9; 173.6, C-7a), one quaternary (sp3); nine sp2 methines; four sp3 methines, three of which are oxymethine; and four methylenes, one of which is a sp3 methines. The signals at _d_c_ 146.10, 146.5, 116.8, 115.7, 123.8, 146.7, 146.0, 115.2, 116.5, and 121.7 were ascribed to two 1,3,4-trisubstituted aromatic systems characteristic of a catechol moiety.8 The signals at _d_c

## Page 2

117.7, 151.3, 115.7, 151.3, and 117.7 evidenced the presence of one 1,3,5-substituted aromatic ring.9 The signals at \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 63.3, 70.2, 71.2, and 81.5 were assigned to a dihydroxytetrahydrofuran moiety. The signal at \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 91.7 revealed a peculiar downfield shifted carbon, which, analyzed together with the signals at \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 28.5, 41.3, 43.2, and 173.6, allowed us to attribute one part of the structure of **1** as being a trisubstituted lactone moiety (Table 1).

Detailed analysis of the \({}^{1}\)H-1\({}^{\ast}\)H COSY, HMQC, and HMBC spectra demonstrated that **1** bears a different skeleton, with two C6-C3 units similar to those found in ingids. Correlations between H-7 (2H, \(\delta\) 3.06, d, \(J\) = 13.0; 17.5 Hz), H-8 (\(\delta\) 4.22, dd, \(J\) = 13.0; 9.0 Hz), H-9' (2H, \(\delta\) 2.70 and 2.75, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz), and H-8' (\(\delta\) 3.33, m) were observed by \({}^{1}\)H-1\({}^{\ast}\)H COSY. The hydrogen at \(\delta\) 3.06 (H-7) has HMBC correlations with the aromatic carbon at \(\delta\) 128.6 (C-1) and with a quaternary carbon at \(\delta\) 0 176.5 (C-9), as well as a correlation with a melting carbon at \(\delta\) 43.2 (C-8). Correlations of the methylene hydrogen resonating at \(\delta\) 3.33 (H-8') with C-1' and C-9' and correlations of H2-9' with C-8' and C-7' are also evident. The hydrogen at \(\delta\) 4.66 (H-2b) correlates with C-7' and C-3b. From these observations and the analysis of all \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data (Table 1), it is evident that the two caffeic acid units and a dihydroxytetrahydrofuran system are connected to the \(\delta\)-lactone moiety.

These data suggest the presence of a \(\delta\)-lactone moiety linked at C-1' (ring C) and at C-2b (ring B), Figure 2. The anisotropic unshielded signals of the quaternary carbon C-7 (\(\delta\) 91.7) might be explained by its ligands: oxygen, the aromatic carbon C-1', and C-2b. The correlations between H-2b (\(\delta\) 4.66, d, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz), H-3b (\(\delta\) 3.68, dd, \(J\) = 2.5; 8.5 Hz), H2, H2-4b (\(\delta\) 3.57, ddd, \(J\) = 2.5; 6.0, 6.5 Hz and \(\delta\) 3.41, dd, \(J\) = 6.5; 11.0 Hz), and H2-5b (\(\delta\) 3.32, m) indicate that ring B consists of a dihydroxytetrahydrofuran system, biogenetically derived from a ttrose sugar unit (Figure 2). HMBC correlations from the aromatic hydrogens at \(\delta\) 7.33 (H-2a) and 7.31 (H-6a) of the third 1,3,5-trisubstituted aromatic ring (A) with C-7a (\(\delta\) 176.5) showed that the third aromatic system is the 3,5-dihydroxybenzoic ester moiety at C-3 of the tetrose ring (B) (Figure 2).

These observations and the presence of two caffeic acid moieties, which could be biogenetically defined as a neolignan, determined a skeleton formed by unusual couplings C-7-C-9' and HOC-9-C8'. The spectroscopic evidence and a literature survey of lignan types (neolignans and lignans) indicated that compound **1** has a new neolignan-type skeleton.

The relative configuration of the stereocenters at C-2b, C-3b, C4-b, C-7', and C-8 and the conformation of **1** were determined on the basis of coupling constants and conformational analysis by the semiempirical RM1 method in the gas phase. For C-2b and C-3b, the coupling constants of H-2b (\(\delta\) 4.66 d, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz) and H-3b (\(\delta\) 3.68 dd, \(J\) = 8.5, 2.5 Hz) indicate a vicinal H-2bax-H-3bax position, which is in good agreement with the presence of the gallate moiety in the _b_-position at C-3b. For C-4b, the coupling constants of H-4b (\(\delta\) 3.56 ddd, \(J\) = 6.5, 6.75, 2.5 Hz) also confirm an \(\alpha\)-hydroxy group at this position. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR data recorded in methanol-_d_** clearly show all the coupling constants of H-4b with Hax and Hax-5b (Table 1) and confirmed the tetrose moiety as part of this molecule. The coupling constants of H-8 (\(\delta\) 4.22 dddb, \(J\) = 9.0, 13.0 Hz) suggest the \(\alpha\)-positioned 8-R, which is in accordance with the relative configuration of C-8. The relative configuration is assigned as 2_R_*, 3_R_*, 4_S_*, 7_S_*, and 8_R_*.

To confirm the relative configuration of C-2b, C-3b, C-4b, and C-8 and in order to establish the conformation of **1**, this structure was submitted to conformational analysis by the semiempirical RM1 method in the gas phase. The obtained minimum energy conformations enable estimation of \({}^{3}\)J\({}_{\text{HH}}\) coupling constants by means of the Haasnoot-Altona parametrization of the Karplus equation,10 which considers the electronegativity of the substituents and the geometry of the H-C-C-H dihedral angle. A comparison between the theoretical and experimental coupling constants permitted the characterization of the conformation of charimarhinin, represented in Figure 3, with the respective theoretical coupling constants (Table 1), considering the most stable envelope conformation of the tetrahydrofuran ring and half-chair conformation of the tetrahydro-2-pyranone ring. Consistent with previous conformational analyses of natural products with diverse skeletons,11,11,12 the employed semiempirical calculations agreed with experimental data more satisfactorily when compared with older Hamiltonians such as AM1 and PM3 and _ab initio_ HF/6-31G** calculations.

The radical scavenging effects observed for compounds 1-3 assayed with DPPH are summarized in Table 2, the standard antidotant BHT (IC50 62.50 +- 0.6 \(\mu\)mol L\({}^{- 1}\)), and chlorogenic acid (IC50 20.0 +- 0.2 \(\mu\)mol L\({}^{- 1}\)) used as reference. The results indicate that the free radical scavenging activity of these molecules is due to their hydrogen-donating ability, provided by the stabilization of the phenoxy radical after DPPH reduction. Stabilization is enhanced by the presence of catechol groups and, in the case of the phenylpropanoids (**2**, **3**), the \(\alpha\),b-unsaturated carbonyl moiety, as evidenced by their IC50 values. Compound **1** gave the best results, with an IC50 value lower than that of the standard BHT, a well-known food antioxidant. This result may be related to the presence of two catechol groups in this molecule.

## EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

### General Experimental Procedures.

Optical rotation measurements were conducted on a Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter using a quartz cuvette (length 1 cm). IR spectra were measured on either a Perkin-Elmer 1600 or a Nicolet EMACT-40 FTIR spectrophotometer. NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 NMR spectrometer operating at 500 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H and at 125 MHz for \({}^{13}\)C. TMS was used as internal standard. Mass spectra were obtained at high resolution on a Micromass Q-TOF spectrometer. For chromatographic procedures, Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia Biotech) was employed. Preparative HPLC separations were performed on a Varian Prep LC 4000 System, and C18 Luna (Phenomenex) columns and precolumns were utilized.

Figure 1.: Compounds from _C. turbinatea._



## Page 3

Peaks were detected using a Varian model 320-chromatointegrator connected to a UV detector. All solvents (Merck or Mallinckrodt) were analytical or HPLC grade. The theoretical study was carried out using the semiempirical RMI method on MOPAC 7.0 software.

**Plant Material.**_Chimarthis turbinate_ was collected in Reserva do Viro, Belem, PA, Brazil, in February 2000, and identified by Dr. Marina Thereza V. do A. Campos. A voucher specimen, Lopes-51, was deposited in the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden, Sao Paulo.

**Extraction and Isolation.** Dried and powdered leaves of C. _turbinate_ (1.2 kg) were exhaustively extracted with EtOH at room temperature to afford 57.1 g of dry residue, which was dissolved in MeOH/H2O (8:2, v/v) and extracted with _n_-hexane. The aqueous alcoholic fraction was evaporated to roughly MeOH/H2O (6:4, v/v) and then extracted successively with CH2Cl2, EtOH2, and _n_-BuOH. All fractions were screened with _b_-carotene and DPPH assays, aiming at selecting potential antioxidant compounds. The EtOH2 layer was active in these assays, and this extract was selected for guided fractionation. The dried EtOH2 extract (4:16 g) was dissolved in MeOH (5 mL) and submitted to gel filtration over Sephadex LH-20. A total of 25 fractions of 25 mL each were collected and pooled according to their TLC profiles (CHCl2/MeOH/H2O, 65:30:5). Fractions A-6,7 and A-8 to A-12 exhibited antioxidant activity and were further purified by HPLC. Fractions A-8 to A-12 yielded the compounds described elsewhere.3,4

Fraction A-6,7 (0.699 g) was purified by gel filtration over Sephadex LH-20 CC (88.0 cm x 2.0 cm), which was eluted with MeOH, giving 36

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c}  & \multicolumn{4}{c}{gHMQC} \\ position & \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) & \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) (_J_ in Hz) & \(J\) (Hz)bover & gHMBC & COSY & TOGSY \\
1 & 125.6 & & & H-7 & & \\
2 & 116.8 & 6.78 d (2.0) & n.d.c & H-5 &

## Page 4

fractions of 10.0 mL each. The fractions B-20-30 (0. 387 g) tested positively in the b-carotene and DPPH assays, and they were further combined and subjected to preparative HPLC separation using CH3CN/H2O isocratic elution (18.88) [Phenomenex C18 Luna column 25.0 mm x 12.20 mm x 5 mm, at 10 mL.min-1, with UV detection at 280 nm], to afford 10 subfractions. From those, C-3 (97.2 mg) was separated by preparative HPLC using the same column described above [isocratic elution; H2O/MeCN/HOAc (84.5:15:0.5), UV detection at 237 nm, 12.0 mL min-1 flow rate], to give compound 1 (4.3 mg).

### Molecular Modeling.

The semiempirical calculations were carried out using the RM1 Hamiltonian13 within the MOPAC 7.0 program.14 The MOLDEN program was employed as a graphic interface for construction and visualization of the structure of compound 1.15 Hessian matrix analyses were used to unequivocally characterize the obtained conformations as true potential energy surface minima. Additionally, the minimum energy achieved by RM1 was further refined through _ab initio_ calculations, using the GAMESS program16 at the HF/6-31G** level. In order to obtain theoretical 3\({}^{\text{7}}_{\text{JHH}}\) coupling constants for the minimum energy conformation achieved by conformational analysis, the Haasonot-Altona parametrization of the Karplus equation15 was applied to the H-C-C-H dihedral angle geometries.

### Bleaching Experiments Using b-Carotene.

After being developed and dried, TLC plates were sprayed with 0.02% b-carotene solutions (Aldrich) in CH2Cl2. Plates were placed under natural light until discoloration of the background. The remaining yellow spots indicated the presence of antioxidant substances.7

### Determination of the Radical Scavenging Activity.

The DPPH radical was used in MeOH (100 _m_mol L-1). The reagent (2.0 mL) was added to a 1.0 mL aliquot of the compounds previously dissolved in MeOH, to yield final concentrations of 100, 80, 40, 20, 10, and 5 _m_mol L-1. Each mixture was shaken and kept at room temperature for 30 min, in the dark. Chlorogenic acid and BHT were employed as standards. A DPPH solution (2.0 mL) in MeOH (1.0 mL) served as a control. Absorbances of the resulting solutions were measured at 517 nm using a Milton Roy 20 D spectrophotometer, and the percent inhibition was determined by comparison with a MeOH-treated control group.

_Chimarhinin (1)._ amorphous, pale brown powder, [_a_]25_, \(b\) -204 (_c_ 0.01, MeOH); IR (KBr) 3410 (OH), 1656, and 1604 cm-1; 1H and 13C NMR (see Table 1); HRESIMs _m/z_ 550.6433 [M - H2O]+ (caled for C23H26O11550.1475).

## Associated Content

### Supporting Information.

This material is available free of charge via the Internet at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org).

## Author Information

### Corresponding Author

* Tel: 55 16 3301 9660. Fax: 55 16 33016692. E-mail: bolzaniv@iq.unesp.br.

## Acknowledgment

This work was funded by grants from Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) as part of the Biot-FAPESP-The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biot-tasp.org.br), grant no. 03/02176-7, awarded to V.S.B. C.L.C. acknowledges FAPESP for a scholarship. V.S.B. thanks CNPq and CAPES for a research scholarship. H.V. thanks CNPq for grants no. 420015/2005-1 and no. 472174/2007-0.

## Appendix A Dedication

Dedicated to Dr. Koji Nakanishi for his pioneering work on bioactive natural products.

## References

- Cardoso, C. L.; da Silva, D. H. S.; Tomazela, D. M.; Verli, H.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Eberlin, M. N.; Bolzani, V. S. J. Nut. Prod. 2003 2003 2003 2004 20

## Page 5

* (11) Flausino, O., Jr.; Santos, L. A.; Verli, H.; Pereira, A. M.; Bolzani, V.; S.; Nunes-de-Souyo, R. L. J. Nat. Prod. 2007, 70, 48-53.
* (12) Kerber, V. A.; Passos, C. S.; Verli, H.; Fett-Neto, A. G.; Quirion, J. P.; Henriques, A. T. J. Nat. Prod. 2008, 71, 697-700.
* (13) Rocha, G. R.; Freire, R. O.; Simas, A. M.; Stewart, J. J. P. J. Comput. Chem. 2006, 27, 1101-1111.
* (14) Stewart, J. J. P. QCPE 455, Indiana University: Bloomington, IN, 2008.
* (15) Schaftenaar, G.; Noordik, J. H. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 2000, 14, 123-134.
* (16) Schmidt, M. W.; Baldridge, K. K.; Boatz, J. A.; Elbert, S. T.; Gordon, M. S.; Jensen, J. H.; Koseki, S.; Matsunaga, N.; Nguyen, K. A.; Su, S. J.; Windus, T. L.; Dupuis, M.; Montgomery, J. A. J. Comput. Chem. 1993, 14, 1347-1363.



