# 10.1016@0031-9422(73)80421-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Distribution of DARYLIPROPANOIDS IN AMAZONIAN _Virola_ species*

Otto Richard Gottlieb, Arthur A. Loureiro, Milade dos Santos Carneiro

Arnando Imbiriba da Rocha

Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, Brasil

# Abstract

Virola species; Myristicaceae; chemotaxonomy; diarylpropanoids; alkaloids.

Virola [1-(2-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)-3-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-propane] and virolanol [2-hydroxy-1-(2-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)-3-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-propane], two diarylpropanoids recently isolated from the wood of _Virola multimervia_ Ducke1 (Myristicaceae, INPA 2855/21157, Ducke Reserve Manaus), were found to occur additionally in the wood of _V. venosa_ (Benth.) Warb. (INPA 1947/13996, Ducke Reserve, Manaus), _V. divergens_ Ducke (INPA 2818/14787, Ducke Reserve, Manaus), _V. melinoni_ (Benoist) A.C.Sm. (INPA 1315/10356), Navio Mt., Amapa), _V. paonis_ (A.DC.) A.C.Sm. (INPA 599/5160, Ducke Reserve, Manaus) and _V. surinamensis_ (Roland) Warb. (INPA 632/5593, Benjamin Constant, Amazonas); and to be absent from _V. calophylla_ Spr. ex Warb. (INPA 2036/14207, Ducke Reserve, Manaus), _V. elongata_ (Benth.) Warb. (Codajas, Amazonas), _V. rufula_ Warb. (INPA 2001/14013, Ducke Reserve, Manaus) and _V. multicostata_ Ducke (IPEAN 31005/--, Madeira river, Para). Among the group of species which contain diarylpropanoids, _V. multinervia_ and _V. venosa_ were previously examined phytochemically, and it was shown that their bark, root and leaves are almost devoid of alkaloids.2 In contrast, most of the species of the second group are renowned hallucinogenic plants, due to the presence of tryptamine derivatives2 in _V. theiodora_ (Spr. ex Bh.) Warb., by some considered to be synonymous with _V. rufula_,3,4_V. rufula_ and _V. calophylla_; and 1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-b-carboline derivatives in _V. theiodora_ and _V. rufula_. _V. cuspidata_ (Benth.) Warb. considered to be synonymous with _V. elongata_4,5 contains 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroharman derivatives.6

Footnote *: Part II in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Myristicaceae”. For Part I see Ref. 1.

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]



