# 10.1016@S0031-9422(97)00872-8.pdf

## Page 1



# NORMIMONOIDS FROM SEEDS OF _TOONA CILIATA_

Joao Oiano Neto, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Edson Rodrigues Fo, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira and Antonio L. Pinheiro

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil; + Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, 36570-000 Vicosa, MG, Brazil

###### Abstract

Further examination of the seeds of _Toona ciliata_ led to the isolation of two new normionoids which were identified on the basis of spectroscopic analysis as 5\(x\),_6\(b\),_8_a_-trihydroxy-28-norisotoonafolin and 5\(x\),_6\(b\),_8\(a\),12_a_-tetrahydroxy-28-norisotoonafolin. In addition, the known limonoids cedrelone and toonacilin and the sterols sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol and 3_b_-O-_b_-d-glucopyranosylistosterol were also isolated and characterised. These results show that _Toona_ has a less pronounced relationship to the Swietenioideae.

1998 10 September 1997

## Introduction

_Toona_ differs from other genera of Swietenioideae, notably by the absence of limonoids of the mexicanolide group [1]. Recently, we have described the isolation and identification of two novel limonoids, 12-deacetoxytoonacilin and 6_a_-acetoxy-14\(b\),15_b_-epoxyazadirone from the dichloromethane extract from the seeds of _Toona ciliata_[2]. Limonoids with an intact carbon skeleton and the B-seco are features that are largely confined to the Meliodeae [1]. Thus, _Toona_ appears to have a less pronounced relationship to the former.

We have now examined the hexane and methanol extracts of _T. ciliata_. The methanol extract afforded two new pentanortriterpenoids, 5\(x\),_6\(b\),8_a_-trihydroxy-28-norisotoonafolin (**1**) and 5\(x\),_6\(b\),8\(a\),12_a_-tetrahydroxy-28-norisotoonafolin (**2**).

## Results and discussion

The hexane extract from the seeds of _T. ciliata_ gave a mixture of sterols and two limonoids, which were identified by comparison with published data as cedrelone [1] and toonacilin [2]. The mixture of sterols was analysed by GC mass spectrometry, which established that the sterols were sitosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol.

A methanol-soluble fraction of the methanol extract was purified by repeated column chromatography on silica gel to give 3_b_-O-_b_-d-copyranosylistosterol and two new limonoids **1** and **2**.

The limonoid **1** was identified on the basis of the following data. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) indicated the presence of four tertiary methyl groups (_d_ 0.99, 1.20, 1.38 and 1.56), a _b_-substituted furan ring (_d_ 6.37, 7.45, and 7.57), four signals characteristic of protons attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (_d_ 3.62 ; 3.81 \(d\), \(J\) = 4.1 Hz; 4.09 _dd_, \(J\) = 9.5 and 7.0 Hz; 4.14 _ddd_, \(J\) = 12.0, 9.6 and 7.2 Hz) and three signals for hydroxyl groups (_d_ 6.07 ; 6.41 \(s\); 7.03 \(d\), \(J\) = 4.1 Hz; no correlation in the HMQC spectrum). The 13C NMR (Table 2) and HMBC (Table 3) spectra indicated the five-membered ring D to have a 14\(b\),15_b_-epoxide by the cross-peak of H-15 (_d_ 3.62) with C-17 (_d_ 40.9), C-14 (_d_ 72.6); H-17 (_d_ 2.62) with C-20 (_d_ 122.9), C-21 (_d_ 140.1) and 3H-18 (_d_ 0.99) with C-17 and C-14. In the same way, the unsubstituted C-12 emerged from the correlation between the H3-18 signal and the 13C signal at \(d\) 43.5 (_d_', _C_-12), which showed one-bond correlation with the 1H signals at \(d\) 1.56 and 2.37, ascribed to H-12a and H-12b, respectively. A second methyl proton at \(d\) 1.20 was attributed to H3-30 by its correlation with the C-14 signal. The signal for C-9 was established as \(d\) 53.8 (_d_H 3.08, by HMQC) by the existence of a correlation between the H3-30 signal and this 13C signal. The H3-30 signal also showed a cross-peak with the singlet resonance at \(d\) 74.6, requiring the presence of a tertiary hydroxyl function at C-8 or a cyclic ether. The shielded resonance observed here (_d_ 74.6) is not typical of a cyclic ether, when compared with sandoricin (_d_ 80.3, C-14) [3] and tricoccin S7 (_d_ 89.5, C-8) [4], indicating a hydroxyl attached to C-8, rather than a oxygen bridge.



## Page 2



## Page 3

The third methyl proton at \(\delta\) 1.38 showed long-range correlation with the C-9 signal (\(\delta\) 53.8) and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 84.5 (CH), permitting the assignments of these signals to H\({}_{1}\)-19 and C-1 (\(\delta_{\rm{H}}\) 4.09 by HMQC), respectively. A second oxymethine proton at \(\delta\) 4.14 showed one-bond correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 73.7 (CH) and was coupled to the \({}^{1}\)H signals for H-9, H-12a and H-12b, thus allowing the assignments of these signals to H-11 and C-11, respectively. These correlations resulted in the construction of a cyclic ether between O-1 and O-11, which agreed closely with published data for toonafolin (\(\delta_{\rm{H}}\) 3.77 _dd_, \(J\) = 11.2 and 6.4 Hz, H-1, \(\delta_{\rm{C}}\) 85.2, C-1; \(\delta_{\rm{H}}\) 4.14 _ddd_, \(J\) = 11.8, 8.8 and 5.8 Hz, \(\delta_{\rm{C}}\) 74.2, C-11, **3**) [5]. Orientation of the cyclic ether followed from the large coupling between H-1 (\(\delta\) 4.09 _dd_, \(J\) = 9.5 and 7.0 Hz) and H-2 axial (\(\delta\) 2.86 _dd_, \(J\) = 15.5 and 9.5 Hz) and between H-11 (\(\delta\) 4.14 _ddd_, \(J\) = 12.0, 9.6 and 7.2 Hz) and H-9a (\(\delta\) 3.08 \(d\), \(J\) = 12.0 Hz), which require the oxide ring to be \(a\), as in toonafolin (**3**). Moreover, the existence of correlation between the \({}^{1}\)H signals at \(\delta\) 2.86 and 2.61, assigned to H\({}_{2}\)-2, and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 202.3 determined a 3-oxo limonoid. These observations and the absence of an exocyclic methylene, indicated that we were not dealing with the more usual B-ring _seco_-limonoid.

A carbonyl resonance at \(\delta\) 173.0 and a singlet resonance at \(\delta\) 90.3 were also observed in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 2) and suggested the presence of a 4-7 lactone ring, since it was the only location left in the nucleus. This implies that compound **1** has only one methyl group at C-4. This was supported by the HMBC experiments, which showed relationship of the H\({}_{3}\)-28 signal at \(\delta\) 1.56 to the C-3 signal at \(\delta\) 202.3 (\({}^{3}\)_J_) and to the C-4 signal at \(\delta\) 90.3 (\({}^{2}\)_J_). A hydroxyl must also be connected at C-5 due to the observed correlation between the H\({}_{3}\)-28 signal and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 83.7. Thus, the fourth oxymethine proton at \(\delta\) 3.81 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 4.1 Hz) can be attributed to H-6, since it was coupled only to the \({}^{1}\)H signal of a hydroxyl group at \(\delta\) 7.03 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 4.1 Hz) and both signals also showed cross-peaks with the C-5 signal (\(\delta\) 83.7). The H-6 signal also showed cross-peaks with the C-4 signal (\(\delta\) 90.3). The relationship of the \({}^{1}\)H signal of a hydroxyl at \(\delta\) 6.07 to the C-6 signal as well as of the \({}^{1}\)H signal of a second hydroxyl at \(\delta\) 6.41 to the C-9 signal led to their assignments as OH-5 and OH-8, respectively.

A model shows that, in compound **1**, ring A is nearer to a chair conformation, in which H-1 and H\({}_{3}\)-19 are eclipsed. This was supported by NOESY experiments (Table 4), which showed correlations of the signal of H-1\(\beta\) (\(\delta\) 4.09) with the signals of H-2\(\beta\) (\(\delta\) 2.61) and H\({}_{3}\)-19 (\(\delta\) 1.38). Moreover, the existence of a correlation from H\({}_{3}\)-19 to H-11 (\(\delta\) 4.14) confirmed that H-11 is in the \(\beta\)- and the oxide ring in the \(\alpha\)-configuration. In addition, the signal of H-2a (\(\delta\) 2.86) showed cross-peaks with the signal of H\({}_{3}\)-28 (\(\delta\) 1.56), suggesting a spatial proximity of H-2a to H\({}_{3}\)-28, which requires the methyl group at C-4 to be in the \(\alpha\)-configuration. Thus, the correlations of 5-OH with H\({}_{3}\)-28 (\(\alpha\)) and H-6, required 5-OH and H-6 on the \(\alpha\)-side of the molecule. Moreover, the relationship of 8-OH signal to the H-9, H\({}_{3}\)-18 (\(\alpha\)) and H-15 signals, indicated

## Page 4

that 8-OH is also in the a-configuration. All these correlations require ring C to be in a boat conformation. These conclusions were supported by several NOEDIFF experiments (Table 5).

The PIDCI mass spectrum showed ions at _m_/_z_ 475 [M + H]+, 457 [M + H - H2O]+ and 383 (base peak) [M + H - H2O - C2H2O3 (6-7 lactone)]+, confirming the cyclic ether function, the absence of a methyl group, the 4-7 lactone ring, and thus the molecular formula (C2H3O9). This information along with the low field position of the C-4 resonance (d 90.3) and the lactone vibration frequency at 1797 cm-1, were in agreement with the presence of a g-lactone ring similar to dregeanin (d_C-4 88.6, IR band for g-lactone 1787 cm-1) [6, 7]. Based in the above evidence we proposed structure **1** for this limonoid.

The second limonoid showed spectral characteristics (Tables 1-3) close to those of **1**, except for the presence of an additional signal of a proton attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (d_h_ 4.01, \(t\), \(J\) = 4.4 Hz; d_c_ 70.2). The 1H-1H COSY spectrum, in addition to correlation between H-9 and H-11, revealed H-11 (d 4.10, _dd_, \(J\) = 12.0 and 4.4 Hz) to be coupled to an oxymethine proton instead of coupling to methylene protons, so placing the hydroxyl substituent at C-12. This was supported by the HMBC experiments with **2** (Table 3), which clearly showed correlations from H-12 (d 4.01) to the C-17 signal at d 41.0 and C-9 signal at d 48.8. The a orientation of the OH-12 was revealed by the small coupling of 4.4 Hz between H-11b and H-12b, as in toonacilin (H-12, d 5.33 \(d\), \(J\) = 4.4 Hz; H-11, d 5.35 \(d\), \(J\) = 4.4 Hz) [2]. The NOESY (Table 4) showed correlation of H-12 with H-17, confirming H-12 on the b-side and OH-12 on the a-side of the molecule. The structure of this limonoid was thus established as **2**.

This appears to be the first record of 4-7 lactone limonoids from the _Toona_, a feature typical of _Trichilia_ limonoids [1, 2]. Thus the range of limonoids found in _Toona_ is still rather typical of the Melioideae [1, 2].

## EXPERIMENTAL

NMR: on a Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as int. standard; GC-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument; ESI-MS, DCI-MS: low resolution on a VG Plataform II (Fisons) instrument; [a]D: Perkin Elmer 241 instrument; IR: Bomen--FT/IR instrument.

### Plant material

_T. ciliata_ var. _australis_ was collected in Vicosa, M.G., Brazil, and a voucher (DEF 1025) is deposited in the Herbarium of the Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, M.G.

### Isolation of compounds

The seeds were dried, powdered and extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH. The hexane extract (56 g) was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using hexane, hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:1), CH2Cl2, CH2Cl2-EtOAc (1:1), EtOAc and MeOH. The CH2Cl2-EtOAc fr. 1 was flash chromatographed on silica gel eluting with hexane-EtOAc-MeOH (17:4:1) affording a mixture of sterols

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c}  & H \\ H & **1** & **2** \\
1 & 2b, 19 & 19 \\
2a & 28 & \\
6 & 19 & 19 \\
9 & 18, 28 & 28 \\
11 & 12b, 19 & 19 \\
12b & 12a & 17 \\
12a & 18 & \\
15 & 16a & 30 \\
16b & 16a & \\
16a & 18 & 16b \\
17 & 16a, 16b & \\
21 & 16a,

## Page 5

and 3 new frs. The mixture of sterols was analysed by GC mass spectrometry, which established that the sterols were sitosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol. Frs 1-3 were purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-EtOAc-MeOH, 20:4:1) to yield cedrelone (23 mg). The CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc fr. 2 was chromatographed on florisil eluting with hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH (20:7:1) affording 2 new frs (a and b). Fr. (a) was flash chromatographed on silica gel eluting with hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH (20:7:1) affording a new fr. containing toonacilin (15 mg). The latter was then purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH, 20:7:1). Fr. (b) was twice flash chromatographed on silica gel (hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH, 40:5:1; hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH, 20:3:1) yielding a mixture of sterols, which was analysed as above to give sitosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol. The MeOH extract (64 g) was suspended in MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O (1:3) and partitioned with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\). The CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) fr. was concd and then partitioned with hexane-MeOH. The MeOH fr. was flash chromatographed on silica gel eluting with CHCl\({}_{3}\)-MeOH (24:1) affording 3_b-O-b-d-glu-copyanosylstoterol_ and 2 new frs. Fr. 1 was rechromatographed as above to give **1** (30 mg). Fr. 2 was twice flash rechromatographed as above to give **2** (15 mg).

5\(a\),6\(b\),8_a_-_trihydroxy_-28-_norisotonafolin_ (**1**). Plates, mp 331-333\({}^{\circ}\), [_a_]\({}_{\rm D}\) + 152.5\({}^{\circ}\) (DMSO; \(c\) 0.0051). IR \(v_{\rm max}^{\rm kBr}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3276, 1797, 1735, 873, 826. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 2; HMBC (400/100 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 3; NOESY-TPPI (400 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 5. PI-DCI-MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 475 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (50), 457 [M + H - H\({}_{2}\)O]\({}^{+}\) (15), 383 [M + H - H\({}_{2}\)O - C\({}_{2}\)H\({}_{2}\)O\({}_{3}\)]\({}^{+}\) (100), 85 (90).

5\(a\),6\(b\),8\(a\),12_a_-_tetrahydroxy_-28-_norisotonafolin_ (**2**). Plates, mp 329-332\({}^{\circ}\), [_a_]\({}_{\rm D}\) + 121.4\({}^{\circ}\) (DMSO; \(c\) 0.0063). IR \(v_{\rm max}^{\rm kBr}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3250, 1791, 1731, 874, 827. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 2; HMBC (400/100 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 3; NOESY-TPPI (400 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{6}\)): see Table 4. PI-ESI-MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 513 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\) (100); NI-ESI-MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 489 [M - H]\({}^{-}\) (100).

Acknowledgements--The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support, Instituto de Fisica e Quimica da USP-Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil, for GC-MS and Instituto de Quimica da UNESP-Araraquara, SP, Brazil, for ESI-MS.

## References

* [1] Agostinho, S. M. M., Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Pinheiro, A. L. and Vilela, E. F., _Biochemical Systematics and Ecology_, 1994, **22**, 323.
* [2] Oiano-Neto, J., Agostinho, S. M. M., Silva, M. F. das G. F. da., Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Pinheiro, A. L. and Vilela, E. F., _Phytochemistry_, 1995, **38**, 397.
* [3] Powell, R. G., Mikolajczak, K. L., Zilkowski, B. W., Mantus, E. K., Cherry, D. and Clardy, J., _Journal of Natural Products_, 1991, **54**, 241.
* [4] Mondon, A., Trautmann, D., Epe, B., Oelbermann, U. and Wolff, C., _Tetrahedron Letters_, 1978, 3699.
* [5] Kraus, W. and Grimminger, W., _Liebigs Amalen der Chemie_, 1981, 1838.
* [6] Taylor, D. A. H., _Journal of Chemical Research (S)_, 1982, 55.
* [7] MacLachlan, L. K. and Taylor, D. A. H., _Phytochemistry_, 1982, **21**, 2426.



