# 10.1055@s-2002-36346.pdf

## Page 1



## Antibacterial Activity of a Stearic Acid Derivative from _Stemodia foliosa_

Lourinalda Luiza Dantas da Silva\({}^{2}\), Marcia Nascimento\({}^{1}\),

Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva\({}^{2}\), Maysa Furlan\({}^{2}\),

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani\({}^{2}\)

**Affiliation:**\({}^{1}\) Departamento de Antibilóticos - Centro de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, PE, Brazil - \({}^{2}\) NUBBE (Núcleo de Bioensaio, Biossintese e Ecfosiologia de Produtos Naturais), Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista - UNESP, Aaraquara, SP, Brazil

**Correspondence:** Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani - NuBBE (Núcleo de Bioensaio, Biosintese e Ecfosiologia de Produtos Naturais) - Instituto de Quimica - Universidade Estadual Paulista - O 355, CEP 14801-970 - Aaraquara 'SP, Brazil - E-mail: bolzani@uja.unesp.br

**Received:** April 8, 2002 - **Accepted:** July 28, 2002

**Bibliography:** Planta Med 2002; 68: 1137-1139 \(\copyright\) Georg Thieme Verlag Stuttgart - New York - ISSN 0032-0943

## Page 2

A concentrated ethanol extract of the leaves and stems of _S. filosa_ was dissolved in _n_-BuOH and successively extracted with hexane. The hexane-soluble phase was concentrated and submitted to chromatographic procedures to afford the new compound **1.** Stearic acid 4-pentoyloxyphenyl ester (**1**) was obtained as an amorphous powder and its molecular formula, C32H503 was established from ES-MS, \({}^{\text{}}\)H- and \({}^{\text{}}\)3C-NMR data. The ES-MS exhibited a molecular ion peak at m/z 475 [M + H]+ and representative ion peaks at m/z 207, 191, 177 and 163, which are consistent with the 4-(_n_-pentoxy)-phenethyl moiety proposed for **1**. An IR band at 1710 cm-1 and one signal at d 173.9 in the \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectrum suggested an aliphatic ester. The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum (Table **1**) showed two _ortho_-coupled doublets due to a 4-O-substituted phenethyl unit and three triplets for six hydrogens at d 4.23, d 3.64 and d 2.85 due to the oxygen-bearing methylenes (H-8' and H-1') and to the benzyline methylene (H-7), respective-by. Moreover, signals at d 2.27, d 1.58, d 1.55 and d 1.25 corresponding to several methylenes, and two triplets at d 0.86 and d 0.88, attributed to two terminal methyl groups suggested, as part of **1**, two aliphatic methylene chains. The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectrum (Table **1**) showed signals which confirmed the phenethyl moiety and two aliphatic methylene chains in compound **1**. The HOMO-COSY experiment evidenced the spins system associated with aromatic _ortho_-coupled hydrogens and with methylene hydrogens H-8' and H-7'. Additional couplings between methylene hydrogens at d 3.64 and d 1.55 as well as at d 2.27, d 1.58 and d 1.25 were also evidenced by the COSY spectrum and gave clear indication of signals belonging to each methylene chain. Precise assignments of all hydrogens and carbons followed from detailed analysis of gHMQC and gHMBC spectra (Table **1**) and allowed the location of the two aliphatic moieties in compound **1**. Correlations between H-1' and C-4' as well as between H-7' and C-1' were evidenced in the gHMBC spectrum and corroborated the 4-(_n_-pentoxy)-phenethyl moiety of compound **1**. Additionally, correlation of H-8' with C-1' and C-1 evidenced the stearic acid bonding to the phenethyl moiety through an ester linkage. Subsequent attempts to confirm the structure of compound **1** through ES-MS analysis disclosed the base peak with m/z 267 and minor peaks in good agreement with the expected fragmentation pattern for compound **1**. Additional evidence was obtained from mild basic hydrolysis of **1** followed by methylation, achieved in good yield, to produce the expected stearic methyl ester, which was identified from GC-MS analysis. Thus, **1** was established as stearic acid 4-[(_n_-pentoxy)-phenethyl] ester.

This compound was tested against Gram-positive bacteria _Staphylococcus aureus_, _Bacillus cereus_, _B. anthracis_ and _B. subtilis_; Gram-negative bacteria _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ and _Pseudonocardia termophyta_ and fast-acid bacterium _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ due to the inhibition displayed by the crude ethanol extract against these strains. However, the new isolate **1** only showed significant activity against Gram-positive bacteria _Bacillus cereus_ and _B. subtilis_ and fast-acid bacterium _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ (Table **2**) and gave no inhibition against the other strains at the concentration of 10 mg/mL, which were compared with the positive control claritomycin at the concentration of 1.28 mg/mL [7].

## Materials and Methods

Silica gel 60 F254 sheets (Merck and Sigma) were used for TLC and open Column Chromatography (CC) was performed on silica gel (60-230 \(\mu\)m, Merck). Solvents: EtOH, hexane, MeOH, EtOAc, _n_-BuOH and DMSO (Merck and Sigma-Aldrich) were used for chromatographic procedures, bioassays and UV/IR analysis; CDCl3 (Merck) was used for NMR purposes. IR and UV spectra were recorded on a FT-1750 Perkin Elmer and UV/Vis Hitachi U-3000 spectrometers. ES-MS spectra were obtained at 70 eV on a VG platform II spectrometer; \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian-Inova Unit 500 spectrometer using TMS as internal standard.

### Stemodia foliosa

Benth was collected in July, 1998 at the Campus of Federal University of Pernambuco (UFFE), in Recife, Northeastern Brazil. The botanical material was identified by Dr. Alda Chiappeta, from Departamento de Antibioticos-UFFE, and a voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of Departamento de Botanica-UFFE, under the number UFFE-19810. Whole aerial parts of this shrub (1.0 kg) were dried at room temperature, powdered, extracted with ethanol and concentrated to give a crude extract (52.0 g). Aliquots from the ethanol extract were separated for acute toxicity and antibacterial bioassays.

The antibiotic assay was performed with Gram-positive bacteria: _Staphylococcus aureus_ (DAUFPE 01), _Bacillus cereus_ (DAUFPE 11), _B. anthracis_ (DAUFPE 09) and _B. subtilis_ (DAUFPE 016); Gram-negative bacteria: _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ (DAUFPE 396*) and _Pseudonocardia thermophyta_ (DAUFPE 3517) and fast-acid bacterium _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ (DAUFPE 405). Bacteria were incubated on a nutrient agar-slant (stationary culture) for 48 h 

## Page 3

at 37 degC followed by inoculation in Mueller Hinton Agar (MHA) medium. Bacteria strains were supplied by Departamento de Antibioticos-UFPE. The antibacterial activity was demonstrated using the disc-diffusion method originally described by Watt and Collee [6]. The stock solution of each test compound/extract in DMSO was diluted at 10 mg/mL in nutrient broth. All the tests were done by placing the disc (9 mm diameter) impregnated with extracts, fractions or pure compound **1** on the MHA surface previously inoculated with 10 mL of (MHA) liquid medium with Gram-positive, Gram-negative and fast acid bacteria. DMSO was used as negative control and standard antibiotic claritomycin (1.28 mg/disc) was used as reference or positive control. Plates were incubated at 37 degC for 48 h and the inhibition zones around each disc were measured.

The ethanol extract (52.0 g) was partitioned between H2O and _n_-BuOH to give the aqueous and _n_-BuOH phases. After evaporation of the solvents, the _n_-BuOH residue (41.0 g) was dissolved in 80% aqueous MeOH and sequentially partitioned with _n_-hexane, CH2Cl2 and EtOAc. The _n_-hexane soluble phase was concentrated to give a bioactive _n_-hexane extract (9.4 g), which was subjected to silica gel (300.0 g) column chromatography, eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc gradient: 9:1, 8:2 and 75:25, (1000 mL of each eluent). Fractions were tested and those obtained upon elution with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (8:2) proved to contain bioactive compounds. They were analyzed by TLC (_n_-hexane/EtOAc 8:2, UV detection at 254 nm), pooled (2.1g) and further submitted to silica gel (200 g) column chromatography using a _n_-hexane/EtOAc gradient: 95:5, 9:1, 8:2 and 7:3, (300 mL of each eluent). Fractions eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 95:5 were pooled and further purified by preparative TLC (_n_-hexane/EtOAc 9:1), yielding the new bioactive compound **1** (35.0 mg, Rf 0.26), in addition to a mixture of sitosterol and stigmasterol (100 mg), lupeol (90 mg) and lupeol acetate (12 mg), which have been identified from analyzes of their NMR spectra and comparison with literature data [8], [9]. Copies of the original spectra are obtainable from the author of correspondence.

## References

- Barroso G. Sicantatica de Angiospermas do Brasil.; Vol. 3 Vicosa: Universidade Federal de Vicosa, 1991: 124


