# 10.1002@ptr.1249.pdf

## Page 1



# Antioxidant Flavan-3-ols and Flavonol Glycosides from _Maytenus aquifolium_

Joaquim Corsino, Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva, Maria Valnice Boldrin Zanoni, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Suzelei Castro Franca, Ana Maria S. Pereira

# Abstract

TLC autographic assay revealed, in the EtoAc extract obtained from leaves and root bark of _Maytenus aquifolium_ (Celastracaee), the presence of five compounds exhibiting antioxidant properties towards _b_-carotene. They were isolated and identified as epigallocatechin(1), (+) ouratea-catechin (2), proanthocyanidin (3), kaempferol 3-_O-a_-L-mannopyranosyl (1~6)-_O-_b_-D-glucopyranosyl (1~3)-_O-a_-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1~2)-_O-b_-D-glucopyranosyl (4) and quercetin 3-_O-a_-L-rhamnopyranosyl (1~6)-_O-_b_-D-glucopyranosyl (1~3)-_O-a_-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1~2)]-_O-b_-D-glucopyranosyl (5). The isolates were investigated for their redox properties using cyclic voltammetry and for their radical scavenging abilities through spectrophotometric assay on the reduction of 2,2-diphenyl-propyl hydrazyl (DPPH). These results were correlated to the inhibition of _b_-carotene bleaching on TLC autographic assay and to structural features of the flavonoids. Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

## INTRODUCTION

In the course of our systematic studies on the chemistry of _Maytenus_ species, we have investigated _Maytenus aquifolium_ Martins (Celastracaee), a tree widely distributed in Cerrado region of Brazil. The infusion of _M. aquifolium_ leaves is one of the most popular antiulcer traditional drugs in Brazil (Carlini, 1988) and its effectiveness has been proved in ethanol and/or indomethacin-induced gastric lesion models (Bersani-Amado _et al._, 2000; Vilegas _et al._, 1999). Our previous studies on _M. aquifolium_ were carried out on its leaves and root barks and showed the presence of sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids, quinomenthide and friedelane triterpenes (Corsino _et al._, 1998a; 1998b; 2000). On the other hand, nothing has been reported on the antioxidant properties of the constituents of _M. aquifolium_.

TLC analysis using _b_-carotene as a spray reagent (Pratt and Miller, 1984) revealed the presence of antioxidant compounds in the MeOH extract of the leaves and root bark of _M. aquifolium_. Their isolation and identification as catechins and flavonol glycosides were subsequently undertaken. Flavonoids are acknowledged as having interesting medicinal properties as anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, antiviral and antitumor activities and are by far the most comprehensively investigated natural products when considering anti-oxidative properties. They are widely distributed in food and could hence play a role in the defense of the organism against oxidative stress (Gordon, 1996; Pietta, 2000). Reactivity of flavonoids has been studied under many experimental conditions and towards several free radicals. These investigations have demonstrated that the antioxidant capacity of flavonoids is mainly due to radical scavenging properties (Cotelle _et al._, 1996; Nanjo _et al._, 1996). In addition, the antioxidant activity of a compound depends ultimately on its ease of oxidation and, for a variety of natural or synthetic compounds, good correlations have been observed between antioxidant activities and low oxidation potentials (Born _et al._, 1996; Chevion _et al._, 2000). The present work deals with the isolation and identification of flavonoids from _M. aquifolium_, which have inhibited the bleaching of _b_-carotene on TLC plates, and the evaluation of parameters related to the antioxidant activity by separately measuring their oxidation potentials through cyclic voltammetry and the free radical scavenging ability towards DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl).

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### General experimental procedures.

Silica gel (Merck, 230-400 and 70-230 Mesh), Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia) and polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) were used for column chromatography unless otherwise stated and solvents were redistilled prior to use. NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker AC-200 or Varian INOVA 500 spectrometers at 200 or 500 MHz, respectively, for 1H NMR, and at 50 or 125 MHz, respectively, for 13C NMR, with TMS as internal standard and DMSO-_d_s or MeOH-_d_s as solvent. ES-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. IR and UV spectra were

## Page 2

obtained on Nicolet and Lambda 14P Perkin Elmer spectrophotometers, respectively.

**Plant Material.** Leaves and root bark of _Maytenus aquifolium_ Martius were collected from a private culture in Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo and identified by Dr Rita Maria de Carvalho. A voucher specimen (number HPM0268) is deposited in the Herbarium of the University of Ribeirao Preto (UNAERP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.

**Extraction and isolation.** Dried and powdered leaves of _M. aquifolium_ (4.5 kg) were extracted with ethanol. The resulting EtOH extract was filtered and concentrated _in vacuum_ to afford a green gum (896.7 g). The EtOHac soluble part of the EtOH extract (5.3 g) was applied to a Sephadex LH-20 column (300.0 g), eluted with MeOH to give 30 fractions. Fraction 13 (0.234 g) was applied to a silica gel column (300.0 g) and eluted with CHCl3/MeOH gradient to give 10 fractions. Fractions 7 and 17 were identified as compounds **2** (0.089 g) and **3** (0.139 g), respectively. The methanol insoluble part of the EtOH extract (2.0 g) was submitted to Sephadex LH 20 column (100.0 g) eluted with MeOH to give 35 fractions. Fraction 10 was applied to a polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) column (6.0 g) eluted with MeOH to afford 15 fractions, yielding **4** (0.093 g) and **5** (0.034 g) as pure compounds. The dried and powdered root bark of _Maytenus aquifolium_ (925.2 g) was extracted with EtOH and concentrated to give a brown gum (17.4 g). The EtOHac soluble part of this extract (2.2 g) was applied to a Sephadex LH-20 column (100.0 g) and eluted with MeOH to give 30 fractions. Fraction 14 was identified as compound **1** (0.017 g).

**Bleaching experiments on b-carotene.** After developing and drying, TLC plates were sprayed with a 0.02% solution of b-carotene (Aldrich) in CH3Cl3. Plates were placed under natural light until discoloration of background. The remaining yellow spots indicated the presence of antioxidant substances (Pratt and Miller, 1984).

**Spectrophotometric assay on the reduction of 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical.** Reaction mixtures containing test samples (dissolved in MeOH) at several concentrations and 0.004% DPPH methanolic solutions were incubated at 25 degC for 30 min. Absorbanes of the resulting solutions were measured using a Milton Roy 20D spectrophotometer at 517 nm and the percent inhibition was determined by comparison with a MeOH treated control group (Cuendet _et al._, 1997).

**Electrochemical assay.** The cyclic voltammograms were carried out with a Polarecord E-506 (Metrohm) potentiostat. A three electrode system (663 VA, Metrohm) with a working electrode of glassy carbon (GC), a Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a carbon auxiliary electrode was used. DMF (Merck) was used as solvent and tetra-_n_-butyl ammonium tetrafluorate (Merck), as the supporting electrolyte. Rutin (Aldrich) was used as reference compound for its well known electron-reductive properties (Van Acker _et al._, 1996; Peyrat-Maillard _et al._, 2000). The working electrode was polished with aluminium oxide 0.3 u (Buehler) and special polishing cloth (Buehler) prior to each measurement, because formation of a polymeric film inactivated the electrode after each scan. The electrode was then washed thoroughly with water, dried and cycled several times in the range - 1.6 to + 0.6 V in order to reassure the absence of voltammetric signal due to the supporting electrolyte. Each compound was dissolved to concentrations of 10-20 mM in DMF and added to a 15 mL aliquot of the supporting electrolyte. The solutions were then deoxygenated with nitrogen for 10 min and the cyclic voltammograms were carried out at scan rates of 50, 100 or 200 mV/s.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Dried leaves and root barks were separately powdered and extracted with ethanol. TLC analysis of the crude extract using b-carotene solution as spray reagent (Pratt and Miller, 1984) revealed the presence of antioxidant compounds. Chromatographic fractionation of this extract guided by the antioxidant assay with b-carotene afforded flavon-3-ols **1-3** and flavonol gycosides **4** and **5** (Fig. 1). Their identification was based on spectrometric data, mainly MS, uni and bidimensional NMR techniques as well as comparison with literature data (Vilegas _et al._, 1999; Agrawal and Bansen, 1989). Specific information on the identity of sugar moieties, including stereochemical aspects, and their position of linkage to the aglycone and to other sugar units followed from extensive analyses of PND and DEPT 135degC NMR, HMBC spectra as well as from analyses of coupling constants of the another hydrogen signals on the 1H NMR spectra of compounds **4** and **5**.

Antioxidative properties of flavonoids **1-5** were evaluated against b-carotene (Pratt and Miller, 1984). Compounds **1-3** and **5** (10 mg) appeared as yellow spots against the TLC plate white background whereas compound **4** (10 mg) appeared as a pale-yellow spot owing to its weaker antioxidant activity. The antioxidant activity of flavonoids is due to the presence of structural features as _ortho_-dihydroxy groups (usually on B ring), a,b-unsaturated carbonyl moiety and a- and/or b-hydroxyketone groups, which are responsible for chelating properties or enhancement of the radical stabilization after the initial oxidation steps (Bors _et al._, 1990). The lack of a catechol moiety on B ring and a free hydroxy group at C-3 in flavonoid **4** may account for its low ability to protect b-carotene from bleaching and for the higher oxidation potential observed on its cyclic voltammogram when compared to compound **5** (Table 1). These structural features should also be predictive of the poor radical scavenging properties of flavonol **4**, when compared to flavon-3-ols **1-3** and to

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} Compound & E\({}_{\text{rev}}\) \\
**1** & +0.76 \\
**2** & +0.82 \\
**3** & +0.80 \\
**4** & +0.49 \\
**5** & +0.30 \\ Rutin & +0.31 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Oxidation potential from cyclic voltammograms for flavonoids 1-5 and reference compounds rutin and BHT in DMF

## Page 3

the potent radical scavenging quercetin derivative **5** (Fig. 2).

Catechins **1** and **2** and proanthocyanidin **3** exhibited comparable oxidation potentials owing to the catechol moiety (**2** and **3**) or the 4'-methylpyrogallol group (**1**), which are believed to be the major electrochemically active groups in these compounds. The absence of an a,b-unsaturated carbonyl moiety conjugated to the B ring accounts for their higher oxidation potential when compared to compounds **4** and **5**. The presence of a 4-oxo function on flavonoid **4** gave rise to a b-hydroxy ketone group which probably enhances the ease of flavonoid oxidation, resulting in the oxidation peak at + 0.48 V on its cyclic voltammogram. These structural features, in addition to the catechol moiety on the B ring of flavonoid **5**, conferred the highest stabilization ability for this quercetin derivative, resulting in the lowest oxidation potential (+ 0.30V) among flavonoids **1-5**.

The association of antioxidant and antiulcer activities evidencing gastroprotective effect of antioxidants after stressor-induced oxidative damage on gastric mucosa has been demonstrated by several means: through induction of anti-lipoperoxidase processes, enhancement of free-radical scavenging and antioxidant enzymes (e.g. glutathione peroxidase: GSH-Px) activity and/or reduction of the main sources of oxygen radicals in such systems, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and xanthine oxidase (XOD) (Osakabe _et al._, 1998; La Casa _et al._, 2000).

Antioxidant-rich fractions (e.g. polyphenols) from plant extracts have been extensively used in experimental models to prove their inhibitory effect on induced ulceration. (Osakabe _et al._, 1998; Vilegas _et al._, 1999). Pure compounds have also been submitted to antiulcer activity evaluation. The protective effect of trutin, a widespread flavonoid glycoside, against ethanol-induced gastric lesions as well as the inhibition of gastric H', K'-ATPase by catechins have already been assessed (Murakami _et al._, 1992; La Casa _et al._, 2000). The quantification of flavonoids in _M. aquifolium_ has been recently performed and showed that flavonoids are the major compounds, representing ca 7.6% of the dry EtOH extract (Leite _et al._, 2001). The presence of significant amounts of antioxidant hydrosoluble flavonoids in the leaves of _Maytenus aquifolium_ may therefore consist evidence for the efficiency of its infusion as an antinulcer agent and legitimate its ethnopharmacological use.

## References

- This work was funded by grants of the State of Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biota-FAPESP
- The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br); Grants _missing_ 98/05074-0 and _missing_ 97/10184-7 awarded to VSB and MF, respectively.

Figure 1: Flavonoids from _Maytenus aquifolium_.

Figure 2: Radical scavenging properties of flavonoids **1–5** and standard compound trutin.



## Page 4



## References

* [1] Agrawal PK, Bansal MC. 1989. _Carbon-13 NMR of Flavonoids_. Elsevier: Amsterdam.
* [2] Bersani-Amado CA, Massoa LB, Baggio SR, _et al._ 2000. Antiulcer Effectiveness of _Maytenus aquifolium_ Spray Dried Extract. _Phytochrome Res_**14**: 543-545.
* [3] Born M, Carrupt P-A, Zini R, _et al._ 1996. Electrochemical Behaviour and Antioxidant Activity of Some Natural Polyphenols. _Helv Chim Acta_**39**: 1147-1158.
* [4] Bors W, Heller W, Michel C, Saran M. 1990. Flavonoids as Antioxidants: Determination of Radical-Scavenging Efficiencies. _Methods Enzymol_**186**: 334-355.
* [5] Carini EA. 1988. _Scutos de Acqb Anti-ulcera Gastrica de Plantas Brasileiras:_ Maytenus elicifolia (_Espinheira Santa) e outras.__CEME/AFE_: Brasilia.
* [6] Chevin G, Roberts MA, Chevion M. 2000. The Use of Cyclic Voltammetry for the Evaluation of Antioxidant Capacity. _Free Rad Biol Med_**28**: 860-870.
* [7] Coving J, Alcica AC, Ribeiro ML, _et al._ 1998a. Quantitative Determination of Maytenin and 22_b_-Hydroxymatytenin in callus of _Maytenus aquifolium_. _Phytochem Analysis_**9**: 245-247.
* [8] Corsino J, Bolzani VS, Pereira AMS, _et al._ 1998b. Further Sesquiterpene Pyridine Alkaloids from _Maytenus aquifolium_. _Phytochemistry_**92**: 21813-2183.
* [9] Corsino J, Carvalho PRF, Kato MJ, _et al._ 2000. Biosynthesis of Friedelane and quinonamethaftereptools is compartmentalized in _Maytenus aquifium and Salacia campestris. Phytochemistry_**55**: 741-748.
* [10] Cotelle N, Bernier JL, Cateau JD, _et al._ 1996. Antioxidant Properties of Hydroxym-flavones. _Free Rad Biol Med_**20**: 35-43.
* [11] Cuendet M, Hostettmann K, Potterat O, Dytminko W. 1997. Iridoid glucosides with free radical scavenging properties from _Fagrase blume).__Helv Chim Acta_**30**: 1144-1152.
* [12] Gordon MH. 1996. Dietary Antioxidants in Disease Prevention. _Nat Prod Reports_**13**: 265-273.
* [13] La Casa C, Villegas I, Alarcon de la Lastra C, _et al._ 2000. Evidence for Protective and Antioxidant Properties of Rutin, a Natural Flavone, Against Ethanol Induced Gastric Lesions. _J Ethopharmacmod_**71**: 45-53.
* [14] Leite JPV, Rastelli L, Romussi G, _et al._ 2001. Isolation and HPLC Quantitative Analysis of Flavonoid Glycosides from Brazilian Beverages (_Maytenus elicifolia_ and _M. aquifolium_). _J Agric Food Chem_**49**: 3796-3801.
* [15] Murakami S, Muramatsu M, Otomo S. 1992. Gastric H', K' -ATPase Inhibition by Catechins. _J Pharm Pharmacol_**44**: 926-928.
* [16] Nanio F, Goto K, Seto R, _et al._ 1996. Scavenging Effects of Tea Catechins and their Derivatives on 1,1-Diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl Radical. _Free Rad Biol Med_**21**: 895-902.
* [17] Osakabe N, Sanbonyi C, Yamagishi M, _et al._ 1998. Effects of Polyphenol Substances Derived from _Theobroma cacao_ on Gastric Mucosal lesion Induced by Ethanol. _Biosc Biotech Biochem_**62**: 1535-1538.
* [18] Peyrat-Maillard MN, Bonnely S, Berset C. 2000. Determination of the antioxidant activity of phenolic compounds by colorimetric detection. _Talanta_**51**: 709-716.
* [19] Pietta P. 2000. Flavonoids as Antioxidants. _J Nat Prod_**63**: 1035-1042.
* [20] Pratt DE, Miller EE. 1984. A Flavonoid Antioxidant in Spanish Peanuts (_Arachia hypogea_). _J Am Oil Chem Soc_**61**: 1064-1067.
* [21] Van Acker SABE, Van Den Berg DJ, Tromp MNJL, _et al._ 1996. Structural aspects of antioxidant activity of flavonoids. _Free Rad Biol Med_**20**: 331-342.
* [22] Viegas W, Sanonymiya M, Rastrelli L, Pizza C. 1999. Isolation and Structure Elucidation of Two New Flavonoid Glycosides from the Infusion of _Maytenus aquifolium_ Leaves. _Evaluation of the Antiulcer Activity of the Infusion. _J Agr Food Chem_**47**: 403-406.



