# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2004.03.039.pdf

## Page 1



# Antioxidant phenolic and quinonemethide triterpenes from _Cheiloclinium cognatum_

Alex Haroldo Jeller

maysaf@iq.unesp.br

Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva

Luciano Morais Liao

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Maysa Furlan

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Matos Grosso do Sul, CP 351, 79804-970 Dourados, MS, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, Campus de Aranquara, 14801-900 Aranquara, SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Goias, CP 131, 74001-970 Goiania, GO, Brazil

22 October 2003; received in revised form 5 March 2004

###### Abstract

The triterpenes, 228-hydroxypristimerin and cognatine, were isolated together with the known compounds pristimerin, maytenin, 202-hydroxymarytenin, 228-hydroxymarytenin, netzahualcoyol, netzahualcoyondiol and netzahualcoyone from root bark of _Cheloclinium cognatum_. The structures of the isolated compounds were elucidated by interpretation of their spectral data, including gHMQC and gHMBC experiments.The isolates were investigated for their radical scavenging abilities through a spectrophotometric assay involving reduction of 2,2-diphenyl-picryl hydrazyl (DPPH).

Celeloclinium cognatum; Hippocrateaceae; Quinonemethide triterpenes; Phenolic triterpene; Antioxidant activity 0031-9422/$ - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

## 1 Introduction

The Celastraceae and Hippocrateaceae families are rich sources of quinonemethide triterpenes (Bruning and Wagner, 1978; Gunatilaka, 1996), and these compounds have a variety of biological activities such as antitumor (Bhatnagar et al., 1979; Goncalves de Lima et al., 1971), antimicrobial (Ferreira de Santana et al., 1971); antibiotic (Goncalves de Lima et al., 1969; Gonzalez et al., 1977); cytotoxic (Setzer et al., 1998) and antimalarial (Pavanand et al., 1989; Figueiredo et al., 1998) properties. Systematic studies on Celastraceae and Hippocrateaceae plant species (Corsino et al., 1998a,b,c, 2000, 2003; Buffa Filho et al., 2002) have been concerned with biosynthesis of quinonemethide triterpenes, the main secondary metabolites in this taxon. The biosynthetic study dealing on _Maytenus aquifolium_ (Celastraceae) and _Salacia campestris_ (Hippocrateaceae) indicated that friedelane triterpenes are putative precursors of quinonemethide triterpenes, which are biosynthesized in the leaves and translocated to the root bark, where these compounds would be transformed into quinone methide triterpenes (Corsino et al., 2000). These findings have led us to investigate other species of Celastraceae and Hippocrateaceae. _Cheiloclinium cognatum_ (Miers) A.C. Sm. (Hippocrateaceae) a tree widely distributed in the Cerrado region of Brazil, was selected to investigate the oxidative transformation on the E ring of the quinonemethide triterpenes. With this objective, we carried out a chemical study on this plant species, which led to the isolation of two new triterpenes, 228-hydroxypristimerin (**1**) and cognatine (**2**), besides seven known quinonemethide triterpenes; pristimerin (**3**), maytenin (**4**), 228-hydroxymarytenin (**5**), 202-hydroxymethyl-netazahualcoyonol (**6**), netzahualcoyondiol (**8**) and netzahualcoyone (**9**). The free radical scavenging activities of the isolates have been evaluated through a spectro-photometric assay using the stable free radical 2,2-diphenyl-picryl hydrazyl(DPPH).



## Page 2



## 2. Results and discussion

A CH2Cl2 soluble fraction obtained from the ethanolic extract of the root bark _C. cognatum_ was subjected to silica gel column chromatography. The fractions obtained were further purified by preparative TLC and/or HPLC, affording compounds **1-9**.

22b-Hydroxypristimerin (**1**), obtained as a red amorphous solid, was shown to have the molecular formula C30H40O5 by analysis of its ESI/MS spectrum, elemental analysis and 13C NMR spectral data. The IR spectrum exhibited absorption bands at 3450 cm-1 (hydroxyl group) and 1724 and 1645 cm-1 (carbonyl groups). The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** revealed the presence of six methyl singlets at \(d\) 2.13, 1.38, 1.22, 1.15, 0.99 and 0.41, attributed to H3-23, H3-25, H3-26, H3-30, H3-28 and H3-27, respectively, (Table 1). The quinon-cmethodie moiety was characterized by a doublet at \(d\) 6.26 (1H, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz), a singlet at \(d\) 6.41 (1H) and a doublet at \(d\) 6.94 (1H, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz) attributed to H-7, H-1 and H-6, respectively. The singlet at \(d\) 2.13, characteristic of a methyl group attached to a _sp_2 carbon (H3-23), corroborated the presence of a quinonemethide system. Further oxygenated functional groups were assumed to be hydroxyl and ester on the basis of NMR spectral analysis. The 13C NMR, gHHBC and gHMQC spectra (Table 2) showed the presence of 30 carbons in **1**. In the 13C NMR spectrum two carbonyl carbon signals (_d_ 178.2 and \(d\) 178.3) attributed to C-29 and C-2, respectively, six methyl carbons (_d_ 38.1, 32.2, 24.0, 21.6, 19.0 and 10.1), six methylene carbons (_d_ 38.1, 36.1, 33.5, 30.8, 29.5 and 28.2), four methine carbons (_d_ 134.0, 119.5, 118.0 and 46.1), 10 quaternary carbons (_d_ 169.7, 164.6, 146.0, 127.3, 117.2, 44.5, 42.6, 42.4, 39.2 and 38.2), one methoxyl carbon (_d_ 51.6) and one hydroxy-methine carbon (_d_ 67.9) were observed. The assignments were based on gHMQC and gHHBC spectra and by comparison with published data on pristimerin (Gunatilaka, 1989, 1996). The correlations observed in the gHMBC spectrum from the singlet at \(d\) 0.99 (H3-28) to the hydroxymethine carbon at \(d\) 67.9 (Fig. 1) and the signals at \(d\) 36.1 (C-16), 38.1 (C-17) and 46.1 (C-18), confirmed the attachment of the hydroxyl group at C-22. The relative stereochemistry of H-22 was deduced by the coupling constant values (_d_ 4.02, \(J_{22{\rm as/21ax}}\) = 11.0 Hz and \(J_{22{\rm as/21eq}}\) = 4.0 Hz), which corroborated the _equatorial_ orientation of the hydroxyl group. The ester group was confirmed by a singlet at \(d\) 3.50 (3H) attributed to a methoxyl portion of the ester group at C-29, which was confirmed by means of correlation of the methyl group at \(d\) 1.15 (C-30) with the carbonyl carbon of the ester group at \(d\) 178.2 (C-29) observed in the gHMBC spectrum (Fig. 1). The structure of **1** was determined as 22b-hydroxypristimerin.

Cognatine (**2**), isolated as a pale yellow amorphous solid, was shown to have the molecular formula C31H38O7 by means of analysis of ESI/MS data, elemental analysis and 13C NMR spectral data. The IR spectrum showed absorption bands for hydroxyl group at 3438 cm-1 and carbonyl groups at 1718 and 1643 cm-1. Its 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed the presence of two singlets at \(d\) 6.85 (1H), attributed to H-1 and at \(d\) 6.00 (1H) assigned to H-7. Also, two methoxyl groups signals at \(d\) 3.73 and 3.74 (3H, each) were observed, which were characterized as methoxyl groups attached to C-3 and belonging to the ester group at C

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Position & **1** & **2** \\
1 & 6.41 (_s_) & 6.85 (_s_) \\
6 & 6.94 (_d_, \(J\), = 6, 5 Hz) & – \\
7 & 6

## Page 3

29, respectively, as evidenced by gHMBC experiments (Fig. 2). Other singlets integrating for 3H each were observed at \(\delta\) 2.67, assigned to a methyl group on aromatic ring (H\({}_{3}\)-23), at \(\delta\) 1.72 assigned to one methyl group on double bond (C-26) and at \(\delta\) 1.38, 1.33, 0.95 and 0.90, corresponding to tertiary methyl groups (H\({}_{3}\)-28, H\({}_{3}\)-25, H\({}_{3}\)-30 and H\({}_{3}\)-27, respectively).

The analysis of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR (Table 2), gHMQC and gHMBC spectral data indicated the presence of three carbonyl carbons at \(\delta\) 214.0, 185.8 and 175.2 attributed to C-22, C-6 and C-29, respectively, six methyl groups at \(\delta\) 27.6, 23.9, 22.5, 21.7, 15.1 and 13.7, attributed to C-25, C-27, C-28, C-26, C-23 and C-30, respectively, two vinylic carbons at \(\delta\) 134.7 and 125.9, two vinylic carbons conjugated to carbonyl groups at \(\delta\) 160.1 and 129.3, four methylene carbons at \(\delta\) 38.0, 37.1, 35.8 and 34.2, one methine carbon at \(\delta\) 46.2, five quaternary aromatic carbons at \(\delta\) 151.7, 151.2, 144.7, 134.0 and 122.4. The remaining signal was an unsubstituted aromatic carbon (\(\delta\) 110.1), which was assigned to C-1. Additionally, sig

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline Position & **1** & **2** & **7** & **8** & **9** \\ \hline
1 & 119.5 \(d\) & 110.1 \(d\) & 119.4 \(d\) & 120.0 \(d\) & 120.1

## Page 4

nals for four quaternary carbons (\(\delta\) 42.2, 40.7, 48.8 and 50.3), two \(sp^{3}\) carbons belonging to methoxyl groups (\(\delta\) 52.7 and 61.7) and one hydroxymethine carbon at \(\delta\) 74.3 were also observed.

The gHMBC data (Fig. 2) showed the correlation of the singlet at \(\delta\) 6.85 (H-I) to the carbons at \(\delta\) 151.7 (C-2), \(\delta\) 144.7 (C-3), \(\delta\) 122.4 (C-5) and \(\delta\) 42.2 (C-9) and the singlet at \(\delta\) 6.00 (H-7) to the carbons at \(\delta\) 134.7 (C-4), \(\delta\) 122.4 (C-5) and \(\delta\) 42.2 (C-9) corroborating unambiguously the assignments of H-I and H-7. Besides, the signal at \(\delta\) 6.85 (1H, H-I) was correlated to \(\delta\) 110.1 (C-I) and the signal at \(\delta\) 6.00 (1H, H-7) showed correlation to \(\delta\) 129.3 (C-7) in the HMQC spectrum. The correlation between the methoxy signal at \(\delta\) 3.73 and the carbon signal at \(\delta\) 144.7 confirmed the position of the methoxyl group at C-3. Also, the gHMBC spectrum showed correlations from the signal at \(\delta\) 1.22 (H\({}_{3}\)-26) to signals at \(\delta\) 125.9 and \(\delta\) 134.7, assigned to carbons C-14 and C-15, respectively. The signal at \(\delta\) 1.38 (H\({}_{3}\)-28) showed correlations with the carbon signal at \(\delta\) 38.0 (C-16) and also with the carbonyl signal at \(\delta\) 214.0, which confirmed the position of one carbonyl group at C-22. An additional correlation from the methyl signal at \(\delta\) 1.72 (H\({}_{3}\)-26) to the carbon at \(\delta\) 38.0 (C-16) corroborated the attribution of the other carbonyl at C-6, with the chemical shift at \(\delta\) 185.6 being characteristic of an \(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated carbonyl and C-16, a methylenic carbon. The remaining gHMBC correlations from H\({}_{3}\)-30 (\(\delta\) 0.95) to C-19 (\(\delta\) 34.2) and the hydroxymethine carbon at C-21 (\(\delta\) 74.3), besides correlation of methoxyl hydrogens at \(\delta\) 3.74 with the carbonyl signal at C-29 (\(\delta\) 175.2), established the proposed structure **2** for cognate.

The known compounds pristimerin **(3)**, maytenin **(4)**, 22\(\beta\)-hydroxymaytenin **(5)** and 20\(\alpha\)-hydroxymaytenin **(6)** were identified by comparison with published data (Gunatilaka, 1989; Gunatilaka, 1996; Dhanabalasingham et al., 1996; Furlan et al., 1990). Compounds **7-9** had been previously isolated from _Orthosphenia mexicana_ (Gonzalez et al., 1983), but a number of inconsistencies were found regarding the assignments of published \({}^{13}\)C NMR data. The analysis of 2D NMR spectra allowed accurate assignment of \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals mostly based on gHMQC and gHMBC experiments.

The spectrophotometric assay using DPPH indicated a prominent free radical scavenging activity for some of the isolated quinonemethide triterpenes (Fig. 3). The stable free radical DPPH has an absorption maximum at 517 nm, which decreases upon reduction through reaction with an antioxidant compound. The free radical scavenging activity of quinonemethide triterpenes is mostly due to the \(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated carbonyl moiety with extended conjugation through ring B, e.g. in compounds **1** and **3-6** or B-D, e.g. in compounds **7-9**. These features stabilize the quinonemethide free radical promptly formed after loss of one radical hydrogen, donated to the DPPH. The more extended conjugations of triterpenes **7-9** account for their higher free radical scavenging abilities (ca. 45% inhibition at 60 \(\mu\)M) when compared to compounds **1-6** (less than 30% inhibition at 60 \(\mu\)M). The phenolic triterpene **2** exhibited the lowest activity (18% at 60 \(\mu\)M) probably due to the lack of conjugation through rings B-D. The free radical scavenging ability of the quinonemethide triterpenes and a standard compound rutin (66% inhibition at 60 \(\mu\)M) are due to catechol moiety present in the B ring of rutin the C2-C3 double bond (van Acker et al., 1996). The synthetic antioxidant BHT (11% inhibition at 60 \(\mu\)M) exhibited the weakest antiradical activity as expected due to its slow reaction rate with DPPH (Bondet et al., 1997).

## Experimental

### Plant material

Root bars of _C. cognatum_ (Hippocrateaceae) were collected at Universidade Federal de Goias, Goiania, GO and identified by Dr Julio Antonio Lombardi (Departamento de Botanica do Institute de Ciencias Biologicas - Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, UFMG). A voucher specimen (No. 19797) is deposited at Herbarium of Institute de Ciencias Biologicas - UFG, Goias.

### Instrumentation and chromatography

Silica gel (Merck, 230-400 and 70-230 mesh) were used for CC unless otherwise stated and solvents were distilled prior to use. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian INOVA spectrometer at 500 and 125 MHz, respectively, using CDCl\({}_{3}\) as solvent and TMS as reference. HPLC separations were performed using a Shimadzu LC-10AS. Preparative HPLC separation were performed on a Varian PROSTAR, using a reversed phase column (Phenomenex-Luna C\({}_{18}\), 21.2 x 250 mm,

Fig. 3: Radical scavenging activity of compounds **1–9** and standards rutin and BHT.



## Page 5

10 \(\mu\)m), eluted with MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O (7:3, with 0.05\(\%\) H\({}_{3}\)PO\({}_{4}\)) detection at 420 nm. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer. ESI-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. Elemental analyses were performed on an Elemental Analyser 2400 CHN Perkin-Elmer.

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

Dried and powdered root barks of _C. cognatum_ (690.0 g) were extracted with EtOH. The resulting EtOH extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford a brown gum (210.6 g), which was submitted to liquid-liquid partitioning. The CH\({}_{2}\)C1\({}_{2}\) soluble part of the EtOH extract was concentrated in vacuo (25.5 g), submitted to a silica gel column (600 g, 70-230 mesh) eluted with a hexane/EtOAc gradient, yielding 41 fractions (A\({}_{1}\)-A\({}_{41}\)). Fraction A\({}_{9}\)-A\({}_{11}\) (1.48 g) was submitted to a flash silica gel CC (230-400 mesh), eluted with a hexane/EtOAc gradient resulting in 32 fractions (B\({}_{1}\)-B\({}_{41}\)). Fraction B\({}_{10}\)-B\({}_{14}\) (0.154 g) was submitted to prep. TLC [hexane:EtOAc (4:1)] yielding compound **3** (55 mg). Fraction B\({}_{18}\)-B\({}_{21}\) (0.085 g) was submitted to prep. TLC [hexane:EtOAc (4:1)] affording compound **4** (34 mg). Fraction A\({}_{16}\)-A\({}_{17}\) (3.55 g) was submitted to flash silica gel CC (70-230 mesh), eluted with hexane/EtOAc gradient, resulting in 46 fractions (C\({}_{1}\)-C\({}_{46}\)). Fraction C\({}_{19}\)-C\({}_{23}\) (0.221 g) was submitted to a reversed phase prep. HPLC [MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O (7:3), \(\lambda=420\) nm, 10 ml min\({}^{-1}\)] to afford compounds **1** (63 mg) and **8** (65 mg). Fraction A\({}_{22}\)-A\({}_{26}\) (2.46 g) was subjected to a flash silica gel CC eluted with hexane/EtOAc gradient, resulting in 77 fractions (D\({}_{1}\)-D\({}_{77}\)). Fraction D\({}_{23}\)-D\({}_{27}\) was submitted to prep. TLC [hexane:EtOAc (4:1), AcOH 0.05\(\%\)] affording compounds **5** (13 mg) and **6** (23 mg). Fraction D\({}_{17}\)-D\({}_{22}\) was submitted to prep. TLC [hexane:EtOAc Ac (4:1), AcOH 0.05\(\%\)], affording compounds **1** (63 mg) and further purified by reversed phase prep. HPLC [MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O (7:3), \(\lambda=420\) nm, 10 mL min\({}^{-1}\)] affording compounds **7** (18 mg) and **2** (4 mg).

### Radical scavenging activity on DPPH radical

Radical scavenging activity was assayed according to the Blois method (Blois, 1958). The free radical scavenging capacities of quinonemethide triterpenes and standard compounds rutin and BHT were evaluated based on their ability to reduce the free radical already assigned (DPPH). Each compound (1 mg) was solubilized in methanol (10 ml) to yield a stock solution. Several dilutions of each compound from 5 to 100 \(\mu\)M were then prepared in MeOH and to each sample a solution of DPPH (0.004\(\%\)) was added. Absorbance at 517 nm was determined after 30 min on a Milton Roy 20D spectrophotometer and the percentage of activity was calculated (see Fig. 3).

### 22b-Hydroxypristimerin (1)

Amorphous solid. UV \(\lambda^{\rm MeOH}\): nm 420 (2670); IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (KBr): 3450; 2929; 1724; 1645; 1598, 1222; 1089, 1081 cm\({}^{-1}\); ESI/MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 481 [M + 1] (100\(\%\)); for \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data see Tables 1 and 2; Elemental analysis: Found: C, 74.97; H, 8.39; O, 16.65. C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{40}\)O\({}_{5}\) requires C, 74.97; H, 8.39; O, 16.64.

### Cognatine (2)

Amorphous solid. UV \(\lambda^{\rm MeOH}\) nm: 320 (2880); IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (KBr): 3438; 2927; 1718; 1643; 1579, 1448, 1218; 1120, 1018 cm\({}^{-1}\); ESI/MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 523 [M + 1] (100\(\%\)); for \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data see Tables 1 and 2; Elemental analysis: Found: C, 71.28; H, 7.27, O, 21.46. C\({}_{31}\)H\({}_{38}\)O\({}_{7}\) requires C, 71.27; H, 7.28; O, 21.46.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Grants provided by FAPESP (Proc. 97/10184-7) M.F. and V.S.B. are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships. A.H.J. thanks FAPESP for providing the scholarship.

## References

* (1979) Bhatnagar, S.S., Divekar, P.V., Dutta, N.L., 1979. Chemical Abstracts 45, 5885d.
* (1958) Blois, M.S., 1958. Antioxidant determinations by the use of a stable free radical. Nature 181, 1199-1200.
* (1997) Bondet, V., BrandWilliams, W., Berset, C., 1997. Kinetics and mechanisms of antioxidant activity using the DPPH free radical method. Lebensmittel Wissenschaften und Technologie 30, 609-615.
* (1978) Bruning, R., Wagner, H., 1978. Ubersicht uber die Celastraceen-Inhatsstoffe: Chemie, chemotaxonomie, biosynthese, pharmakologie. Phytochemistry 17, 1821-1858.
* (2002) Buffa Filho, W., Corsino, J., Bolzani, V.S., Furlan, M., Pereira, A.M.S., Franca, S.C., 2002. Quantitative determination of cytotoxic friedo-_oro-_olganate derivatives from five morphological types of _Myterans lichen/ifolia_ (Celastracee) by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. Phytochemical Analysis 13, 75-78.
* (1988) Corsino, J., Bolzani, V.S., Pereira, A.S., Franca, S.C., Furlan, M., 1998a. Bioactive sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids from _Maytenus aquifolium_. Phytochemistry 48, 137-140.
* (1989) Corsino, J., Bolzani, V.S., Pereira, A.M.S., Franca, S.C., Furlan, M., 1998b. Further sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids from _Maytenus aquifolium_. Phytochemistry 49, 2181-2183.
* (1986) Corsino, J., Alcico, A.C., Ribeiro, M.L., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Duarte, I.B., Furlan, M., 1998c. Quantitative determination of myactinin and 22b-hydroxynstein in callus of _Maytenus aquifolium_ (Celastracee) by reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography. Phytochemical Analysis 9, 245-247.
* (2000) Corsino, J., Carvalho, P.R.F., Kato, M.J., Latorre, L.R., Oliveira, O.M.M.F., Araujo, A.R., Bolzani, V.S., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Furlan, M., 2000. Biosynthesis of friedelane and quinonemethide triterpenoids is compartmentalized in _Maytenus aquifolium_ and _Salacia campstris_. Phytochemistry 55, 741-748.



## Page 6

* Corsino et al. (2003) Corsino, J., Silva, D.H.S., Zanoni, M.V.B., Bolzani, V.S., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Furlan, M., 2003. Antioxidant flavan-3-ols and flavonol glycosides from _Mayetems aquifolium_. Phytotherapy Research 17, 913-916.
* Dhanabalasingham et al. (1996) Dhanabalasingham, B., Karunaratne, V., Tezuka, Y., Kikuchi, T., Gunatilaka, A.A.L., 1996. Biogenetically important quinonemethides and other triterpenoid constituents of _Salacia reticulata_. Phytochemistry 42, 1377-1385.
* Ferreira de Santana et al. (1971) Ferreira de Santana, C., Cortias, C.T., Pinto, K. de V., Satiro, M.W., Satiro, A.L., Lacerda, A.L., Moreira, I.C., 1971. Primerias observacos sobre o emprego de matienina em pacientes canceros. Revista de Instituto de Antibiotes Recife 11, 37-49.
* Figueiredo et al. (1998) Figueiredo, J.N., Raz, B., Sequin, U., 1998. Novel quinone methides from _Salacia kraussii_ with in vitro antimalarial activity. Journal of Natural Products 61, 718-723.
* Furlan et al. (1990) Furlan, M., Alvaragna, M.A., Akisue, G., 1990. Triterpenoids and flavonoids from _Mayetems convinoides_. Revista Latinoamericana de Quimica 21 (2), 72-73.
* Gonzalez et al. (1977) Gonzalez, A.G., Darias, V., Boada, J., Alonso, G., 1977. Study of cytostatic activity of bieustering and related compounds. Planta Medica 32, 282-286.
* Gonzalez et al. (1983) Gonzalez, A.G., Fraga, B.M., Gonzalez, C.M., Ravelo, A.G., Ferro, E., Dominguez, X.A., Martinez, M.A., Fayos, J., Perales, A., Rodriguez, M.L., 1983. X-Ray analysis of metzahuacyone, a triterpene quinone from _Orthosphenia mexicana_. Tetrahedron Letters 24, 3033-3036.
* Goncalves de Lima et al. (1969) Goncalves de Lima, O., D'Albuquerque, I.L., Maciel, G.M., 1969. Substancias antimicrobianas de plantas superiores. Comunicacao XXIX. Primeiras observacoes sobre a atividade antimicrobiana de celastrol. Revista do Institute de Antibioticos (Recife) 9, 75-77.
* Goncalves de Lima et al. (1971) Goncalves de Lima, O., D'Albuquerque, I.L., De Barros Coelho, J.S., Martins, D.G., Lacerda, A.L., Maciel, G.M., 1971. Subsantancias antimicrobianas de plantas superiores. Comunicacao XXXVI. Sobre a presenca de matienina e pristemierina na parte cortical das raizes de _Mayetems liclofila_, procedente do Brasil Meridional. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 11, 35-38.
* Gunatilaka (1989) Gunatilaka, A.A.L., 1989. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR analysis of three quinone-methide triterpenoids. Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry 27, 803-807.
* Gunatilaka et al. (1996) Gunatilaka, A.A.L., Fernando, H.C., Kikuchi, T., 1996. Triterpenoid quinonemethides and related compounds (Celastroloids). Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products 67, 1-123.
* Pavanand et al. (1989) Pavanand, K., Webster, H.K., Yongvanchitt, K., Kunanake, A., Dechatinwongse, T., Nutakul, W., Bansiddhi, J., 1989. Schizontoroidal activity of _Celastra-ponticulus_ wild against _Plasmodium falciparum_ in vitro. Phytotherapy Research 3, 136-139.
* Setzer et al. (1998) Setzer, W.N., Setzer, M.C., Hopper, A.L., Moriarity, D.M., Lehrman, G.K., Niekamp, K.L., Morcomb, S.M., Bates, R.B., McClure, K.J., Stessman, C.C., Haber, W.A., 1998. The cytotoxic activity of a _Salacia_ Liana species from Monteverde, Costa Rica, is due to a high concentration of tingenona. Planta Medica 64, 583.
* van Acker et al. (1996) van Acker, S.A.B.E., van den Berg, D.J., Tromp, M.N.J.L., Griffioen, D.H., van Bennekom, W.P., van der Vigh, W.J.F., Bast, A., 1996. Structural aspects of antioxidant activity of flavonoids. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 20, 331-342.



