# 10.1016@j.phytol.2010.11.003.pdf

## Page 1

Dihydroisocoumarins produced by _Xylaria_ sp. and _Penicillium_ sp., endophytic fungi associated with _Piper aduncum_ and _Alibertia macrophylla_

Camila M. Oliveira, Luis O. Regasini, Geraldo H. Silva, Ludwig H. Pfenning, Maria C.M. Young, Roberto G.S. Berlininck, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Angela R. Araujo

# Abstract

The dihydroisocoumarin (3_R_AR_)-3.4-dihydro-4,6-dihydroxy-3-methyl-1-oxo-1H-isochromene-5-car-boxylic acid (**1**) was isolated from _Xylaria_ sp., a fungus associated with _Piper aduncum_ (Pieraceae). Additionally, two known compounds, (_R_)-7-hydroxymellein (**2**) and (_3_R_AR_)-4.7-dihydroxymellein (**3**), were isolated from _Penicillium_ sp. associated to _Alibertia macrophylla_ (Rubiaceae). The structures of all compounds were elucidated by analysis of spectroscopic data. The dihydrocoumarin derivatives **1**-3** showed antifungal and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitory activities _in vitro_.

## Introduction

Fungal endophytes comprise a wide range of fungi characterized by the ability to live for a certain period of their life-cycles internally and asymptomatically in plants (Wang et al., 2007). Such co-existence may confer adaptative advantages to the plant host, such as feeding deterrence, protection against insects and microbial pathogens (De Souza et al., 2004). Considering that chemical clues are usually involved in these biological interactions, natural products from endophytic fungi very often present a broad spectrum of biological activities (Zhang et al., 2006).

Isocoumarins are metabolites of limited distribution, which occur in bacteria, fungi and lichen (Kutschera et al., 2003). These compounds have also been detected in secretions of termites and ants (Engelmeier et al., 2004). Several biological activities have been reported for this class, including cytotoxic, antimicrobial, antialergized, aljcidal, gastroprotective, protease inhibitory, antifungal (Ozcan et al., 2007; Krohn et al., 1997; Guimaraes et al., 2008; Oliveira et al., 2009) as well as plant growth regulators (Kuramata et al., 2007).

The Brazilian cerrado trees are well known sources of bioactive secondary metabolites (Bolzani et al., 1991; Young et al., 1992; Silva et al., 2007, 2010). Among these, _A. macrophylla_ K. Schum (Rubiaceae) and _P. aduncum_ L. (Pieraceae) were chosen for a detailed microbiological investigation. These plants presented several endophytes, including _Penicillium_ and _Xylaria_ species, which were submitted to chemical and biological investigations.

Herein, we report the isolation and biological activities of one new dihydroisocoumarin, (3_R_AR_)-3.4-dihydro-4,6-dihydroxy-3-methyl-1-oxo-1H-isochromene-5-carboxylic acid (**1**) and two known dihydroisocoumarins, (_R_)-7-hydroxymellein (**2**) and (3_R_AR_)-4.7-dihydroxymellein (**3**). (3_R_AR_)-4.7-dihydroxymellein (**3**) (Fig. 1).

## Results and discussion

Compound **1** was isolated as yellow amorphous powder, and showed a positive reaction with ferric chloride suggesting the presence of a phenol functionality. The IR spectrum of **1** showed strong absorption bands due to phenolic hydroxyl and carboxyl groups (3474 cm-1) and a conjugated carbonyl group (1672 cm-1). The UV spectrum of **1** displayed absorptions (lmax) (log e) at 220 (4.28) and 314 (3.34), indicating the existence of oxy-aromatic systems, compatible with a dihydroisocoumarin structure (Pontius et al., 2008). Its elemental composition C11H10O6 with seven degrees of insaturation was deduced from its HRESIMs, which showed a deprotonated molecular ion ([M-H]) at m/22 370.0381 (caled for C11H9O6, 237.0399), consistent with its 1H and 13C NMR spectra. Extensive analysis of 1H-1H gCOSY, 1H-13C gHMQC, and 1H-13C

## Page 2

gHMBC NMR experiments enabled us to assign all \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C signals. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR, DEPT 90', and \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{13}\)C gHMQC indicated that compound **1** had one methyl, four methines, and six quaternary carbons, including two carbonyl groups at \(\delta\) 169.5 and \(\delta\) 167.1, assigned to a carboxyl and to a 8-lactone groups, respectively. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR and \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)Hg gCOSY spectra of **1** showed two ortho-coupled hydrogens at \(\delta\) 7.04 (H-8) and \(\delta\) 8.10 (H-9), suggesting the presence of a tetrasubstituted aromatic ring. The \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)Hg gCOSY spectrum indicated a spin system in **1** which included a methyl group at \(\delta\) 1.43 (H\({}_{3}\)C-10) coupled with an oxymentine hydrogen at \(\delta\) 4.72 (H-3), itself coupled with a methine hydrogen at \(\delta\) 5.47 (H-4). Therefore, the aliphatic portion of **1** was unambiguously established as a H\({}_{3}\)C-CH(0-)CH-OH chain. Long-range correlations observed in the gHMBC spectrum between H-7 (\(\delta\) 7.04) with C-6 (\(\delta\) 163.9), C-5 (\(\delta\) 108.7), and C-8a (\(\delta\) 120.0), between H-4 (\(\delta\) 5.47) with C-4a (\(\delta\) 144.8), C-5, C-8a and C-3 (\(\delta\) 78.2), as well as between H-8 (\(\delta\) 8.10) with C-6, C-1 (\(\delta\) 167.1) and C-4a enabled us to establish unequivocally the substitution pattern of the aromatic moiety of **1**. A logical deduction of the data collected would obviously lead to the structure **1**. Since H-3 and H-4 showed a coupling constant of 1.8 Hz, these protons had an axial-equatorial relationship. Thus, the relative stereochemistry of compound **1** was established as (3_R_*, 4_R_*). This relative configuration at C-3 and C-4 was very similar when compared with data of similar isochronames (Okuno et al., 1986; Aldridge et al., 1971). A comparison of the optical rotation of **1** ([**_a_**]\({}^{28}\) -60.3, \(c\) 0.034, MeOH) with the literature values reported for three of the four possible 4-hydroxymellein stereoisomers (Devys et al., 1980) indicated that (3_R_*,4_R_*)-4-hydroxymellein has both the signal and magnitude of optical rotation ([**_a_**]\({}_{0}\) -1.5) comparable to compound **1**. Therefore, the absolute configuration of **1** was assigned as (3_R_*,4_R_*) (Djoukeng et al., 2009). Hence, the structure of compound **1** was completely elucidated, and established as (3_R_*,4_R_*)-3.4-dihydro-4.6-dihydroxy-3-methyl-1-oxo-1H-isochromene-5-carboxylic acid.

In addition, two known dihydroisocoumarins were isolated from a _Penicillin_ sp. and identified as (_R_*)-7-hydroxymethylein (**2**) and (3_R_*,4_R_*)-4.7-dihydroxymellein (**3**) (Djoukeng et al., 2009). Compounds **2** and **3** were identified by analysis of spectroscopic data, as well as of optical rotation data, with literature values. Both **2** and **3** exhibited a rare 7.8-dihydroxy substitution. To date, related compounds have been isolated from plant and fungi sources, including _Azadifractha indica_, _Seporia nodorum_, _Cytospora euclypticola_, _Nodulisporum_ sp. and _Cephalosporium_ sp. (Devys et al., 1980; Siddiqui et al., 1988; Kokubun et al., 2003; Bi et al., 2006; Pontius et al., 2008). The cathecol moiety of **2** and **3** is probably formed after an additional oxidation at C-7, subsequently to the formation of the aromatic polyketide skeleton.



## Page 3

gel 230-400 mesh (Merck). IR spectra were obtained with PerkinElmer FTIR-1600 spectrophotometer, on KBr pellets. Optical rotations were measured with PerkinElmer polarimeter with sodium lamp operating at 589 nm at 28 degC.

### Plant material

Authenticated _A. macrophylla_ K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) and _P. aduncum_ L. (Pieraceae) were collected in "Estacao Ecologica Experimental de Mogi-Guacu, Fazenda Campininha", Mogi-Guacu, S3o Paulo, Brazil, in November 2003. The botanical identifications were assigned by Dr. Ines Cordeiro (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, Brazil), and a voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, Brazil (Voucher no. SP 370915 and Cordeiro PAO, respectively).

### Isolation and identification of the endophytes

Adult and healthy leaves of _P. aduncum_ and _A. macrophylla_ were selected and submitted to surface sterilization. Leaves were first washed with water and soap, then immersed in a 1% aqueous sodium hypochlorite solution for 5 min and in 70% aqueous EtOH for 1 min. A second washing with water and soap was performed and finally the leaves were immersed in sterile water for 10 min. The sterilized leaves were cut into 2 x 2 cm pieces and deposited on a Petri dish containing PDA (potato-dextrose-agar) and anthamicine sulfate (50 mg/mL), 3-4 pieces on each dish. The material of the two species was incubated at 25 degC for 10 days and the endophytes _Penicillium_ sp. and _Xylaria_ sp. were isolated by successive inoculation in Petri dishes from _Alibertia macrophyla_ and _P. aduncum_, respectively (Silva et al., 2006).

The fungus _Penicillium_ sp. was identified by Dr. Derlene Attili de Angelis (CPQBA-UNICAMP - Centro Pluridiscipliner et Pesquisas Quimicas, Biologicas e Agricolas, Campinas, Brazil) and deposited in the NuBBE collection under the number 05070032-C. The fungus _Xylaria_ sp. was identified by Prof. Dr. Ludwing H. Pfenning (Universidade Federal de Lavras, Departamento de Fitopatologia) and deposited in the NuBBE collection under the number PA-01.

### Growth of Xylaria sp. and extraction

The strain was inoculated in twenty Erlenmeyers (500 mL each) containing each one: 0.8 g of potato extract, 4.0 g dextrose (PDB) in 300 mL of sterilized H2O. The medium was autoclaved at 121 degC for 15 min. After cooling, the medium was inoculated with the endophyte and incubated at 25 degC on rotary shakers at 150 rpm, for 28 days. The mycelia biomass accumulated in the Erlenmeyers was separated from the aqueous medium by filtration, and the filtrate was subjected to a liquid-liquid partition with EtOAC (3 x 2 L). The EtOAc fraction was evaporated resulting in the crude EtOAc extract (4.0 g).

#### Extraction and isolation of compound 1

The crude EtOAc extract (4.0 g) was purified by column chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 gel, eluting with MeOH, to afford 08 fractions (F-1-F-8, 100 mL portions). Compound **1** (175.0 mg) was obtained from fractions F-6 to F-7 as a yellow amorphous powder.

### Growth of Penicillium sp. and growth medium extraction

The _Penicillium_ sp. strain was inoculated in nine Erlenmeyers (500 mL each), containing each one: 90 g of corn meal in 75 mL of sterilized H2O. The medium was autoclaved four times (four consecutive days) at 121 degC for 40 min. After cooling, the medium was inoculated with the endophyte and incubated at 25 degC in still mode during 21 days. At the end of the growth period, the solid cultures were ground and extracted with MeOH (6x 250 mL). The MeOH was evaporated, to give 15 g of the MeOH extract. The MeOH extract was dissolved in McN and then subjected to liquid-liquid partition with hexane. The McN fraction was evaporated to give 6.0 g of a McN-deffated extract.

#### Extraction and Isolation of compounds 2 and 3

The McN-deffated fraction obtained (6.0 g) was fractionated using a C18 reversed-phase CC, eluted with a gradient of MeOH in H2O (5-100% MeOH), to afford 16 fractions (Fri-Fri-Fri16). Fraction Fri-2 (218.0 mg) was further separated using RP-HPLC [l = 254 nm, 10.0 ml/ml, 8:2 H2O-McN (80 min)], to give compounds **2** (6.3 mg, _R_** = 40.3 min) and **3** (6.1 mg, _R_** = 30.0 min).

_(3_R_**,_**

## Page 4

see Table 2; HRESI-MS (negative ion): _m_/_z_ 209.0485 [M - H]- (caled for C10H10O5, 209.0459).

### Antifungal activity

_Cidasopporum cladosoprioides_ (Fresen) de Vries SPC 140 and C. _spherosperimum_ (Perzig) SPC 491 were used in the antifungal assay. Compounds **1**-**3** were applied on pre-coated Si-gel TLC plates using a solution (10 mL) containing 100.0, 50.0, 25.0, 10.0, 5.00 and 1.00 mg samples of pure compounds. After eluting with CHCl3:MeOH (85:15), the plates were sprayed with the fungi suspension (Rahalison et al., 1991). Nystatin was used as a positive control at 1.0 mg.

### Acetylcholinesterase inhibitory activity

Acetylcholinesterase (1000 U) was dissolved in 150 mL of 0.05 M Tris-hydrochloric acid buffer at pH 7.8. Bovine serum albumin (150 mg) was added to the solution in order to stabilize the enzyme during the biochemical assay. The stock solution was kept at 4 degC. TLC plates were eluted with an appropriate solvent (acetone or isopropanol) in order to clean the plates before drying at 30 degC. After elution of samples in CHCl3:MeOH (85:15), the TLC plates were dried at 30 degC for complete removal of solvent. The plates were then sprayed with enzyme stock solution and carefully dried at r.t. again. For incubation of the enzyme, the plate was deposited flat over plastic plugs in a covered plastic tank containing a small amount of H2O, in order to keep the humidity constant. The incubation of plates was performed at 37 degC for 20 min. For detection of the AChE inhibitory activity, solutions of 1-naphthyl acetate (250 mg) in EtOH (100 mL) and of Fast Blue B salt (400 mg) in distilled water (160 mL) were prepared immediately before use. After incubation of the TLC plate, 10 mL of the naphthyl acetate solution and 40 mL of the Fast Blue B salt solution were mixed and sprayed onto the plate to give a purple coloration after 1-2 min (if positive). Galantamine was employed as positive control 1.0 mg (Marston et al., 2002).

## References

- Aldridge, C.C., Galt, S., Giles, D., Turner, W.B., 1971. Metabolites of _Lasiodiophodia theobromane_. J. Chem. Soc. C 1623-1624.

- Bi, Y.-M., Bi, X.-B., Zhao, Q.-R., Fang, A., Chen, Y.-G., 2006. Dihydroisococcumarins from the fungus _Cepthosporium_ sp. A1031. Polish J. Chem. 80, 397-401.

- Bolzani, V.S., Trevisan, L.M.V., Young, M.M., 1991. Caffeic acid esters and triterpenes of _Allberria macrophyla_. Phytochemistry 30, 2089-2091.

- De Souza, A.Q.L., De Souza, A.Q.L., Filho, S.A., Pinheiro, M.L.B., Sarouis, M.L., Pereira, J.O., 2004. Attividade antimicrobiana de fungos endofitos isolados de plantas tokacs a amazonia: _Folicurease longiflora_ (Aub.) rich e _Strychnos cogens Bentham. Acta Anza. 34, 185-195.

- Djoukeng, J.D., Polli, S., Laringon, P., Abou-Mansour, E., 2009. Identification of phytotoxins from Borylosphaeric obfusa, a pathogen of black dead arm disease of grapevine. Eur. J. Plant. Pathol. 124, 303-308.

- Devys, M., Bousquet, J.-F., Kollman, A., Barbier, M., 1980. Dihydroisocouramires et adcic myophemoluie du milieu de culture du champion phytopathogene _exploton_. Morphochemistry 19, 2221-2222.

- Engelmeier, D., Hadacek, F., Hofer, O., Kutschera, G.L., Nagl, M., Wurz, G., Greger, H., 2004. Antifungal 3-butylisocouramins from Astaceae-Anhemideae. J. Nat. Prod. 67, 19-25.

- Guimarasek, K., Souza-Filho, J.D., Mares-Guia, T., Raga, F.C., 2008. Dihydroisocouramina form ZN's pteroglydephder active against dermatophyte fungi. Phytochemistry 69, 439-444.

- Kokubun, V., Vettich, N.C., Ridge, P.D., Simmonds, M.S.J., 2003. Dihydroisocouramins and tetralone from Orstoyer enculpticol. Phytochemistry 62, 779-782.

- Krohn, K., Bahramsari, R., Florke, U., Ludewig, K., Kilicbe-Spory, C., Michel, A., Qust, J.-D., Draeger, S., Schulz, B., Antus, S., 1997. Dihydroisocouramins from fungi: isolation, structure elucidation, circular dichroism and biological activity. Phytochemistry 45, 313-320.

- Kuramatta, M., Fujioka, S., Shimada, A., Kawano, T., Kimura, Y., 2007. Citronolactones A, B and C, and sclericmint C, plant growth regulators from _Penicillium citrum_. Biosciot. Biochem. 71, 499-503.

- Kutschera, G.L., Engelmeier, D., Hadacek, A.W., Greger, H., Hofer, O., 2003. Synthesis of side chain substituted 3-butylisocouramins and absolute configuration of natural isocouramins from _Artemisia dracunculus_. Monatsh. Chem. 134, 1195-1206.

- Marston, A., Kissling, J., Hostettmann, K., 2002. A rapid TLC bioautographic method for the detection of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors in plants. Phytochem. Anal. 15, 51-54.

- Okuno, T., Oikawa, S., Goto, T., Sawai, K., Shirahama, H., Matsumoto, T., 1986. Structures and phytotoxicity of metabolites from _Valsa ceratosprema_. Agric. Biol. Chem. 50, 997-1001.

- Oliveira, M., Silva, G.H., Regasin, I., Oanzardi, L.M., Evangelista, A.H., Young, M.C.M., Bolzani, V.S., Araujo, K., 2009. Biocatre metabolites produced by _Penicillium_ sp1 and 2.2, two endophytes associated with _Allberria metrophyila_ (Rubiaceae). 2, Naturforsch. 64, 824-830.

- Ozcan, S., Sahin, E., Balci, M., 2007. The synthesis of unusual isocournarin derivatives: the chemistry of homophilic acid. Tetrahedron Lett. 48, 151-2154.

- Pontius, A., Mohamed, I., Krick, A., Kehus, K., Konig, C.M., 2008. Aromatic polyactinides from marine Zieloglous Lipii J. Nat. Prod. 71, 272-274.

- Rahalison, L., Hamburger, M., Hostettmann, K., Monod, M., Frenk, E., 1991. A bioautographic agar overlay method for the detection of antifungal compounds from higher-plans. Phytochem. Anal. 2, 29-193.

- Siddiqui, S., Mahhood, T., Siddiqui, B.S., Fazi, S., 1988. Non-terpenoidal constituents from _Aacridine indica_. Plant Med. 54, 457-459.

- Silva, G.H., Telles, H.L., Zanardi, M., Young, M.M.,C., Berlin, M.N., Haddad, R., Pfenning, LH., Costa-Neto, C., Castro-Camboa, L., Bolzani, V.S., Araujo, A.R., 2006. Cadinate sesquiterpenoids of Phonopsis cssise, an endophytic fungus associated with _Cssisia specthilis_ (Leguminose), Phytochemistry 67, 1964-1969.

- Silva, G.H., Oliveira, C.M., Teles, H.L., Paulettti, M.P., Castro-Camboa, L., Silva, D.H.S., Bolzani, V.S., Young, M.C., Costa-Neto, C.M., Pfenning, LH., Berlinck, R.G.,s., Araujo, A.R., 2010. Sesquripes from _Xyla_ sp., an endophytic fungus associated with _Hyper alaum_ (Pieraceae). Phytochem. Lett. 3, 164-167.

- Silva, V.C., Faria, A.O., Bolzani, V.S., Lopes, M.N., 2007. A new ent-kaarnetag deternep from stems of _Allberria macrophyla_ K. Schum. (Rubiaceae). Helv. Chim. Acta 90, 1781-1782.

- Wang, B., Priest, M.J., Davidson, A., Brubaker, C.L., Woods, M.J., Burton, J.J., 2007. Fungal endophytes of native _Cossypium_ species in Australia. Mycol. Research. III 347-354.

- Young, M.C., Braga, M.R., Dietrich, S.M.C., Gottlieb, H.E., Trevisan, L.M.V., Bolzani, V.S., 1992. Fungtivotic non-glycosidic iridoids from _Allberria macrophyla_. Phytochemistry 31, 3433-3435.

- Zhang, H.W., Song, Y.C., Tan, R.X., 2006. Biology and chemistry of endophytes. Nat. Prod. Rep. 23, 753-771.



