# 10.1515@znc-2002-3-433.pdf

## Page 1



# Isomeric Triterpenoids from _Peritassa campestris_

Luciano M. Liaoa,* Paulo C. Vieirab, Edson Rodrigues-Filhob, Joao B. Fernandesb and Maria F. G. F. Silvab

# Abstract

Investigation of the MeOH extract from the roots of _Peritassa campestris_ (Hippocrataceae) afforded two isomeric _seco_-A-ring quinnomenthide triterpenoids, campestrine-I (**1)** and -II (**2**). This appears to be the first report of a C26-type triterpene carbon skeleton from the Celastracene or Hipporcatiaceae families. The structures were elucidated on the basis of spectral data, particularly HMQC, HMBC and NOE experiments.

## Introduction

In the course of our continuing search for bioactive compounds from plants, following their toxicity to brine shrimp larvae (Alkofahi _et al._, 1989), several bioactive quinonemethide triterpenoids were isolated previously (Liao, 1997). These compounds, known as elastroloids, constitute a relatively small group of natural products encountered exclusively in plants of the families Celastraceae and Hippocrataceae. Celastroloids have been of interest due to their antitumour, antileukemic, antimicrobial (Bruning and Wagner, 1978; Gunatilaka, 1996), antimalarial (Pavanand _et al._, 1989), and trypanocidal activities (Goijman _et al._, 1985). In this paper, we describe the isolation and identification of two new isomeric triterpenes, campestrine-I (**1**) and -II (**2**), which are _seco_-A-ring quinnomethide triterpenoid derivatives, as well as six elastroloids, tingenone, 22-hydroxytrigonene, 20-hydroxy-20-_epi_-tigenone, celastrol, pristimerin, and netzahualcoyene (Gunatilaka, 1996). These compounds were isolated from the roots of _Peritassa campestris_ Cambess. (Hippocrataceae), a plant that occurs in the Brazilian Savannah, popularly known as "bacupari do campo", and used in folk medicine for wound healing in the form of a decoction (Septimio, 1994).

## Results and Discussion

The MeOH extract from the roots of _P. campestris_ afforded, through droplet countercurrent chromatography (DCCC) and repeated chromatographic separation, the isomeric triterpenoids **1** and **2** in low yield, besides the known quinonomethide triterpenoids.

Campestrine-I (**1**) showed a molecular ion peak at _m/z_ 410 [M]+ in the EI-mass spectrum. The UV spectrum of **1** displayed absorption bands at 243 and 287 nm, and the IR spectrum showed a ketone band at 1708 cm-1 and an ester band at 1735 cm-1, indicating that the ester carbonyl group in C-2 was distorted, avoiding the steric crowding with C-11, in contrast with the spectral data for **2** (_vide infra_). The 1H NMR spectrum displayed signals for six methyl groups, one methoxy, three olefinic protons, and one methine. These signals were very similar to those described for tingenone (Gunatilaka, 1989), particularly the signals for the E-ring, indicating a ketone group at C-21. The main differ

## Page 2

ences observed were in the protons of the A- and B-rings, wherein H-1, H-6 and H-7 were shielded in comparison with those in tingenone. The multiplicities were identical, however. In quinonemethide triterpenoids like tingenone, typical signals are the singlets at 8 7.00 (1H, s) and 2.23 (3H, s), characteristic of the hydroxy and 23-Me groups, attached to C-3 and C-4, respectively. These signals were not observed in **1**, but a singlet signal was observed at d 1.76, reinforcing the differences observed in the protons of the A-ring. The long-range coupling observed between H-1 and H-6 (\(J\) = 2.0 Hz) indicated the coplanarity of the bonds involved. The 13C NMR spectrum of **1** revealed a carbonyl signal at d 213.7, a carbornomethyl at d 163.7, carbon signals associated with three double bonds at d 103.7 (_s_), 110.7 (_d_), 115.9 (_d_), 126.4 (_d_), 161.1 (_s_) and 165.2 (_s_), one methoxyl, six methyl, six methyl, six methyl, two methine, and four quaternary carbon signals. The absence of the methyl group attached to C-4 in quinone methide triterpenoids, observed near d 10.3 (23-Me), along with the presence of only 8 sp2 carbons, corroborated the information that the differences between these compounds were in the A- and B-rings. The 13C NMR, HMQC and HMBC spectra supported the six-membered B-ring and a _seco_-A-ring, by the cross-peaks of the proton signal at d 5.86 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-1) with the carbon resonances at d 110.7 (C-1) and 126.4 (C-6); the proton signal at d 6.38 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 6.8 and 2.0 Hz, H-6) with the carbon resonances at d 103.7 (C-5), 126.4 (C-6), 161.1 (C-8) and 165.2 (C-10); the proton signal at d 6.06 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 6.8 Hz, H-7) with the carbon resonances at d 126.4 (C-6), 39.6 (C-9) and 44.1 (C-14); the proton signal of the methyl at d 1.53 (25-Me) with the carbon resonances at d 161.1 (C-8) and 165.2 (C-10); the proton signal of the methyl at d 1.30 (26-Me) with the carbon resonance at d 161.1 (C-8); and proton signal of the methyl at d 8 1.76 (4-Me) with the carbon resonances at d 103.7 (C-5) and 126.4 (C-6).

Campestrine-II **(2)** showed a ketone band at 1706 cm-1 and a conjugated ester band at 1685 cm-1 in its IR spectrum. The UV spectrum contained absorption maxima at 244 and 306 nm, also suggesting a conjugated chromophore, in contrast with **1**. This triterpenoid showed NMR spectra very similar to those of **1**. The 1H NMR spectrum indicated significant differences only in the hydrogen signals for the A- and B-rings. In compound **2**, the signals for H-1 and H-6 were more deshielded than in **1**, and H-7 was more shielded. The tertiary methyl group attached to C-4, observed at d 1.65 is more shielded (DUR 0.11) than in **1**. This information, and the differences observed for the carbon shifts of A- and B-rings in the 13C NMR spectrum, suggested that **1** and **2** are stereoisomers, and the difference in their structure is only in the stereochemistry of the D1,10 double bond. This isomeric relationship was also suggested by the EI-mass spectrum of the mixture which showed the same fragmentation pattern.

The _cis_ or _trans_ stereochemistry for the D1,10 double bond in **1** and **2**, was determined by NOE experiments, which showed correlations in **1** of the proton signal at d 5.86 (H-1) with the proton signals at d 1.76 (H-4) and 3.32 (OMe), indicating the _trans_ configuration for this compound. Correlations of the proton signal at d 5.84 (H-1) with the proton signals at d 1.50 (H-25) and d 3.33 (OMe) indicated the _cis_ configuration for **2**.

This appears to be the first report of a C26-type carbon skeleton from the Celastrace or Hipporcataceae families (Bruning and Wagner, 1978; Gunatilaka, 1996). Regelone, isolated from _Tripterygium wilfordii_ var. _Regelii_ (Takaishi _et al._, 1997) and celastranhydride, obtained from _Kokoona zeylanica_ (Gamlath _et al._, 1990), which are also _seco_-A-ring quinonemethide triterpenoid derivatives, are C27-type examples. Campestrine-I **(1)** and -II **(2)**, which lack the typical quinonemethide chromophore, probably are formed by oxidative cleavage of A-ring, resulting in the two isolated stereoisomers.

### Experimental

#### General experimental procedures

NMR: on a Bruker DRX 400, in CDCl3 and TMS as int. standard; GC-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument; EIMS: low resolution on a VG Platform II (Fisons) instrument; HRMS were obtained on a Fisons VG Autospec; [a]D: Perkin Elmer 241 instrument; DCCC: Tokyo Rikakikai Co. with 300 columns (40 cm x 2 mm i.d.).

#### Plant material

Roots of _P. campestris_ were collected in a Savannah reserve at Universidade Federal de Sao

## Page 3

Carlos, in October, 1992 and identified by Dr. Maria Helena de O. Antunes, Departamento de Botanica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Paulo, Brazil, where a voucher specimen (no. 2845) is deposited.

#### Extraction and isolation

The roots were dried, powdered (2.8 kg) and successively extracted with hexane, CH2Cl2, and MeOH. The combined extracts were submitted to liquid-liquid partition, resulting in hexane, MeOH, EtOAc, 1-butanol and aqueous extracts. The MeOH extract (3.5 g) was submitted to droplet countercurrent chromatography (DCCC) using the aqueous layer of hexane: MeOH:H2O:EtOAc (5:4:1:2 v/v/v) as the stationary phase and the organic layer as the mobile phase, in a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min. The collected fractions were monitored by TLC and grouped in 22 fractions. Fractions 13 and 14 were flash chromatographed on silica gel, eluting with hexane: EtOAc (8:2 v/v), to afford tigenone and a mixture of triterpenoids. The latter was then purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane: CH2Cl2-MeOH, 8:2:0.5 v/v/v) yielding campestrine-I (**1**, 2.1 mg) and a mixture containing **1** and **2**. This mixture was rechromatographed on recycling HPLC using a Shim-pack column (silica 5 um; 2:0x25 cm; hexane: CH2Cl2-MeOH:8:2:0.5 v/v/v; flow rate: 3 ml/min; detection; UV 254 nm), affording campestrine-II (**2**, 1.0 mg).

#### Spectroscopic data

_Campestrine-I_ (**1**) was obtained as pale amorphous yellow powder, [a]206 deg (c 0.002, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3) _l_max (log e) 243 (3.11), 287 (2.71), 363 (2.38) nm; IR (KBr) _v_max 2928, 2853, 1735, 1708, 1421, 891 cm-1; 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz) 8 l.00 (3H, s, CH3-27), 1.00 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 6.4 Hz, CH3-30), 1.04 (3H, s, CH3-28), 1.30 (3H, \(s\), CH3-26), 1.53 (3H, s, CH3-21), 1.76 (3H, s, CH3-4), 1.85 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 14.4 Hz, H-22b), 2.19 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 15.2 and 6.8 Hz, H-19a), 2.51 (1H, _ddq_, \(J\) = 13.5, 7.0 and 6.5 Hz, H-20), 2.91 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 14.4 Hz, H-22a), 3.32 (3H, s, O-CH3), 5.86 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-1), 6.06 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 6.8 Hz, H-7), 6.38 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 6.8 and 2.0 Hz, H-6); 13C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz) 8 l5.1 (C-30), 19.7 (C-27), 22.5 (C-26), 24.7 (C-4), 28.4 (C-15), 29.7 (C-12), 32.0 (C-19), 32.5 (C-28), 33.4 (C-11), 35.5 (C-16), 36.8 (C-25), 38.2 (C-17), 39.6 (C-9), 40.5 (C-13), 41.9 (C-20), 43.4 (C-18

## Page 4

Alkofahi A., Rupprecht J. K., Anderson J. E., McLaughlin J. L., Mikolajczak K. L. and Scott B. A. (1989), Search for new pesticides from higher-plants. In: American Chemical Society Symposium Series ACS, Washington D.C., Vol. **387**, pp. 25-43.
* Bruning and Wagner (1978) Bruning R. and Wagner H. (1978), Ubersicht aber die Celastracen-Inhaltsstoffe: Chemie, Chematoxonmie, Biosynthese, Pharmakologie. Phytochemistry **17**, 1821-1858.
* Gamallah C. B., Gunatilaka A. A. L., Tezuka Y., Kikuchi T. and Balasubramaniam S. (1990), Quinone-methide, phenolic and related triterpenoids of plants of Celastracene: further evidence for the structure of e-astranhydride. Phytochemistry **29**, 3189-3192.
* Goijman S. G., Turrens J. F., Marini-Bettolo G. B. and Stoppani A. O. M. (1985), Effect of tingenone, a quinoid triterpene, on growth and macromolecule biosynthesis in _T. cruzi._ Experientia **41**, 646-648.
* Gunatilaka A. L., Fernando H. C., Kikuch T. and Tezuka Y. (1989), \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13C}\)NMR analysis of three quinone-methide triterpenoids. Magn. Reson. Chem. **27**, 803-811.
* Gunatilaka A. L. (1996), Triterpenoid quinonomethides and related compounds (celastroloids). In: Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products. Springer-Publ.: Wien, Vol. **67**, pp. 1-123.
* Liao M. (1997), Alcaloides sesquiterpenicos piridrioc s triterpenes outiquanontanentelos degradados de _S. campern_ (Hipoprotaceae). PhD Thesis, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Brazil.
* Pavanand K., Webster H. K., Yongvanitchit K., Kun-Anake A., Dechatiwongsche T., Nutakul W. and Bansaldih J. (1989), Schizomotacid activity of _Celastarus paniculans_ Wild. against _Plasmodium falciparum in vitro_ Phytotherapy, Res. **3**, 136-139.
* Septimio L. R. (1994), A fitoterapia baseada em evras medicinais do Cerrado; Ministerio da Cultura, SIPE (Secretaria de Intercambio e Projetos (Especiais): Brasilia, 103.
* Takaishi Y., Miyagi K., Kawazoe K., Nakano K., Li K. and Duan H. (1997), Terpenoids from _Triperygium wildfordii_ var. _Regelii_. Phytochemistry **45**, 975-978.



