# 10.1093@chromsci@bms163.pdf

## Page 1

HPLC Analysis of Midodrine and Desdymidodrine in Culture Medium: Evaluation of Static and Shaken Conditions on the Biotransformation by Fungi

Thiago Barth, Josefina Alcu, Monica Tallarico Pupo, Pierina Sueli Bonato, Isidro G. Collado

# Abstract

A high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method is presented for the simultaneous determination of midodrine and desdymidodrine (DMAE) in Czapek-Dox culture medium, to be used in biotransformation studies by fungi. The HPLC analysis was conducted using a Lichrospher 100 RP18 column, acetonitrile-40 mmol/L formic acid solution (60:40, v/v) as mobile phase, and ultraviolet detection at 290 nm. The sample preparation was conducted by liquid-liquid extraction using ethyl acetate as extractor solvent. The method was linear over the concentration range of 0.4-40.0 u.g/ml. for midodrine (_r_ > 0.9897) and DMAE (_r_ > 0.9998). Within-day and between-day precision and accuracy were evaluated by relative standard deviations (<= 8.2%) and relative errors (-7.3 to 7.4%), respectively. The validated method was used to assess midodrine biotransformation by the fungi _Papulsapora immersa_ Hotson SS13, _Botrytis cinerea_ UCA 992 and _Botrytis cinerea_ 2100 under static and shaken conditions. Under shaken conditions, the biotransformation of midodrine to DMAE was more efficient for all studied fungi, especially for the fungus _Botrytis cinerea_ 2100, which converted 42.2% of midodrine to DMAE.

## Introduction

Midodrine is a pro-drug of desdymidodrine (DMAE), developed by the attachment of the amino acid approach glycine to the functional amine of DMAE (Figure 1). The prodrug midodrine is primarily converted into its active drug in the liver and in the systemic circulation by unknown peptidases (1, 2). DMAE is a long acting a-adrenergic agonist that causes elevation of systemic blood pressure, accompanied by a reduction in heart rate (3), and it is therapeutically used for the treatment of orthostatic hypotension (4). Until now, the metabolism of midodrine has not been extensively studied (3), and the production of DMAE by fungi may be used to provide sufficient amounts of the metabolite to further be used in pharmacological, toxicological and analytical tests.

Many researchers have reported the production of drug metabolites using microbial biotransformations (5), and the use of microorganisms for simulating the mammalian metabolism of many molecules of pharmacological importance is well documented (6, 7, 8).

_Papulsapora immersa_ H. H. Hotson (Ascomycetes, Ssdoriales, Chaetomiaceae) is a familiar soil competitor mold in the culture of mushrooms (9), and it has been recently reported as endophyte in a few plant species such as _Vitex negundo_ (10), _Solanum tuberosum_ (11), and _Smallanthus soncbfolitous_ (12). Moreover, this fungus has been highlighted as a producer of phenol-oxidizing and amylase enzymes (13), and was recently used on the biotransformation of albendazole (14). Endophytes are a special kind of fungi that inhabit internal plant tissues without causing visible disease symptoms (15). These fungi are an especially unexplored, or at least under-explored, source for microbial biotransformation (16).

The fungus _Botrytis cinerea_ is a fungi imperfecti that belongs to the order Moniliades of the family Moniliaceae. They are geographically widespread, and are polyphagous parasites that cause serious economic losses to commercial crops (17). The biotransformation ability of _Botrytis_ species has been summarized, and the hydroxylase and oxidase activities were the more frequently observed reactions (18).

To simultaneously determine midodrine and DMAE in biological matrices (primarily plasma), some methods have been developed based on radioisotope-labeled techniques (19), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with fluorescence (20, 21, 22) and ultraviolet (UV) detection (23), and capillary electrophoresis (CE) (24). The HPLC method with fluorescence detection described by Posch and Lindner (20) is quite complicated because it requires a column-switching technique (20), and the other HPLC with fluorescence detection methods (21, 22) are not validated. Moreover, the method published by Quaglia _et al._ (23) is enantioselective, not applicable to the intended purpose. More recently, Barth _et al._ (24) described another enantioselective method based on a CE method.

Therefore, the aim of the present study was the development of an HPLC method with UV detection to be used to evaluate the ability of the fungi _Papulsapora immersa_ and _Botrytis cinerea_ to produce midodrine biotransformation under static and shaken conditions.

## Experimental

### Chemicals and reagents

The reference substance, midodrine hydrochloride, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), whereas DMAE was prepared by acidic hydrolysis following the procedure described by Quaglia _et al._ (4). In this procedure, a solution of midodrine hydrochloride (0.001 mol) in 2 mol/L HCl (10 mL) was refluxed for three hours. After this, the solution was 

## Page 2

cooled, alkalinized with 60% NaOH and extracted by ethyl acetate. The organic layer was dried over anhydrous Na2SO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure. The crude extract was purified on C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) using methanol-water (8.2, v/v) plus 0.5% of triethylamine, as mobile phase. The 1H and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were used to confirm the structure of DMAE.

Methanol and ethyl acetate were purchased from Carlo Erba (Val de Reuil, France) and acetonitrile was purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), all of chromatographic grade. Formic acid was purchased from Panreac (Barcelona, Spain). All other chemicals were of analytical grade in the highest purity available. Water was purified with a Milli-Q plus system (Millipore, Bedford, MA).

#### Reference substance solutions

The middorine and DMAE stock solutions were prepared at the concentration of 1 mg/mL. The working solutions of middorine and DMAE were 4, 12, 40, 100, 200, 300, and 400 mg/mL. All were prepared in methanol on a free-base basis. The solutions were stored frozen at -20degC and protected from light.

#### Liquid chromatographic conditions

The liquid chromatographic analyses were conducted using a VWR-Hitachi chromatograph (Darmstadt, Germany), equipped with an L2130 quaternary solvent pump unit and an L2400 UV-Vis detector operating at 290 nm. Injections (25 mL) were performed automatically through an L2200 auto-injector. An EZChrom Elite Client/Server software, version 3.1.6, was used for system control and data acquisition. The analyses of middorine and DMAE were performed at room temperature (25 +- 2degC) on a Lichrospher 100 RP18 column (250 x 4.6 mm i.d, 5 mm particle size; Merck) using acetonitrile-40 mmol/L formic acid solution (60:40, v/v) as the mobile phase at the flow rate of 1.4 mL/min.

#### Extraction procedure

Middorine and DMAE were extracted from the Czapek-Dox culture medium (described in Middorine biotransformation procedure) by a liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) procedure adapted from Barth _et al._ (24). Aliquots of 0.5 mL Czapek-Dox medium spiked with 50 mL of reference solutions of middorine and DMAE or samples obtained in the biotransformation process were transferred to 10 mL glass tubes and alkalinized with 50 mL of 10 mol/L sodium hydroxide solution. The samples were mixed by vortex agitation for 20 s. Then, a 4 mL aliquot of extraction solvent, ethyl acetate, was added. The tubes were vortex-mixed for 2 min and then centrifuged at 1,800 g for 10 min. The organic layers (3 mL) were transferred

Figure 1: Chemical structures of middorine and DMAE.

Figure 2: Representative chromatograms (under conditions described in “Liquid Chromatographic Conditions”; all samples extracted by an LLE procedure): blank Czapek-Dox culture medium (A); blank Czapek-Dox culture medium spiked with 10 mg/mL of middorine and DMAE (B). Peaks: middorine (1). DMAE (2).



## Page 3

into 10 mL conical glass tubes. The solvent was evaporated to dryness under a stream of compressed air at room temperature. The residues were dissolved in 100 mL of mobile phase and vortex-mixed for 20 s, and then analyzed by HPLC.

### Method validation

To determine the extraction recovery, Czapek-Dox medium samples (0.5 mL) were spiked with middorine and DMAE at the concentrations of 1.2, 20.0 and 30.0 mg/mL (_n_ = 3) for each analyte and submitted to the extraction procedure. Another set of samples was prepared by extracting 0.5 mL aliquots of Czapek-Dox medium and then spiking the extract with the same amounts of middorine and DMAE. The recovery was determined by comparing the peak area of solutions submitted and not submitted to the extraction procedure, and the recovery was expressed as the percentage of the extracted amount.

Calibration curves were obtained by spiking aliquots of Czapek-Dox medium with standard solutions of middorine and DMAE in the concentration range of 4-400 mg/mL, resulting in concentrations of 0.4-40 mg/mL for each analyte. The linearity of the calibration curves was determined using the correlation coefficient (_r_) and the _F_-test for lack-of-fit (FLOF) using a _p_-value of 0.05. The statistical software MINITAB version 14.1 (State College, PA) was used to perform the statistical calculations.

The sensitivity of the method was evaluated by determining the limit of quantification (LOQ) (25). The LOQ was defined as the lowest analyte concentration that could be determined with accuracy and precision below 20% (25) over five analytical runs. The LOQ was determined by using Czapek-Dox culture medium (0.5 mL) spiked with 0.4 mg/mL of each analyte (the lowest point in the calibration curve).

The precision and accuracy of the method were evaluated by within-day (_n_ = 5) and between-day (_n_ = 3) assays using Czapek-Dox medium samples spiked with middorine and DMAE in the concentrations of 1.2, 20.0 and 30.0 mg/mL of each analyte. The results obtained were expressed as relative standard deviation (RSD, %) and relative error (RE, %).

Freeze-thaw cycle stability, short-term room temperature stability and stability under biotransformation conditions were determined. To perform the freeze-thaw cycle stability, three aliquots (_n_ = 3) of samples, prepared in Czapek-Dox culture medium at the concentration of 1.2 and 30.0 mg/mL of middorine and DMAE, were stored at -20degC for 24 h and thawed at room temperature. When completely thawed, the samples were refrozen for 12 h under the same conditions. The freeze-thaw cycle was repeated two more times, and then the samples were analyzed after the third cycle. For the determination of short-term room temperature stability, aliquots of samples prepared in Czapek-Dox culture medium at the concentrations specified previously were kept at room temperature (22 +- 2degC) for 12 h and analyzed.

To determine the stability under static biotransformation conditions, an aliquot of 6 mg of middorine (on a free-base basis) dissolved in 750 mL of sterile water was added to Roux bottles

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c} Analyte & Recovery & Linearity & & & & & \\ \% & RSD & Range & Linear equation & \(r\) & & ANOVA & \\  & & & & & & & _F_-value & _ρ_-value \\ \hline Middorine & 82.0 & 7.2 & 0.4–40.0 & _ν_ = 126688x - 17947 & 0.9997 & 2.86 & 0.055 \\ DMAE & 83.9 & 8.6 & 0.4–40.0 & _ν_ = 13978x - 16114 & 0.9998 & 0.25 & 0.934 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Recovery and Linearity of the Method

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} Analysis & Removal concentration & Analyzed concentration & RE (\%) & RSD (\%) \\  & (μ0/ml) & (μ0/ml)* & & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Recovery and Linearity of the Method

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} Analysis & Recovery & Linearity & & & & \\ \% & RSD & Range & Linear equation & \(r\) & & ANOVA & \\  & & & & & & _F_-value & _ρ_-value \\ \hline Middorine & 82.0 & 7.2 & 0.4–40.0 & _ν_ = 126688x - 17947 & 0.9997 & 2.86 & 0.055 \\ DMAE & 83.9 & 8.6 & 0.4–40.0 & _ν_ = 13978x - 16114 & 0.9998 & 0.25 & 0.934 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Recovery and Linearity of the Method

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} Analysis & Middorine & & DMAE \\ \hline Nominal concentration (μa/ml) & 1.2 & 20.0 & 30.0 & 1.2 & 20.0 & 30.0 \\ Within-day (_n_ = 5) & Concentration (μa/ml) & 1.12 & 20.40 & 30.98 & 1.14 & 19.74 & 30.05 \\ Precision (RSD, \%) & 2.4 & 3.8 & 3.1 & 3.6 & 4.1 & 2.5 \\ Accuracy (RE, \%) & –7.3 & 1.9 & 3.2 & 5.0 & 1.3 & 0.2 \\ Between-day (_n_ = 3) & Concentration (μa/ml) & 1.12 & 20.33 & 31.26 & 1.12 & 20.14 & 29.99 \\ Precision (RSD, \%) & 4.7 & 6.7 & 7.6 & 3.7 & 6.9 & 8.2 \\ Accuracy (E, \%) & –6.9 & 1.6 & 4.0 & 7.4 & 0.7 & 0.0 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 5: Stability of Middorine under Biotransformation Conditions

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} Analysis & Recovery & Linearity & & & & \\ \% & RSD & Range & Linear equation & \(r\) & & ANOVA & \\  & & & & & & _F_-value & _ρ_-value \\ \hline Middorine & 82.0 & 7.2 & 0.4–40.0 & _ν_ = 126688x - 17947 & 0.9997 & 2.86 & 0.055 \\ DMAE & 83.9 & 8.6 & 0.4–40.0 & _ν_ = 13978x - 16114 & 0.9998 & 0.25 & 0.934 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Recovery and Linearity of the Method

## Page 4

containing 150 mL of Czapek-Dox medium (40 mg/mL), and submitted to the same conditions used in the biotransformation procedure (described in Midodrine biotransformation procedure). Daily, during the period of biotransformation (seven days), aliquots of 0.5 mL (_n_ = 3) were analyzed.

The stability of the samples placed into the autosampler was evaluated using three aliquots (_n_ = 3) of samples prepared in Czapek-Dox culture medium at the concentrations of 1.2 and 30.0 mg/mL of middorine and DMAE; the samples were extracted and placed into the autosampler at room temperature. The samples were analyzed after 12 h.

The samples of the stability studies were compared with fresh samples at the same concentrations and were considered stable if the deviations (expressed as RE, %) observed for the concentrations from the fresh samples were within +- 15%.

The selectivity of the method was evaluated by analyzing a sterile Czapek-Dox medium and a sterile Czapek medium added to fungal mycelium.

### Midodrine biotransformation procedure

#### Fungi

The fungus _Papulaspora immersa_ Hotson (SS13) used in this experiment was previously isolated as an endophyte from the plant _Smallanthus sonchbfolius_ (26), and is deposited in the Laboratorio de Quimica de Micro-organismos--CFRP/USP (Brazil). Moreover, two strains of _Botryptis cinerea_ were employed in this experiment. _B. cinerea_ (UCA 992) was isolated from grapes from the Domecq vineyard, Jerez de la Frontera, Cadiz, Spain. This _B. cinerea_ strain is deposited in the Universidad de Cadiz, Facultad de Ciencias, Mycological Herbarium Collection (UCA, Spain). The other strain of _B. cinerea_ (2100) was purchased from the Coleccion Espanola de Cultvios Tipo (CECT), Facultad de Biologia, Universidad de Valencia, Spain, where this strain is deposited.

#### P. immersa biotransformation procedure

Three discs of 0.5 cm diameter of potato dextrose agar (PDA) plugs containing the fungal mycelia were aseptically transferred to 9.0 cm diameter Petri dishes containing PDA medium and allowed to grow for seven days at 25degC. Biotransformation was performed using a two-stage fermentation protocol (24, 27). In the first stage (pre-culture), three 0.5 cm uniform discs were cut with a transfer tube and then inoculated in 50 mL Falcon tubes containing 10 mL of pre-fermentative liquid broth (10 g glucose, 5 g tryptone soy broth, 3 g yeast extract, and 10 g malt extract, per liter and with pH adjusted to 6.2 with 0.1 mol/L HCl solution). The Falcon tubes were incubated for four days (96 h) at 25degC on a rotatory shaker (Adolph Kuhner, model CH 4127, Birsfelden, Switzerland) operating at 120 rpm.

The second stage (biotransformation) was conducted under static and shaken conditions. Under shaken conditions, the resulting mycelium was transferred to 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL of Czapek-Dox medium (50 g glucose, 1 g yeast extract, 2 g NaNO3, 5 g K2HPO4, 0.5 g MgSO4*7H2O and 0.01 g FeO4*7H2O, per liter) adjusted to a pH range from 6.5 to 7.0 with 0.1 mol/L HCl solution. In sequence, 8 mg of middorine (on a free-base basis) dissolved in 1,000 mL of sterile water was added to the flask. Control flasks consisted of culture broth (Czapek-Dox) without middorine and fungus, sterile broth with middorine and sterile broth with endophytic fungal mycelium. Biotransformation experiments were conducted at 25 degC, with shaking at 120 rpm for 120 h.

Figure 3: Representative chromatograms of Czapek-Dox medium incubated with: the fungi Botryptis cinerea (2100) under shaken conditions (A); _Botryptis cinerea_ (2100) under static conditions (B); _Papulaspora immersa_ (SS13) under shaken conditions (C); _Papulaspora immersa_ (SS13) under static conditions (D); _Botryptis cinerea_ (UCA 992) under shaken conditions (E); _Botryptis cinerea_ (UCA 992) under static conditions (F). The chromatographic conditions described in “Liquid Chromatographic Conditions.”



## Page 5

Under static conditions the resulting mycelium was transferred into Roux bottles containing 150 mL of Czapek-Dox medium. Furthermore, 6 mg of middorine (on a free-base basis) dissolved in 750 mL of sterile water were added to the flask. Just as described previously, control bottles were also performed. Biotransformation experiments were conducted at 25degC for 120 h.

Daily aliquots of 3 mL, for both conditions, were collected from the culture flasks, and 0.5 mL were submitted to the extraction procedure and analyzed by HPLC.

### _cinerea strains biotransformation procedure_

The biotransformation was conducted under static and shaken conditions. Under the shaken condition, a volume equivalent to 107 spores was transferred into 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL of Czapek-Dox. After two days' growth, 8 mg of middorine (free-base basis) dissolved in 1,000 mL of sterile water were added to the flask. Biotransformation experiments were conducted at 25 degC, with shaking at 120 rpm for 168 h.

Under the static condition, a volume equivalent to 107 spores was transferred into Roux bottles containing 150 mL of Czapek-Dox medium. Subsequently, 6 mg of middorine (free-base basis) dissolved in 750 mL of sterile water were added to the flask. Biotransformation experiments were conducted at 25 degC during 168 h. Daily aliquots of 3 mL for both conditions, were collected from the culture flasks, and 0.5 mL were submitted to the extraction procedure and analyzed by HPLC. As described previously, control flasks were also performed.

The biotransformation kinetic studies were presented as concentration versus collecting interval (hours) profiles. The efficiency of the biotransformation process was calculated (in percentage) based on the amount of DMAE in the culture medium and correlating this amount with the initial amount of middorine (time 0). Regarding the repeatability of the biotransformation procedure, the experiment was performed in replicate (_n_ = 2).

## Results and Discussion

The resolution of middorine and DMAE was conducted on a Lichrospher 100 RP18 column under reverse elution mode. The evaluated mobile phases were prepared using methanol-water and acetonitrile-water mixtures. Formic acid was added to these mobile phases to suppress the ionization of the silanol groups of the silica support, and its interaction with the analytes, reducing the tails of the peaks of middorine and DMAE that are basic compounds (26). The best separation condition was achieved with a mobile phase consisting of acetonitrile-40 mmol/L formic acid solution (60:40, v/v), at a flow rate of 1.4 mL/min and with detection at 290 nm. Under these conditions, the separation of the compounds was performed in 10 min with enough resolution (\(R_{s}\) = 1.52) (Figure 2B).

### _Method validation_

The recoveries of middorine were approximately 82%, while the DMAE recoveries were approximately of 84%. The RSD (%) for the recoveries of both analytes were lower than 15% (Table I).

Linear regression analyses were performed by plotting the peaks areas of the analytes (_y_) versus theoretical analyte concentrations (_x_). The method proved to be linear over the concentration range of 0.4-40 mg/mL for both middorine and DMAE, with correlation coefficient \(r\) >= 0.9997. The linearity of the method was also confirmed by the FLOF test (Table I).

The LOQ using the validated method was 0.4 mg/mL for each analyte. The RSD (%) and RE (%) were lower than 20% (Table II).

The precision and accuracy of the method were evaluated by within and between-day assays. The RSDs and relative errors were lower than 15% (Table III).

The freeze-thaw, short-term room temperature and auto-sampler stability of middorine and DMAE in Czapek-Dox medium showed RSDs and relative errors lower than 15%. These results are presented in Table IV. Midodrine was stable for 168 h under the biotransformation conditions (shaken and

Fig. 4.: Graphs of concentration time-profiles of middorine and DMAE in culture medium incubated with: _Bapulsapora innurexa_ Hotson (A); _Botrris cinerea_ UCA 992 (B); _Botrris cinerea_ 2100 (C) under static and shaken conditions. The black circles represent middorine under shaken conditions; white circles represent DMAE under shaken conditions; black squares represent middorine under static conditions; white squares represent DMAE under static condition.The bars denote the error of two replicates.



## Page 6

static) (RSD and RE < 15%), and no degradation of middorine could be observed during this period (Table V).

The studied fungi did not produce any secondary metabolite that presented retention times close to those of middorine and DMAE (Figure 3).

#### Biotransformation of middorine

The middorine biotransformation was evaluated with three fungi under static and shaken conditions. These different conditions were tested to evaluate the effect of aeration of the cultures and the growth morphology of these fungi. Under static conditions, a weak oxygenation was observed, and under shaken conditions this oxygenation was higher (29). Moreover, under static conditions, the fungi, in general, grew on the culture surface, while under shaken conditions, spherical aggregates called pellets are formed (30).

The biotransformation was monitored for 168 h for the _B. cinerea_ strains and 120 h for the fungus _P. immersa_. The concentrations of the analytes were determined based on calibration curves constructed daily. The identification of DMAE was performed by comparing its retention time with that of the reference substance.

The endophytic fungus _P. immersa_ Hotson was able to biotransform middorine in the human active metabolite DMAE (Figure 1). The maximum amount of DMAE was detected in the extracts of the endophytic fungus culture medium after

Figure 5: Representative chromatogram of Capek-Dox medium incubated with the fungus _Paupalspana immersa_ Hotson (SS13) and middorine after 120 h of biotransformation under static conditions (A); representative chromatogram of Capek-Dox medium incubated with the fungus _Botryts cinerea_ 2100 and middorine after 48 h of biotransformation under static conditions (B). The chromatographic conditions described in “Liquid Chromatographic Conditions.” Peaks: middorine (1); DMAE (2); unidentified compounds [3, 4 and 5].



## Page 7

120 h of middorine incubation for both conditions. A slightly higher efficiency (7.9%) under shaken conditions could be observed than under static conditions (7.3%) (Figure 4A). In addition, under static conditions, an additional peak was detected, which can be considered another possible metabolite of middorine (peak 3, Figure 5A).

The fungus _B. cinerea_ has extensively been used to biotransform synthetic (31, 32, 33, 34, 35) and natural products (36, 37) with potential fungistatic and fungicide activities. The conversion of middorine to DMAE involves an amide hydrolysis reaction, which has already been observed for _B. cinerea_ (38).

The strain _B. cinerea_ UCA 992 showed better biotransformation results under shaken conditions. The maximal formation of DMAE under static conditions (11.5%) was verified in 168 h of biotransformation (Figure 4B), whereas, under shaken conditions, a higher concentration of DMAE (29.2%) was observed within 96 h of incubation (Figure 4B). Additional peaks at both biotransformation conditions were not observed for _B. cinerea_ UCA 992.

_B. cinerea_ 2100 showed higher DMAE formation under shaken conditions (Figure 4C). The maximal amount of formed DMAE under shaken conditions was verified in 48 h of incubation (42.2% of biotransformation). On the other hand, under static conditions, the maximum amount of DMAE was observed in 72 h of incubation (8.9% of biotransformation). Moreover, under static conditions, after 48 h of incubation, three additional peaks were observed. These peaks can also be considered possible middorine metabolites (peaks 4, 5 and 6, Figure 5B). The unidentified metabolites (peaks 3, Figure 5A; peaks 4, 5 and 6, Figure 5B) were not studied here. The biotransformation under static conditions of middorine by _P. immersa_ Hotson and _B. cinerea_ 2100 deserve more studies for the isolation and characterization of these unknown metabolites.

## Conclusions

An HPLC-UV method was described for the simultaneous determination of middorine and DMAE in Czapek-Dox culture medium. The validation parameters were evaluated and met the literature requirements (25). This work presents a simpler method than that published by Posch and Lindner (1989), which uses fluorescence detection and column-switching procedures. This method was successfully employed to study middorine biotransformation by the endophytic fungus _P. immersa_ Hotson and by the phytopatogen strains _B. cinerea_ 2100 and _B. cinerea_ UCA 992. The biotransformations were conducted under static and shaken conditions. For all studied fungi, the shaken conditions resulted in higher DMAE formation, especially for the fungus _B. cinerea_ 2100, which biotransformed 42.2% of middorine to DMAE.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), and Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) for financial support and for granting research fellowships.

## References

- Mcctellan _et al._ 1998 Mcctellan, K.J., Wiseman, L.R., Wilde, M.I.; Middorine. A review of its therapeutic use in management of orthostatic hypotension, _Drug and Aging_ (1998); 12: 75-86.

- Rautio _et al._ 2008 Rautio, J., Kumpulainen, H., Heimbach, T., Oliyail, R., Oh, D., Jarvinen, T., _et al._; Prodrugs: Design and clinical applications; _Nature Reviews Drug Discovery_, (2008); 7: 255-270.

- Akimoto _et al._ 2004 Akimoto, M., Iida, I., Itoga, H., Miyata, A., Kawahara, S., Kohno, Y.; The in vitro metabolism of desdylimidorine, an active metabolite of prodrug middorine by human liver microsomes, _European Journal of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetrics_, (2004); 29: 179-186.

- Quaglia _et al._ 2004 Quaglia, M. G., Farina, A., Palmery, M., Desideri, N., Donati, E., Bossh, E., _et al._; Chiral investigation of middorine, a long-acting a-adrenergic stimulating agent; _Cbirality_, (2004); 16: 356-362.

- Venisetty _et al._ 2003 Venisetty, V.J., Ciddi, V.; Application of microbial biotransformation for the new drug discovery using natural drugs as substrates; _Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology_, (2003); 4: 123-140.

- Smith _et al._ 1975 Smith, R.V., Rosazza, J.P.; Microbial models of mammalian metabolism; _Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences_, (1975); 64: 1759-1765.

- Azerad _et al._ 1999 Azerad, R.; Microbial models of drug metabolism; _Advances in Biochemical Engineering/Biotechnology_, (1999); 63: 169-218.

- Asha _et al._ 2009 Asha, S., Vidyavathi, M.; Cunninghamella-A microbial model for drug metabolism studies--A review; _Biotechnology Advances_, (2009); 27: 16-29.

- Fudo _et al._ 2009 Fudo, R., Ando, T., Sato, S., Kameyama, T., Yamanaka, S.; Isolation of iscoqueetin as a fruiting body inducer for _Stimatella aurunatinal_ from a soil fungus _Papultaspora_ sp; Bioscience, _Biotechnology and Biochemistry_, (1997); 61: 183-184.

- Ravirala _et al._ 2006 Ravirala, N.S., Maria, G.L., Sridhar, K.R.; Antimicrobial evaluation of endophytic fungi inhabiting medicinal plants of the western Ghats of India; _Engineering in Life Sciences_, (2006); 6: 515-520.

- O'Callaghan _et al._ 2004 O'Callaghan, M., Gerard, E.M., Waipara, N.W., Young, S. D., Glare, T.R., Barrell, P.J., _et al._; Microbial communities of _Solanum tuberostrum_ and imagain-producing transgenic lines; Plant and _Solt_, (2004); 266: 47-56.

- Gallo _et al._ 2010 Gallo, M.B.C., Cavalcanti, B.C., Barros, F.W.A., Moraes, M.O., Costa-Lotufo, L.V., Pessoa, C., _et al._; Chemical constituents of _Papultaspora tumersa_, an endophyte from _Smallantbus sonchoffius_ (Asteraceae), and their cytotoxic activity; _Cbemistry & Bioditersity_; (2010); 7: 2941-2950.

- Adams _et al._ 1990 Adams, P.R.; Mycelial amylase activities of thermophilic species of _phramicomer, bumiculola_ and _papultaspora_, _Mycopatologia_, (1990); 112: 35-37.

- Hilario _et al._ 2012 Hilario, V.C., Carrio, D.B., Barth, T., Borges, K.B., Furtado, N.A.J.C., Pupo, M.T., _et al._; Assessment of the stereoselective fungal biotransformation of alibendazole and its analysis by HPLC in polar organic mode; _Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis_, (2012); 61: 100-107.

- Schulz _et al._ 2005 Schulz, B., Boyle, C.; The endophytic continuum; _Mycological Research_, (2005); 6: 661-686.

- Borges _et al._ 2009 Borges, W.S., Borges, K.B., Bonato, P.S., Said, S., Pupo, M.T.; Endophytic fungi: Natural products, enzymes and biotransformations reactions. _Current Organic Chemistry_; (2009); 13: 1137-1163.

- Collado _et al._ 2007 Collado, I.G., Sanchez, A.J.M., Hanson, J.R.; Fungal terpene metabo-lifes biosynthetic relationships and the control of the phytopatogenic fungus _Botrytis cinerea, Natural Product Reports_, (2007); 24: 674-686.

- Aleu _et al._ 2001 Aleu, J., Collado, I.G.; Biotransformations by Botrytis species; _Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic_, (2001); 13: 77-93.

- Kolossa _et al._ 1979 Kolossa, N., Schutzemberg, W.G., Wiener, H., Krivanek, P.; Plasma level of the prodrug middorine and its active metabolite in comparison with the a-mimetic action in dogs; _Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamic et de Therapie_, (1979); 238: 96-104.

- Posch _et al._ 1989 Posch, W., Lindner, W.; Quantification of middorine and its active metabolite in plasma using a high performance liquid chromatography column switching technique; _Biomedical Chromatography_, (1989); 3: 153-156.



## Page 8

* (21) Zachariah, P.K., Bloedow, D.C., Moyer, T.P., Sheps, S.G., Schirger, A., Fealek, R.D.; Pharmacodynamics of midofidine, an antihypertensive agent; _Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics_ (1986), 39: 586-591.
* (22) Lamarre-Cliche, M., Du Souich, P., De Champlain, J., Larochelle, P.; Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics effects of midofine on blood pressure, the autonomic nervous system, and plasma natriuretic peptides: A prospective, randomized, single-blind, two-period, crossover, placebo-controlled study; _Clinical Therapeutics_ (2008), 30: 1629-1638.
* (23) Quaglia, M.G., Farina, A., Bossu, E., Cotichini, V.; Human a1-glycoprotein acid as chiral selector in the enantioseparation of midofidine and degbylmodrine racemates by HPLC, _Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis_ (1998); 18: 171-177.
* (24) Barth, T., Pupo, M.T., Borges, K.B., Okano, L.T., Bonato, P.S.; Stereoselective determination of midofine and desylmodidine in culture medium: Application to a biotransformation study employing endophytic fungi, _Electrophoresis_, (2010); 31: 1521-1528.
* (25) Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Guidance for Industry: Bioanalytical Method Validation, (2001).
* (26) Gallo, M.B.C., Chagas, F.O., Almeida, M.O., Macedo, C., Cavalcanti, B.C., Barros, F.W.A., _et al_; Endophytic fungi found in association with _Smallanthus sonchofolius_ (Asteraceae) as resourceful producers of cytotoxic bioactive natural products; _Journal of Basic Microbiology_ (2009); 49: 142-151.
* (27) Borges, K.B., Pupo, M.T., Bonato, P.S.; Enantioselective analysis of propranolol and 4-Hydroxypropranolol by CE with application to biotransformation studies employing endophytic fungi; _Electrophoresis_, (2009); 30: 3910-3917.
* (28) Mccalley, D.V.; The challenges of the analysis of basic compounds by high performance liquid chromatography: Some possible approaches for improved separations, _Journal of Chromatography A_, (2010); 1217: 858-880.
* (29) Mansour, H.B., Mosrati, R., Corroler, D., Ghedira, K., Barrilier, D., Chekir, L.; in vitro mutagenicity of acid violet 7 and its degradation products by Pseudomonas putida mt2: Correlation with chemical structures; _Environmental Toxicology and Pharmacology_, (2009); 27: 231-236.
* (30) Gibbs, P.A., Seviour, R.J., Schmid, F., Growth of filamentous fungi in submerged culture: Problems and possible solutions; _Critical Reviews in Biotechnology_, (2000); 20: 17-48.
* (31) Durian, R., Corrales, E., Galan, R.H., Collado, I.G.; Biotransformation of oxypropyline oxide by _Botrris cinerea_, _Journal of Natural Products_, (1999); 62: 41-44.
* (32) Durian-Patron, R., Aleu, J., Galan, R.H., Collado, I.G.; Biotransformation of (4E,8R)-caroophyll-4(5)-en-8-ol by _Botrris cinerea_, _Journal of Natural Products_ (2000); 63: 44-47.
* (33) Bustillo, A.J., Aleu, J., Galan, R.H., Collado, I.G.; Biotransformation of the fungistatic compound (R)+(+)-1(4'-chlorophenyl)propan-1-ol by _Botrysis cinerea_, _Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic_, (2003); 21: 267-271.
* (34) Daouhl, M., Deligeorgopoulou, A., Sanchez, A.J.M., Galan, R.H., Hitchcock, P.B., Hanson, J.R., _et al_; Antifungal activity and biotransformation of diisophorone by _Botrysis cinerea_, _Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry_, (2005); 53: 6035-6039.
* (35) Pinedo-Rivilla, C., Bustillo, A.J., Galan, R.H., Aleu, J., Collado, I.G.; Asymmetric preparation of antifungal 1-(4'-chlorophenyl)phenyl-1-cyclodextrin1-cyanopropyl methanol and 1-(4'-chlorophenyl)-2-phenylethanol. Study of the detoxification mechanism by _Botrysis cinerea_, _Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic_, (2011); 70: 61-66.
* (36) Aleu, J., Hanson, J.R., Galan, R.H., Collado, I.G.; Biotransformation of the fungistatic sesquiterpenoids preschool, joinsenol, ecdfrol and globuloid by _Botrysis cinerea_, _Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic_, (2001); 11: 329-334.
* (37) Nunez, Y.O., Salabarria, L.S., Collado, I.G., Galan, R.H.; The antifungal activity of wildorid and its biotransformation by _Colloetricbum glocoprodoles_ (penz.) Penz. & NCC. and _Botrysis cinerea_ Pers. Fr. _Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry_, (2006); 54: 7517-7521.
* (38) Tellier, F., Carlin-Sinclair, A., Fritz, R., Cherton, J.C., Leroux, P.; Activity and metabolism of cyano-oxime derivatives in various strains of _Botrysis cinerea_, _Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology_, (2004); 78: 151-160.



