# 10.1016@0031-9422(95)00504-Z.pdf

## Page 1



# Dihydrochalcones, Coumarins and Alkaloids from _Metrodorea nigra_+
Footnote †: Based in part on the doctorate thesis presented by the senior author to the Universidade Federal de São Carlos, SP, Brazil (1994).

Adolfo H. Muller, Paulo C. Vieira, M. Fatima Das G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.1Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Para, Campus Universitario, 66075-900 Belem, PA, Brazil; $Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

20 April 1995

###### Abstract

Two novel dihydrochalcones, 2',3,4',6'-tetrahydroxy-4-methoxy-3',5-di-(3,3-dimethylallyl)-dihydrochalcone and 2',3,6'-trihydroxy-4-methoxy-5-(3,3-dimethylallyl)-3',4'-(2'',2''-dimethyldihydropyran)-dihydrochalcone, have been isolated from fresh fruits of _Metrodorea nigra_. Stems and leaves showed a similar composition and we have isolated common steroids, simple coumarins, several furocoumarins, furoquinoline alkaloids and a furofuran lignan. From stems, we have also isolated the pentacyclic 6-_C_-monoterpenyl-5,7-dioxycoumarin, deoxybruceol. Structures of the isolated compounds were elucidated on the basis of spectral data.

## Introduction

The genus _Metrodorea_, belonging to the tribe Cusparieae, is considered to contain _ca_ eight species, which are confined to Brazil [1, 2]. There are, as yet, no reports of any chemical studies on _Metrodorea_ species. Thus, as part of our ongoing phytochemical and chemotaxonomic study on members of the Cusparieae, we have examined fresh fruits, leaves and stems of M. _nigra_. This species, commonly known as wild orange, is a small tree of 1-2 m high. We report here in the isolation and characterization of two new dihydrochalcones, along with known coumarins, anthranilate alkaloids, lignans and steroids.

## Results and discussion

The fresh fruits of _M. nigra_ were percolated with methanol. The chloroform-soluble fraction of the methanol extract was concentrated and subjected to VLC. Apolar and polar fractions were composed mainly by triacyl glycerols and condensed tannins, respectively. From the medium polar fractions, after prep. TLC, we obtained two novel _C_-prepaired dihydrochalcones. Compound 1 exhibited similar spectral data to 2',4',6'-tetrahydroxy-3,5-di-(3,3-dimethylallyl)-dihydrochalcone (6), which has previously been isolated from _Boronia inconspicua_ (Rutaceae) [3]. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1), instead of signals for _meta_-coupled A-ring protons, showed one 1H singlet at 65.80. This signal and the mass spectral fragment at _m_/_z_ 220 [C12H12O4]+, due to fission of the propanone bridge between the C = O and the C-a, established the presence of a 3,3-dimethylallyl group at C-3'/C-5'. The signal at 65.80 was thus assigned to H-5'/H-3'. This was supported by comparison with the spectral data published for 5,7,2',4'-tetrahydroxy-6,5'-di-(3,3-dimethylallyl)-flavanone, isolated from _Eucheresta japonica_ (Leguminosae) [4]. The 1H NMR also showed a B-ring spin-system for 3,4,5-substitution, as in 6, and a signal for a metnoyl group. However, for 1, H-6 (d6.67) was more deshielded than that at H-2 (d6.54) and, in the 13C NMR spectrum, the deshielded position of the methyloxyl resonance at _d

## Page 2

Stems and leaves of _M. nigra_ were percolated with hexane, chloroform and methanol, respectively. The hexane and chloroform extracts, and the chloroform-soluble fractions of the methanol extracts, were investigated. From the leaves, we isolated the coumarins, limetin [6], aurapten [7], 8-methoxylimetin [8], bergapten [9], sattotoxin [10], isopimpinellin and isolimeratorin [11], the furoquinoline alkaloid, skimminaine [12], the furofuran lignan, eudesmin [13] and a mixture of b-sitosterol and stigmasterol. From the stems we isolated the coumarins, limetin, aurapten, 8-methoxylimetin, bergapten, xantotoxin, isopimpinellin, imperatorin [11], scopoletin [14], umbelliferone [14], isogospherol (3) [15] and deoxybrucool (4) [16-18], the furoquinoline alkaloid, skimminaine, the secorduroquinoline alkaloids, _E_- and _Z_-dimethylrhofilonate (5) [19], and a mixture of b-sitosterol and stigmasterol. These compounds were identified by comparison of their spectral data with those reported in the literature. Isogospherol (3), a 8-modified _O_-penylated linear furocoumarin previously isolated from _Prangos lophoptera_ (Umbelliferae) [15], does not appear to have previously been recorded from the Rutaceae. Also, this appears to be the first record of deoxybrucool (4), a pentacyclic 6-_C_-monoterphenyl-5,7-dioxycoumarin, from the tribe Cusparaeae, but it has been reported from _Eriostemom brucei_ (tribe Boronieae) [16, 17]. The furoquinoline alkaloids, _Z_- and _E_-dimethylrhofilonate (5), have been reported previously by us from another Brazilian species of the Rutaceae, _Zanthoxylum rhodifolium_ [19]. The range of compounds we have isolated from _M. nigra_ reinforces its position as a member of the Rutaceae [20].

## Experimental

_General._ Mps uncorr. UV and IR were recorded in MeOH and CHCl3, respectively. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, in CDCl3 with TMS as int. standard. FIMS were obtained at 70 eV (probe).

_Plant material. Metrodorea nigra_ St. Hil. was collected in the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil, in April 1984. A voucher specimen is deposited at the Herbarium of the Instituto Agronomico de Campinas, SP, Brazil.

_Extraction and isolation._ Fresh fruits (110 g) were chopped into small pieces and percolated with MeOH. The residue was dried and extracted with CHCl3 at room temp. This extract (2.5 g) was shown to be composed of sat hydrocarbons and triacylglycerols. The MeOH extract (10 g) was suspended in 50% aq. MeOH and partitioned between CHCl3, EtOHAc and _n_-BuOH. The CHCl3-sol. for (2.2 g) was submitted to VLC over silica gel 60 H using CH2Cl2-MeOH mixts of increasing polarity and, after combination, monitored by TLC, furnished 5 frs (A-E). Fr. B (42 mg), prep. TLC (silica gel;

## Page 3

hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH, 15:7:7:1, 2 runs), afforded tricapylglycerols (15 mg), **1** (19 mg) and **2** (1 mg). The other frs showed a complex composition. EtOAc (0.2 g) and _n_-BuOH (0.8 g) frs were composed mainly of sugars.

Stems (284 g) were ground and percolated with hexane, CHCl3 and MeOH, respectively. Similar chromatographic treatment as described for fruits gave, in order), aurapten (21 mg), limetin (13 mg), a mixt. of b-sitosterol and stigmasterol (22 mg), bergapten (3 mg), xantotoxin (11 mg), imperatorin (4 mg), deoxybrucoel (4) (0.9 mg), isopimpinellin (10 mg), 8-methoxylime (6 mg), skim-minaine (1.5 mg), \(E\),_Z_-dimethylnofilonate (5) (0.8 mg), isogosphered (3) (0.5 mg), scopoletin (8 mg), umbelliferone (6 mg) and 8-methoxylimetim (53 mg).

Leaves (850 g) were ground and percolated with hexane, CHCl3 and MeOH, respectively. Chromatographic treatments similar to those used for fruits gave, in order, aurapten (19 mg), a mixt. of b-sitosterol and stigmasterol (23 mg), limetin (12 mg), bergapten (4 mg), isopimpinellin (5 mg), 8-methoxylimetim (6 mg), isopimpinellin (6 mg), isopimetorin (5 mg), isopimetorin (6 mg), isopimetorin (5 mg), isopimetorin (5 mg), isopimetorin (6 mg), isopimetorin (

## Page 4

* [18] Gray, A. I., Rashid, M. A. and Waterman, P. G. (1992) _J. Nat. Prod._**55**, 681.
* [19] Arruda, M. S. P., Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Da Silva, M. F. das G. F. and Pirani, J. R. (1992) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**20**, 173.
* [20] Waterman, P. G. (1983) in _Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales_ (Waterman, P. G. and Grundon, M. F., eds), p. 377. Academic Press, London.



