# 10.1002@hlca.200890147.pdf

## Page 1



# New Antifungal Terpenoid Glycosides from _Alibertia edulis_ (Rubiaceae)

Viviane Candida da Silva, Maria Jose Soares Mendes Giannini, Virginia Carbone, Cosina Piacente, Cosimo Pizza, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

# Abstract

Phytochemical investigation from the stems of _Alibertia edulis_ led to the isolation and identification of a new iridoid 6_b_-hydroxy-7-epigardoside methyl ester (**1**) and a new saponin 3_b_-O_-[a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1 - 2)-O-b-d-glucopyranosyl-(1 - 2)-O-b-d-glucopyranosyl]-28-_O_-b-d-glucopyranoside pomolate (**2**), along with three known compounds, shanzhiside methyl ester (**3**), ixoside (**4**), and 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl 1-_O_-b_-d-apifofuranosyl-(1 - 6)-_O_-b-d-glucopyranoside (**5**). The structures of **1** and **2** were established on the basis of their spectroscopic data. Iridoid **1** and saponin **2** exhibited moderate inhibitory activities against _Candida albicans_ and _C. krusei_ in a dilution assay.

## Introduction

_- Albertia edulis_ (Rich.) A. Rich. ex DC, commonly known as'marmelada-bola', is widely spread in the Brazilian 'Cerrado'. The _Alibertia_ genus is known for the occurrence of iridoids, triterpenoids and phenolic derivatives [2-6]. Recent phytochemical investigations of stems of _A. macrophylla_ led to the isolation of a diterpene, 2\(b\),3\(a\),16_a_-trihydroxy _ent_-kaurane [5]. Previous studies of the leaves of _A. edulis_ resulted in the isolation of ten triterpenes [7]. In our continuing chemical and biological investigations of the Brazilian Rubiaceae plant species, we report the isolation and structure elucidation of a new iridoid, 6_b_-hydroxy-7-epigardoside methyl ester (**1**), and a new saponin 3_b_-O_-[a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1 - 2)-O-b-d-glucopyranosideyl-(1 - 2)-O-b-d-glucopyranoside pomolate (**2**), from _A. edulis_ stems together with known iridoids: shanzhiside methyl ester (**3**) and ixoside (**4**), and phenolic derivative 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl 1-_O_-b_-d-apifuranosyl-(1 - 6)-_O_-b-d-glucopyranoside (**5**). We also report strong antifungal activity against pathogenic _Candida_-species yeast and _Cryptococcus neoformans_ of the AcOEt extract of this species and, the moderate antifungal activity of compounds **1** and **2**.



## Page 2



**Results and Discussion.** - The EtOH extract prepared from dried and powdered stems of _A. edulis_ was submitted to partition in hexane, AcOEt, and BuOH. The preliminary biological screening indicated that the AcOEt extract showed antifungal activity (_cf. Table 4_). Fractionation and purification over silica _RP-18_ led to the isolation of compounds **1** - **5**. The known compounds **3** - **5** were identified by comparing their spectroscopic data to those reported in literature [8-10].

Compound **1** was obtained as a white amorphous powder. The HR-ESI-MS of **1** showed a peak at _m_/_z_ 403.1289 ([_M_ - H]-), determining the molecular formula as being C17H24O11, and a peak at _m_/_z_ 241.0738 ([_M_ - H - 162]-), corresponding to the loss of a hexose moiety. The 1H- and 13C-NMR spectroscopic data were consistent with a _b_-glucopyranosyl unit and an iridoid aglycone. The 1H-NMR spectrum showed signals at d(H) 7.34 (_d_, \(J\) = 1.0, H - C(3)) and 5.61 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H - C(1)) corresponding to an iridoid dihydropyran ring. The signal at d(H) 3.64 (_s_, 3 H) corresponded to a MeO group, and the signal at d(H) 5.21 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.5, 2 H) corresponded to an exocyclic =CH2 group. An anomeric H-atom signal at d(H) 4.41 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.5) confirmed the presence of a sugar residue with _b_-configuration. The 13C-NMR spectrum of **1** showed 17 signals. The C-atom signals at d(C) 35.5 (C), 41.8 (C), 95.0 (CH), 107.9 (C) and 152.2 (CH) were attributed to C-atoms C(5), C(9), C(1), C(4), and C(3), respectively of the dihydropyran ring of the iridoid aglycone. The remaining C-atoms signals, d(C) 73.7 (CH) and 73.5 (CH) were assigned to C(6) and C(7), respectively, and the signals at d(C) 110.0 (CH2(10)) and 150.4 (C(8)) were attributed to an _exo_-methylene function present in the structure. The _g_HMBC spectrum confirmed the assignment of C(6) and

## Page 3

C(7) due to the \({}^{3}\)_J_-correlation observed between H\(-\)C(10) (\(\delta\)(H) 5.21) and C(7) (\(\delta\)(C) 73.5). The attachment of the \(\beta\)-d-glucopyranosyl moiety in **1** was established as in C(1) position in the aglycone, on the basis of the cross-peak correlations, in _g_HMBC, between H\(-\)C(1') (\(\delta\)(H) 4.41) and C(1) (\(\delta\)(C) 95.0) (_Table 1_).

The \(\alpha\)-orientation of H\(-\)C(1) and \(\beta\)-orientation of H\(-\)C(5) and H\(-\)C(9) is in accordance with the biosynthetic origin of the iridoids [11]. The coupling constant between H\(-\)C(5) and H\(-\)C(6) (\(J\) < 1.0 Hz), together with the upfield shift of C(1) (\(\delta\)(C) 95.0), and the calculation of the shift difference between C(3) and C(4) (\(\Delta\delta\) = 44.3) indicated that the orientation of the OH group at C(6) was \(\beta\)[12]. The appearance of H\(-\)C(6) as a broad _singlet_ (\(\delta\)(H) 4.08) provided a small coupling constant between H\(-\)C(6) and H\(-\)C(7) (\(J\) < 1.0 Hz), corresponding to a dihedral angle close to 90\({}^{\circ}\), necessitating a _trans_-relationship between these H-atoms, which suggested the \(\alpha\)-orientation of the OH group at C(7) [13]. This configuration was confirmed on basis of NOESY interactions between H\(-\)C(5) (\(\delta\)(H) 2.81) and H\(-\)C(9) (\(\delta\)(H) 3.12 - 3.15, \(\beta\)-oriented), and no interactions between H\(-\)C(6) or H\(-\)C(7). Thus, the structure of compound **1** was elucidated as 6\(\beta\)-hydroxy-7-epigardoside methyl ester.

Compound **2** was obtained as a brown amorphous powder. The HR-ESI-MS of **2** showed a peak at \(m/z\) 1127.5641 (\([M+{\rm Na}]^{+}\)), corresponding to the molecular formula C\({}_{54}\)H\({}_{88}\)O\({}_{23}\). The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum showed signals of seven Me groups at \(\delta\)(H) 0.81, 0.90, 0.99, 1.14, 1.23, 1.36 (\(s\), each 3 H), and 0.96 (\(d,J\) = 6.7, 3 H), and an olefinic H-atom at \(\delta\)(H) 5.33 (br. \(s\)). The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR data confirmed the presence of seven Me C-atom signals at \(\delta\)(C) 15.8, 16.4, 16.7, 17.5, 24.6, 27.0, and 28.6, and a pair of olefinic C-atoms at \(\delta\)(C) 129.6 and 139.5, suggesting that the aglycone possesses an urs-12-ene skeleton. In the _g_HSQC spectrum, the long-range correlations observed for Me groups at \(\delta\)(H) 1.23

## Page 4

(_s_, Me(29)) and 0.96 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.7, Me(30)) with a quaternary C-atom at d(C) 73.5, together with the multiplicity of H - C(18) at d(H) 2.55 (_s_), observed in the 1H-NMR spectrum, were consistent with the aglycone pomolic acid (_Table 2_) [14].

The presence of four sugar moieties was established from the signals of four anomeric H-atoms at d(H) 4.44 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.7), 4.91 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.6), 5.22 (br. _s_), and 5.36 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.1), attached to the C-atoms at d(C) 105.5, 101.8, 101.9, and 95.6, respectively, in the _g_HSQC spectrum. The C-atom signals observed at d(C) 92.1 (C(3)) and 178.5 (C(28)) in the aglycone are consistent with a bidesmoside saponin moiety. Glycosylation of the alcoholic function at C(3) and esterification of the C(28)OOH group were indicated by the downfield shift (+13.9 ppm) and upfield shift (-2.1 ppm) observed, respectively, for the resonance of these C-atoms in **2**, relative to the corresponding signals in pomolic acid [14].

To confirm our assumption regarding the glycosidic composition of this compound, an ESI-IT-MS\({}^{n}\) experiment was performed. In the ESI-IT-MS\({}^{n}\) spectrum, the peak at 

## Page 5

\(m/z\) 1103 was assigned to a deprotonated molecule (\([M-{\rm H}]^{-}\)) of compound **2**. An adduct at \(m/z\) 1139 was observed, and it was tentatively assigned to \([M-{\rm H}+2\) H2O]-, which could result from the use of H2O to dissolve the sample [15]. The second order fragmentation of the adduct \(m/z\) 1139 led to a base peak at \(m/z\) 941 (\([M-162-{\rm H}]^{-}\)), indicating the loss of a hexose moiety. The MS3 fragmentation from this ion (\(m/z\) 941) gave a product ion at \(m/z\) 795 (\([M-162-146-{\rm H}]^{-}\)), corresponding to the loss of a deoxyhexose moiety. MS4 fragmentation from the ion \(m/z\) 795 yielded a peak at \(m/z\) 633 (\([M-(2\times 162)-146-{\rm H}]^{-}\)), due to the loss of a second hexose moiety, and the MS5 fragmentation of this precursor ion produced a product ion at \(m/z\) 471 (\([M-(3\times 162)-146-{\rm H}]^{-}\)), corresponding to the loss of a third hexose moiety and is in agreement with the molecular weight of the aglycone pomolic acid.

The structures of the sugar moieties were deduced by 1D-TOCSY and 2D-NMR experiments (_Table 3_). The 1D-TOCSY method [16] allowed the subsectrum of a single monosaccharide unit to be extracted from the crowded overlapped region. Selected 1D-TOCSY data obtained by irradiation of each anomeric H-atom signal yielded the subsectrum of each sugar residue. Thus, the shifts of the sugar resonances were attributable to an \(\alpha\)-L-rhamnopyranosyl (\(\delta\)(H) 5.22 (H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm Rha}\))) and three \(\beta\)-d-glucopyranosyl (\(\delta\)(H) 4.44 (H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcI}\))), \(\delta\)(H) 4.91 (H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcII}\)))), and \(\delta\)(H) 5.36 (H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcII}\)))) units. The \(\beta\)-orientation of all three anomeric centers of the glucopyranosyl moieties was supported by the relatively large coupling constant values observed for the H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcI}\)) (\(d\), \(J\) = 7.7), H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcII}\)) (\(d\), \(J\) = 7.6), and H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcIII}\)) (\(d\), \(J\) = 8.1). And the \(\alpha\)-orientation of the anomeric H-atom of the rhamnopyranosyl moiety was based on the multiplicity of the H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm Rha}\)) signal (br. \(s\)). The absolute configuration of the sugar residues has been tentatively determined by biogenetic considerations.

The positions of the sugar moieties were unambiguously defined by the _g_HMBC experiment. A cross-peak due to long-range correlations between H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcI}\)) (\(\delta\)(H) 4.44) and C(3) (\(\delta\)(C) 92.1) of the aglycone indicated that this sugar unit was linked at C(3) of the aglycone. Yet, a long-range connectivity between H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcIII}\)) (\(\delta\)(H) 5.36) and C(28) (\(\delta\)(C) 178.5) indicated this sugar to be involved in an ester linkage with the C(28)OOH group. Similarly, cross-peaks were observed between H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm GlcII}\)) (\(\delta\)(H) 4.91) and C(2\({}_{\rm GlcI}\)) (\(\delta\)(C) 78.1), and between H\(-\)C(1\({}_{\rm Rha}\)) (\(\delta\)(H) 5.22) and C(2\({}_{\rm GlcI}\)) (\(\delta\)(C) 79.4). On the basis of these findings, compound **2** was established to be 3\(\beta\)-\(O\)-[\(\alpha\)-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1 \(\to\) 2)-\(O\)-\(\beta\)-d-glucopyranosyl-(1 \(\to\) 2)-\(O\)-\(\beta\)-d-glucopyranosyl]-28-\(O\)-\(\beta\)-d-glucopyranoside pomolate.

All isolated compounds were evaluated with respect to antifungal activity (_Table 4_), and all showed moderate antifungal activity against _Candida albicans_ and _C. krusei_ in a dilution assay [17]. On the other hand, none of the compounds showed inhibitory effects against _Candida parapsilosis_ and _Cryptococcus neoformans_ within the concentration range tested (250.0 - 0.4 mg/ml).

The stronger activity of the AcOEt extract compared to the isolated compounds may be due to the occurrence of tannins that were detected by FeCl3 and gelatin/NaCl tests [18]. Toxicity of tannins towards microorganisms is well documented [19].

This is the first report of the isolation of a saponin from the _Alibertia_ genus. Among the isolated compounds, only **3** had already been reported in this genus [5].



## Page 6

The species of the Rubiaceae family contains a great diversity of secondary metabolites: irridoids, indole alkaloids, anthraquinones, flavonoids, phenolic derivatives, diterpenes, triterpenes, and other types of alkaloids. The _Alibertia_ genus is known for the occurrence of iridoids, triterpenoids and phenolic derivatives [2-6]. The presence

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Extract or Compound & _Candida albicans_ & _Candida brucei_ & _Candida paralysis_ & _Cryptococcus neoformans neoformans_ \\ AcOEt extract & 125 & 31.2 & 62.5 & 15.6 \\
**1** & 125 & 125 & \(>250\) & \(>250\) \\
**3** & 250 & 125 & \(>250\) & \(>250\) \\
**4** & 2

## Page 7

of iridoids (**1**, **3**, and **4)** and the phenolic derivative **5** in _A. edulis_ is in agreement with chemosystematic correlations and botanical positioning of this genus in the Ixorodeae subfamily [2][20].

The authors wish to thank the Brazilian Agencies for fellowships to _V.C.S._ (CNPq) and financial support from the _Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo_ (FAPESP).

## Experimental Part

_General Procedures_. Column chromatography (CC): silica _RP18_ (15-25 um; _Merck_). TLC: silica gel _60_\(GF_{254}\) plates (_Merck_); visualization under UV light (_l_ = 254 nm), I2 vapor, and by spraying 0.5% anisaldehyde (in H2SO4), followed by heating. HPLC Separations were performed on a _Varian PrepStar Dynamax SD-1_ system having a UV-VIS detector and a _RP18_ column (_Phenomenex Luna RP-18_ (2) column (250 x 21.20 mm i.d.; 10 um; flow rate 10 ml/min, detection at 235 nm), eluting with MeOH/H2O mixtures. Optical rotations: _Polarnat A Carl Zeiss Jena_ polarimeter. UV Spectra: _Varian ProStar 330_ diode array spectrometer; _l_max in nm. IR Spectra (KBr): _Nicolet-730 FT-IR_ spectrometer; in cm-1. 1D- and 2D-NMR Spectra: _Varian INOVA 500_ and _Bruker DRX 600_ spectrometers; \(d\) in ppm rel. to Me5Si, \(J\) in Hz. HR-ESI-MS: _Bruker Daltonics UltrOTOF-Q_; in _m/z_. MS_n_: Thermo Finnigan LCQ Deca_ ion-trap mass spectrometer, with an electrospray interface. Negative ion mass spectra were recorded in the range of _m/z_ 50 - 2000, with a collision energy of 25% and activation time of 30 ms. Data acquisition and processing were performed using the _Xcalibur_ software.

_Plant Material. Alibertia edulis_ (Rich.) A. Rich. ex DC was collected in the surrounding of Apore - GO, Brazil, in July 2004 by Dr. _C. C. da Silva_ and identified by Dr. _I. Cordeiro_. A voucher specimen (SP 370.913) was deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil.

_Extraction and Isolation._ The dried and powdered stems (600.0 g) of _A. edulis_ were extracted with EtOH (2 l, r.t., 3 d each time) to give a crude material (43.2 g), which was solubilized with MeOH/H2O (80 : 20, _v/v_) and partitioned between hexane, AcOEt, and BuOH (3 x 800 ml each one). These extracts were examined for the occurrence of tannins using FeCl3 and gelatin/NaCl tests, and evaluated for their antifungal activity. After evaporation, a part of the active AcOEt extract (0.50 g) was subjected to CC (_RP18_; gradient of MeOH/H2O 05 : 95 to 100 : 0, _v/v_). A total of nine fractions were collected and combined into seven pools (1 - 7) on the basis of similar TLC profiles. _Fr. 3_ (MeOH/H2O 20 : 80, _v/v_; 84.4 mg) was submitted to a prep. _RP18_ HPLC (MeOH/H2O 18 : 82, _v/v_) to give four subfractions. _Subbr. 3.2_ (16.0 mg) was purified by prep. _RP18_ HPLC (MeOH/H2O 20 : 80, _v/v_) to afford compounds **1** (_t_R = 19.5 min, 5.7 mg) and **4** (_t_R = 24.0 min, 2.4 mg). _Subbr. 3.3_ (30.0 mg) was purified by prep. _RP18_ HPLC (MeOH/H2O 26 : 74, _v/v_) to afford compounds **3** (_t_R = 24.0 min, 8.4 mg), **4** (_t_R = 15.5 min, 2.9 mg), and **5** (_t_R = 20.5 min, 8.7 mg). _Fr. 6_ (MeOH/H2O 80 : 20, _v/v_) yielded compound **2** (31.1 mg) with no further purification step.

_6b-Hydroxy-7-epigaroside Methyl Ester_ (= _Methyl (IS,4aS,5S,6S,7aS)-1-(b-d-Glucopyranoside)-1,4a,5,6,7,7a-hexahydro-5,6-dihydroxy-7-methylidenecyclopenta_(c)/_bryran-4-carboxylate_; **1**). White amorphous powder. [a]28 = -17.49 (_c_ = 0.032, MeOH). UV (MeOH): 236 (3.01). IR (KBr): 3400, 2925, 1692, 1638, 1235, 1156, 947, 840. 1H- and 13C-NMR: _Table 1_. HR-ESI-MS: 403.1289 ([_M_ - H]-, C1,F1H24O711; calc. 403.1246).

_3b-O-[a-L-Rhamnopyranosyl-(1 - 2)-O-b-d-glucopyranosyl]-28-O-b-d-glucopyranoside Pomolate_ (= 1-O-[(3b)-3-[(6-Deoxy-a-l-mannopyranosyl-(1 - 2)-b-d-glucopyranoside)-(1 - 2)-b-d-glucopyranoside)-(1 - 2)-b-d-glucopyranoside)-19-hydroxy-28-oxours-12-en-28-yl]-b-d-glucopyranoside; **2**). Brown amorphous powder. [a]26 = +-2.43 (_c_ = 0.126, MeOH). 1H- and 13C-NMR: _Table 2_. HR-ESI-MS: 1127.5641 ([_M_ + Na]+, C5H8aSuO23; calc. 1127.5614). ESI-IT-MS_n_: MS2 (1139, [_M_ - H + 2 H2O]-): 941; MS3' (941, [_M_ - H - 162]-): 795; MS4 (795, [_M_ - H - 162 - 146]-): 633; MS5 (633, [_M_ - H - (2 x 162) - 146]-): 471 ([_M_ - H - (3 x 162) - 146]-).

_Antifungal Assay. Microorganisms Used, and Growth Conditions_. The test organisms included _Candida albicans_ (ATCC 90028), _Candida krusei_ (ATCC 6258), _Candida parapsilosis_ (ATCC 22019), and _Cryptococcus neoformans_ (ATCC 90012). The microorganisms were originally obtained from the 

## Page 8

Myology Laboratory of the Department of Clinical Analysis at Sao Paulo State University (UNESP). The yeasts were grown and maintained on Sabouraud-dextrose agar for 24 h at r.t.

Antimicrobial Susceptibility TestingThe antifungal activity tests were performed using the broth microdilution method as described in the M27-A2 document of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) with modifications. The medium used was _RPMI 1640_, with l-glutamine buffered to pH 7.0 with 0.165m morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS), supplemented with 2% glucose. The test samples were dissolved in DMSO. The cell suspension was prepared in 0.85% saline soln. with an optical density equivalent to McFarland 0.5 and diluted to 1:100 in RPMI for the final concentration to be \(1\cdot 10^{5}\) to \(5\cdot 10^{5}\) CFU/ml. This suspension was inoculated onto a microdilution plate previously prepared with the test samples diluted to concentrations from 250 mg/ml to 0.4 mg/ml. The plates were incubated under agitation at 37\({}^{\circ}\) for 24 h for the _Candida_ species, and 48 h for _Cryptococcus neoformans_. Fungal growth was evaluated visually and spectrophotometrically. The MIC was defined as the lowest concentration at which the optical density (OD) was reduced to 90% of the OD of the growth control well. Amphotericin B (3 mg/ml) was used as positive control and DMSO as a negative control. MIC values were determined from three independent experiments.

## References

* 7th, 2007, Poster Presentation.
* [2] L. M. V. Trevisan, Livre-Docencia, Thesis, Universidade Estadual Paulista at Araraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1993.
* [3] M. C. M. Young, M. R. Braga, S. M. C. Dietrich, H. E. Gottlieb, L. M. V. Trevisan, V. da S. Bolzani, _Phytochemistry_**1992**, _31_, 3433.
* [4] V. da S. Bolzani, L. M. V. Trevisan, M. C. M. Young, _Phytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 2089.
* [5] V. C. da Silva, A. de O. Faria, V. da S. Bolzani, M. N. Lopes, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**2007**, _90_, 1781.
* [6] V. C. da Silva, V. da S. Bolzani, M. C. M. Young, M. N. Lopes, _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2007**, _18_, 1405.
* [7] C. B. Brochini, D. Martins, N. F. Roque, V. da S. Bolzani, _Phytochemistry_**1994**, _36_, 1293.
* [8] Y. Takeda, H. Nishimura, H. Inouye, _Phytochemistry_**1977**, _16_, 1401.
* [9] L. J. El-Naggar, J. L. Beal, _J. Nat. Prod._**1980**, _43_, 649.
* [10] T. Kanchanapoom, R. Kasai, K. Yamasaki, _Phytochemistry_**2002**, _59_, 551.

* [12] S. Damtoft, S. R. Jensen, B. J. Nielsen, _Phytochemistry_**1981**, _20_, 2717.
* [13] S. Damtoft, _Phytochemistry_**1994**, _36_, 373.
* [14] S. B. Mahato, A. P. Kundu, _Phytochemistry_**1994**, _37_, 1517.
* [15] K. Alipieva, T. Kokubun, R. Taskova, L. Evstatieva, N. Handjieva, _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2007**, _35_, 17.
* [16] H. Kessler, H. Oschkinat, C. Griesinger, W. Bermel, _J. Magn. Reson._**1986**, _70_, 106.
* [17] F. B. Holetz, G. L. Pessini, N. R. Sanches, D. A. G. Cortez, C. V. Nakamura, B. P. Dias Filho, _Mem. Inst. Oswaldo Cruz_**2002**, _97_, 1027.

* [19] A. Scalbert, _Phytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 3875.
* [20] V. Da S. Bolzani, M. C. M. Young, M. Furlan, A. J. Cavalheiro, A. R. Araujo, D. H. S. Silva, M. N. Lopes, _Recent Res. Devel. Phytochem._**2001**, \(5\), 19.



