# 10.1016@0031-9422(74)80100-7.pdf

## Page 1



# Aromatic sesquiterpenoids from _Emmotum Nitens_+
Footnote †: Part I in the projected series ”The Chemistry of Brazilian Icacinaceae”, taken from part of the M. S. Thesis submitted by M. de L. M. F. to the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, and Part XXI in the series ”13C NMR Spectroscopy of Naturally Occurring Substances”.

Alaide Braga de Oliveira, Maria de Lourdes Moreira Fernandes and Otto R. Gottlieb

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais; Belo Horizonte, Brasil

Edward W. Hagaman and Ernest Wenkert

Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47401, U.S.A.

###### Abstract

The trunk wood of _Emmotum nitens_ (Benth.) Miers (Icacinaceae) contains the aromatic sesquiterpenes 2-hydroxy-3-(2'-hydroxyisopropyl)-8-methoxymethyl-5-methyl-1-oxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene (emmotin-A), 2-hydroxy-5-hydroxymethyl-3-(2'-hydroxyisopropyl)-8-methoxymethyl-1-oxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene (emmotin-B), 1,2-dihydroxy-8-formyl-3-isopropyl-5-methylnaphthalene (emmotin-C) and 8-carboxy-1,2-dihydroxy-3-(2'-hydroxyisopropyl)-5-methylnaphthalene _g_-lactone (emmotin-D).

A specimen of _Emmotum nitens_ (Benth.) Miers, an arboreous Icacinaceae species growing in the vicinity of Diamantina in the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais, was collected and identified by the botanist A. Pereira Duarte. A chemical investigation of the trunk wood has now revealed the presence of sitosterol and four crystalline compounds, designated cmmotin-A, -B, -C, and -D.

Elemental analysis and MS MW determination of emmotin-A indicated its formula to be C16H22O4. Its UV and IR spectra revealed the presence of an aryl ketone moiety and its PMR spectrum exhibited signals characteristic of two _ortho_ hydrogens, aromatic methyl and methoxymethyl groups, a 2-hydroxyisopropyl function and a 3-carbon unit defined in part structure **1**. The relative substituent positions in the latter were determined from the shift and coupling behavior of its 4 hydrogens. The oxymethine hydrogen (4:43 ppm) was represented by a doublet of 12:5 Hz, the other methine hydrogen (2:21 ppm) by a double 1:2:1 triplet of 12:5, 12:5 and 4:5 Hz and the methylene hydrogens (2:53, 3:02 ppm) by two quartets of 16:5 and 12:5 Hz and of 16:5 and 4:5 Hz, respectively. The chemical shifts of the hydrogens of the 3-carbon system indicated the terminal carbons to be attached to the carbonyl group and aromatic ring and hence the central carbon to the hydroxyisopropyl group. The presence of an a-ketol function in emmotin-A, indicated by the deacetylation of the diacetate **2b** and formation of

## Page 2

3 on reduction with zinc,1 showed that the attachment of the 3-carbon unit to the remainder of the ring system could only be in the form depicted in 2a.

The PMR spectrum of emmotin-A diacetate confirmed the structural environment of the nuclear hydroxy group by the _ca_ 1 ppm paramagnetic shift experienced by the oxymethine hydrogen on acetylation. The side chain alcohol is tertiary and the natural product underwent dehydration on treatment with phosphorous oxychloride in pyridine. Although the resultant mixture could not be separated, its PMR spectrum revealed it to consist of olefins 4 and 5 by the methyl singlets (1:64, 1:73 ppm) of the isopropylidene unit of the former and the methyl singlet (1:57 ppm) and olefinic methylene multiplet (4:9-5:2 ppm) of the isopropyl group of the latter. The methoxymethyl group was shown to be located _ortho_ to the carbonyl function and its oxymethylene hydrogens deshielded by the latter, since sodium borohydride reduction of emmotin-A yielded a triol whose PMR spectrum revealed the oxymethylene hydrogen signal 0:9 ppm upfield of its earlier position. The combined PMR data for emmotin-A and its derivatives showed the natural product to possess structure 2a or 6a. While 2a was preferred on biogenetic grounds, its final proof depended on its 1:3C NMR analysis (_ride infra_).

The MS MW determination of emmotin-B showed it to be oxyemmotin-A, C16H22O5. The PMR spectrum of emmotin-B resembled closely that of emmotin-A, differing mainly by the replacement of the aromatic methyl singlet (2:32 ppm) of the latter by an oxymethylene singlet (4:67 ppm). The presence of an extra hydroxy group was confirmed by the formation of a triacetate (2d) on acetylation of emmotin-B. The PMR spectrum of the acetate exhibited the new oxymethylene signal at expectedly lower field (Dd 0:45). These facts support structure 2c, 2c with methoxymethyl and hydroxymethyl groups interchanged, 6b or 6c for emmotin-B.

The natural abundance 13C NMR spectra of emmotin-A and emmotin-B yielded further insight into the structures of the two sesquiterpenes. Inspection of the proton-decoupled and the single-frequency, off-resonance decoupled spectra of the former in 

## Page 3

CDCl3 revealed one carbonyl, one quaternary _sp_3 carbon and four quaternary aromatic carbon signals, two non-aromatic and two aromatic methine resonances, two methylene and four methyl signals, while a similar inspection of the spectra of emmotin-B in CDCl3 showed the replacement of a methyl resonance by a methylene signal. The assignment of the chemical shifts of all non-aromatic carbons, indicated on formulas **7** and **8** for emmotin-A and emmotin-B, respectively, was based on chemical shift theory,2 while that for the aromatic carbon shifts was founded on the following arguments. The difference of the methine carbon shifts is mainly due to the difference of the disposition of the carbons toward the carbonyl group, the _p_-carbon being deshielded strongly.2 The latter as well as the quaternary centers under the aromatic methyl group and its _ortho_ neighbour are the only aromatic carbons differing in chemical shift in the two compounds, hence revealing the presence of the extra oxygen in their vicinity in emmotin-B. The remaining two quaternary carbon shifts are assigned on the basis of expected similarity of the \(\delta\) values of the two carbons _ortho_ to the acylated carbon site.

The fact that only the shifts of the aromatic carbons in the neighbourhood of the aromatic methyl group of emmotin-A are changed in emmotin-B proves that the methyl function of the former and the hydroxymethyl group of the latter occupy the same position in the aromatic ring of the two substances. Furthermore, the shielding of the benzylic methylene group in the hydroaromatic ring on introduction of an oxygen onto the aromatic methyl group shows the _ortho_ relationship between the two groups, excludes structures **6** for the emmotins and limits emmotin-A to structure **2a**. Finally, the nearly identical shifts of the methoxymethyl carbons and their aromatic neighbours in the two emmotins excludes the possibility of the methoxymethyl and hydroxymethyl units being interchanged in emmotin-B and limits the latter to structure **2c**.

The emmotins A and B coexist in the plant with structurally related, minor, naphthalene. The PMR spectrum of one of the latter, emmotin-C (C15H16O3), exhibited signals characteristic of three aromatic hydrogens, two hydroxy groups and one each of aldehyde, methyl and isopropyl functions, whose combination in light of a probable biogenetic relationship of emmotin-C with emmotin-A suggested structure **9** for the minor product. The aldehyde function (9:66 ppm singlet) was hydrogen-bonded to a hydroxyl group (12:3 ppm, _s_) and deshielded an _ortho_ hydrogen (7:79 ppm) which was coupled strongly (8 Hz) to another hydrogen (7:24 ppm) whose PMR signal broadness revealed weak, long-range coupling with the neighbouring methyl group (_bs._ 2:77 ppm). These facts are in agreement with structure **9** for emmotin-C.



## Page 4

The UV spectrum of another minor plant constituent, emmotin-D (C15H14O4), showed it also to be a naphthalene, while its IR spectrum and that of its acetate (**10**b) and of its aryl methyl ether (**10**c), prepared _via_ diazomethane, indicated it to possess a g-lactone unit. The PMR spectra of emmotin-D and its derivatives revealed the plant product to contain two _ortho_ hydrogens and another aromatic hydrogen, an aromatic methyl group, two hydroxy functions and two methyl groups, which, while deshielded, were reminiscent of those of the 2-hydroxyethyl unit of emmotins A and B. Attempted acetylation of **10**c gave a mixture of acetate and olefin. The isopropyl unit (1:75 ppm methyl singlet, 5:0-5:2 ppm methylene multiplet) of the latter proved the presence of a 2-hydroxyethyl group in emmotin-D. These results and biogenetic considerations indicated structure **10**a for emmotin-D.

The configurations of the four emmotins are related to the structures of rishitinol (**11**), recently isolated from discased potato tubers.3 and occidol (**12**).4 Since the latter co-occurs in _Thuja occidentalis_ L. with occidentalol (**13**).5 a sesquiterpene alcohol of the general eudesmane type. a 1-carbon shift seems to accompany the aromatization of sesquiterpenes obeying the Isoprene Rule.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of the constituents of_ Emmotum nitens. The trunk wood was separated into bark, heartwood and softwood and the ground heartwood (4:5 kg) extracted successively with benzene and EtOH in a Soxhlet. Chromatography of a portion (65 g) of the C6H, rat, extract (273 g) on silica (1:3 kg) and elution with C6H, and C6H, (1:1) gave an oil and a solid, respectively, which were not investigated. Crystallization of the CHCl3-C6H6 (3:2) eluate from Et2O-petrol. (2:1) yielded emmotin-A (3:3 g), while crystallization of the CHCl3-C6H6 (4:1) eluate from EtOH afforded emmotin-D (1:4 g). Crystallization of the CHCl3 MeOH (9:1) eluate from EtOH led to emmotin-B (3:0 g). Chromatography of a portion (100 g) of the EtOH extract (310 g) on silica (1-0 kg) and rechromatography of the benzene eluate (2:5 g) on silica (50 g) gave a solid whose crystallization from 2:1 Et2O-petrol. produced emmotin-C (52 mg). Extraction of the ground softwood (9:0 kg) with C6H, chromatography of a portion (25 g) of the extract (210 g) on silica and crystallization of the C6H6-CHCl3 (7:3) eluate from EtOH gave instead (12 mg). Crystallization of the C6H6-CHCl3 (1:1) eluate from 2:1 Et2O-petrol.yielded more emmotin-A (735 mg), while crystallization of the CHCl3- MeOH (20:1) eluate from EtOH afforded more emmotin-B (300 mg).



## Page 5

_Emmontin-A_ (2a), Needles, m.p. 79deg (Found: C, 69-00: H, 7-93. C16H2O4 requires: C, 69-03; H, 7-97 %). UV \({}^{\prime}\)z\({}^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (nm): 248, 254, 259, 303 (e 9400, 11000, 9900, 2350). IR \({}^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (cm\({}^{-1}\)): 3470, 2960, 1675, 1575, 1470, 1100, PMR (d): 133 (s, Me), 145 (s, Me), 2.21 (_d, J_ 125, 125, 45 Hz, H-3), 2.32 (s, Me), 2.53 (_dd, J_ 16-5, 125 Hz, Hax-4), 3.02 (_dd, J_ 16-5, 4:5 Hz, Hga-4), 3.50 (_S_, OMC), 4.43 (_d, J_ 125 Hz, H-2), 4.55 (_s_, OH), 4.62 (_s_, OH), 4.86, 4.93 (_d_ each, \(J\) 16 5.2 Hz, AB of OCH2), 7.46 (_d, J_ 9 0.2 Hz, 7-4, 7:54 (_d, J_ 90 Hz, H-6). MS (m/e): 278 (35 %) M, 260 (9), 232 (26), 231 (25), 229 (8), 228 (6), 227 (18), 220 (5), 204 (10), 203 (13), 202 (30), 201 (100), 200 (20), 199 (14), 189 (15), 188 (24), 187 (51), 186 (13), 185 (44

## Page 6

_Emmotin-D methyl ether_ (**10c**). Needles, m.p. 171-172 (EtOH). IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm KBr}\) (cm - 1): 3470, 1754, 1640, 1490, 1405, 1250, 1080, 798. PMR (d): 1'76 (s, 2 Mc), 2'77 (s, Mc), 3'55 (s, OH), 4'38 (s, OMe), 7:43 (d, \(J\) 7 Hz, H-6), 7:83 (s, H-4), 7:93 (d, \(J\) 7 Hz, H-7), MS (_m/e_): 272 (42 %) M, 258 (100).

\(NMR\) _instrumentation._ The PMR spectra were determined for CDCl3 solutions (except **10a**) containing TMS as internal standard (d = 0 ppm) on Varian DP-60 and HR-220 spectrometers. The CMR spectra of CDCl3 solutions in spinning 13 mm o.d. tubes were recorded on a spectrometer operating at 15:08 MHz with a Varian DP-60 magnet working at 14 kg. The \(d\) values on **7** and **8** are in ppm downfield from TMS. \(\delta^{\rm TMS} = \delta^{\rm CDCl3} + 76\)-9 ppm, the solvent being used as the internal reference.



