# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)91125-7.pdf

## Page 1

EtOH). The IR spectrum showed strong absorption at 3400-2300, 3070, 1685, 1675, 1635, 1415, 1255 e 895 cm-1 suggesting the presence of carboxyl, conjugated double bond and terminal methylene groups; confirmed by the PMR spectrum which showed also signals of three methyl groups. Mono- and dimethyl esters were prepared. Dimethyl agathate [5-7], [z]l5 + 54deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3); MS M+ _m/e_ 348:2293 (C22H34O4), was reduced to agathadiol [5-7], mp 104-106deg, [z]l5 + 32deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3). (e) _Agatholic acid_ [7] (350 mg), mp 183-184deg; [z]l5 + 46deg (_c_ 1, EtOH). The IR spectrum had strong absorption at 3500-2400, 3280, 3075, 1680, 1655, 1250, 1240, 1165, 1040 and 905 cm-1, indicating the presence of carboxyl, hydroxyl, conjugated double bond and terminal methylene groups. The PMR spectrum was similar to that of agathic acid, excepting the AB quartet due to -CH2OH. Methyl agatholate [7], mp 71-73deg; [z]l5 + 43deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3); MS M+ _m/e_ 334:2502 (C21H34O3), was prepared and reduced to agathadiol. (f) _Imbricatolic acid_ [8,9] (0.79 g), oily (mp 52-60deg, after drying _in vacuo_); [z]l5 + 48deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3); MS M+ _m/e_ 322. The absorption bands in the IR spectrum at 3400, 3200-2400, 3080, 1700, 1650, 1265 and 890 cm-1 suggested the presence of carboxyl, hydroxyl and terminal methylene groups; confirmed by the PMR spectrum d (CDCl3) 055 (s, Me at C-10); 0-90 (_br_, Me at C-13); l-25 (_s_, Me at C-4); 3:60 (_t_. _J_~6Hz, -CH2CH2OH); 4:50 and 4:75 (both _br_ s, = CH2) and 7:75 (_br_ s, COOH and OH). The acetate (acetyl-imbricatolic acid), [a]l25 + 45deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3), showed in MS, M+ _m/e_ 364:2602 (C22H36O4). The methyl ester of (f), [a]l25 + 47deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3), MS M+ _m/e_ 336, was reduced to imbricatadiol [8,9], mp 111-113deg; [a]l25 + 25deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3). Authentic samples were not available but the spectral data were in accordance with those reported for the three diterpene acids [5-9].

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are indebted to Dr. Ernest Wenkert, Rice University, Houston, Texas, U.S.A., for providing the high resolution MS, and to the Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas and Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (Brazil), for grants.

## References

- Rizzini (1971) _Artores e Madeiras Vteis do Brasil_ --Mamal de Pendrologia_ p. 30 Editora da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo.
- Dryselius E. and Lindberg (1956) _Acta Chem. Scand._**10**, 445.
- Lombardi \(N\), Santamaria, P. M. and Bonino (1970) _Rev. Soc. Quim. Mex._**11**, 148.
- Devon \(T\), K. and Scott (1972) _Handbook of Naturally Occurring Compounds_. Vol. II, p. 218. Academic Press, New York.
- Carman \(T\), R. M. and Marty (1966) _Ausr. J. Chem._**19**, 2403.
- Arya \(V\), P. Erdman, H. and Kubota (1961) _Tetrahedron_**16**, 255.
- Enzell (1961) _Acta Chem. Scand._**15**, 1303.
- Weismann \(G\), Bruns, K. and Gruetzmacher (1965) _Tetrahedron Letters_**15**, 4623.
- Bruns \(K\) and Weismann (1966) _Tetrahedron Letters_**17**, 1901.
- Jayr de Paiva Campello (2000) _Anita J. Marsaioli_ Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, C.P. 1170, 13.100 Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brasil (Received 14 March 1975)


## Page 2

subjected to various chromatographic separations, yielded a series of fractions, listed below in increasing order of polarity. An oily fraction containing two ketones, yielded upon repeated crystallization 50 mg of fine needles. The IR spectrum revealed only one carbonyl group (1710 cm-1), a double bond (1475 cm-1) and a gem-dimethyl group (1380-1390 cm-1). The PMR spectrum of this ketone in CDCl3 suggested the presence of 6 tertiary methyl groups at \(d\) 0-92, 0-99, 1*02, 1*03, 1*03, 1*10; two secondary methyl groups at \(d\) 0-89 and 1*04 each with \(J\) values of 5 Hz; and an olefinic hydrogen multiplet at \(d\) 5*43. These facts pointed to a triterpene ketone skeleton, but the clue to its identity came from a close study of its MS which was identical with that of synthetic bauerenone (**1**) [5]. Upon reduction with LiAlH4, the isolated ketone gave a 3_b_-alcohol having physical properties identical with those of bauerenol, thus confirming the isolation of bauerenone (**1**) as a natural product.

The remaining oily fraction was treated with LiAlH4 and the product crystallized from EtOHc. The MS, IR and PMR spectra showed that the product was a mixture of bauerenol and another triterpene. Upon repeated crystallization from Et2O-C5H5N a small amount of a-amyrin was isolated. These facts indicate the probable presence of baurenone and amyrenone in the original oily fraction.

A solid fraction containing two triterpenes, was also obtained. As TLC, column chromatography and repeated crystallization were not effective for their separation, the mixture was acetylated and then subjected to chromatography on alumina-AgNO3. The main compound obtained was identical in all respects with an authentic sample of a-amyrin acetate, suggesting the presence of a-amyrin in the original mixture.

In our previous work [4] we had mentioned the isolation of a triterpene acid, C30H46O3, terephthalic acid; and we now propose its structure as based on spectral data. The IR spectrum showed absorption bands of carboxy, carbonyl, gem-dimethyl and double bond units. Its PMR spectrum in CDCl3 revealed 5 tertiary methyl group singlets at \(d\) 0*88, 1*04, 1*10, 1*25, 1*25; two secondary methyl groups doublets at \(d\) 1*00 and 1*05 with \(J\) value of 5 Hz; and an olefinic hydrogen multiplet at \(d\) 5*30. The UV spectrum was characteristic of a non-conjugated carbonyl moiety. A close study of its MS revealed a great similarity to that of bauerenone [5], except for an ion of _m/e_ 235. This was explained by comparison with the fragment at _m/e_ 205 from bauerenone, which consists of rings E. D and the C28 methyl group. The difference of 30 amu was attributed to the change from the methyl (bauerenone) to a carboxy group at C28. Based on the above spectral evidence we propose the structure of terephthalic acid as baueren-28-carboxy-3-one. Unfortunately there was insufficient material for further analysis.

From the phytochemical study of the leaves and bark of _Schinus treebenthifolius_, it became evident that the compounds obtained show a greater similarity to compounds isolated from _Pistacia_ [6-8] species, than with those isolated from other species of _Schinus_.

## Experimental

Mp's were determined on a Reichert micro hot stage and are uncorrected. PMR spectra in CDCl3 with internal TMS, were taken on Varian A-60, HA-100, HA-220 spectrometers. MS were determined in the direct inlet system of an AEI MS-9, Varian CH-7, C.E.-21-110 or Finnigan S/L 1015. Column chromatography was performed on 70-230 mesh silica and TLC on Merck Si gel. The material was collected in April in the vicinity of Curitiba, State of Parana, Brazil.

_Extraction._ 183 g of crude bark extract (3*7% of the dried bark) was chromatographed on a 1 kg Si gel column and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (from hexane to C6H6 and EtOHaE-EtOAc) collecting 500 ml fractions.

_Bauerenc._ Eluted with hexane-C6H6 3:1, was crystallized from EtOAc, yielding 50 mg of fine needles; mp 240deg, [2]25 - 47*5 (e, 1, +,

## Page 3

mixture (2 g) was reduced with LAH (1 g) in Et2O and the product, after repeated crystallization from pyridine-Et2O, yielded an alcohol (019 g), mp 180-182: [a]35 + 80 (c, 2, CHCl3); M+ at _m/e_ 426.

a-Amyrin. Eluted with hexane-C6H6 (3:1) as a mixture of 2 triterpenes (5 g) which could not be separated by column chromatography or TLC. The mixture was acetylated (pyrimine-Ac2O) 1:1 at room temp. for 24 h. The product was crystallized from C5H3N-Et2O; 50 mg of the acetates were treated with freshly sublimed SeO2 (100 mg) and HOAc (2 ml). After 6 hr reflux the product was purified on an alumina-AgNO3 column and eluted, with CHCl3, yielding 5 mg of a-amyrin acetate. M+ at _m/e_ 468; mp 219-220deg; [z]265 + 80 (c, 2, CHCl3).

_Terebenthifolic acid._ The acidic fraction of the benzene extract of the leaves, eluted from a silica column with hexane-Et2O (1:1) yielded (61 mg) of fine needles, mp 270deg; 1R \(\gamma_{\text{max}}^{\text{as}}\)(cm-1) 3500-2500 (-COOIII); 1700 (-C-O conj); 1710 (-C-O conj); 1830 and 1370 (-C-Me2); UV \(\gamma_{\text{max}}^{\text{as,40,cm}}\) 210 nm, \(\epsilon_{\text{max}}\) 25; PMR \(\delta\) 088 (_s_. -Me); 100 (_d_, \(J\)5 Hz. -CH-CH3); 104 (_s_. -Me); 105 (_d_. \(J\)5 Hz. -CH-CH3); 1:11 (s, -Me). 1:25 (s, 2-Me); 2:74 (_m_. -CO-CH). 5:30 (_m_. -C-C-H). M+ at _m/e_ (%) 454-3485 (48) [calc for C3H6O42 (O3:454-3447); C.H.O _m/e_ (%), C2H6O3, 439-3212 (52); C10H28O, 272-2186 (5), C18H25O, 257-1948 (21), C17H25O, 245-1941 (100), C15H23O2, 235-1721 (65), C15H22O, 218-1666 (12).

###### Acknowledgements.

 The aicoholic extract of the roots of _Carissa carandas_ L. has been reported to possess cardiotonic activity [1] and to produce a perceptible decrease in blood pressure in normal anaesthetized cats [2]. Chemical studies have led to the isolation of possibly a new cardioactive substance [3]; glucosides of odoroside H [4], a new terpenoid carindone [5] besides carisone, lupeol, ursolic acid and its methyl ester [6]. A recent investigation of the pharmacological activity [7] of the extract showed an increase in free histamine in the guinea pig lung and a pronounced decrease in blood pressure at 1 mg/kg dose which lasted for 4-5 hr. On fractionation of the extract, the hypotensive activity was found to be localized in the C6H6-soluble fraction which prompted further examination of its constituents.

The active fraction was fractionated into Et2O and CHCl3 soluble and insoluble fractions and the activity was now found to be present in the CHCl3-insoluble fraction. It showed one major spot _Rf_ 0:38 in CHCl3-EtOAc (1:4) (TLC), and was chromatographed over Si gel which led to the isolation of the substance corresponding to the above spot as an amorphous powder, named "carinol". The CHCl3-McOH (98:2) eluates containing carinol were found to be inactive whereas the subsequent eluates which possessed hypoten

