# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2011.12.016.pdf

## Page 1



# Cyclopropane- and spirolimonoids and related compounds from _Hortica oredica_

Vanessa G.P. Severino, Patricia A.C. Braga, Maria Fatima das G.F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira, Jahyr E. Theodoro, Javier A. Ellena

# Abstract

The dichloromethane extract from taproots of _Hortica oredica_ afforded six limonoids, these are 9,11-dehydro-12a-acetoxyhortiolide A, hortiolide C, 11a-acetoxy-15-deoxy-6-hydroxyhortiolide C, hortiolide D, hortiolide E, 12b-hydroxynortiolide E, in addition to the known limonoid, guyanin. The dichloromethane extract from stems of _H. oredica_ also afforded two limonoids 9,11-dehydro-12a-hydroxyhortiolide A and 6-hydroxynortiolide C. As a result of this study and literature data, _Hortica_ has been shown to produce highly specialized limonoids that are similar to those from the _Fllandersio_ (Fllandersioideae). The taxonomy of _Hortica_ has been debatable, with most authors placing it in the Toddialoidee. Considering the complexity of the isolated limonoids, _Hortica_ does not show any close affinity to the genera of Toddalioidee. That is, the limonoids appear to be of little value in resolving the taxonomic situation of _Hortica_.

## Introduction

_Hortica_ is a Neotropical genus of the Rutaceae, traditionally included in the subfamily Toddalioidee, subtitle Toddaliinae (Engler, 1931). _Hortica_ species are found from Panama to the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, with most of the species occurring in the Amazonian region. Historically, De Candolle (De Candolle, 1824) described _Hortica brasiliana_ Vand., which was collected in the southeastern part of the state of Minas Gerais and in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and Saint-Hillaire (Saint-Hillaire, 1824) described a shrub collected in Goias and in western Minas Gerais, and also named it _H. brasiliana_. Engler (1874) also attributed the name _H. brasiliana_ to the shrubby species of central Brazil. In the same study, he described a new arborescent species, _Hortica arborea_ Engl. Recently, Groppo et al. (2005) showed that _H. brasiliana_ and _H. arborea_ represent the same arborescent species, and that _H. brasiliana_ Vand., ex DC. is the correct name. Albeit well known, the shrubby species found in central Brazil remained unnamed, so Groppo et al. (2005) called it _Hortica oredica_ Groppo, Kallunki and Pirani. Our taxonomic interest in the Rutaceae motivated an investigation of the taproots and stems of _H. oredica_, whose extracts afforded eight new limonoids (**1-8**, Fig. 1), in addition to the known guyanin (**9**). A search for previous phytochemical studies of _Hortica_ species indicated that only three limonoids (Fig. 1) have been previously reported from the genus, namely guyanin (**9**) (Jacobs and Ramdayal, 1986), hortiolide A (**10**) and B (**11**) (Suarez et al., 1998, 2002).

## Results and discussion

Compound **1** showed spectroscopic characteristics close to those of hortiolide A (**10**) (C2rH32O7). HRESIMS indicated the molecular formula to be C2rH3oO8 for compound **1**, requiring the presence of additional oxygen in comparison with **10**. The main changes observed in the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of compound **1** were the presence of additional signals of a hydrogen attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (\(\delta\) 4.25, d, J = 6.8 Hz) and of an olefinic hydrogen (\(\delta\) 6.20, d, J = 6.8 Hz). This oxymentine hydrogen (\(\delta\) 4.25) was coupled to the olefinic hydrogen at \(\delta\) 2.20, and showed a one-bond correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR signal at \(\delta\) 66.0 (HSQC) and long-range correlation with the C-14 (\(\delta\) 167.3), C-17 (\(\delta\) 79.8) resonances and \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals at \(\delta\) 153.3 and 120.7 (HMDC), indicating the presence of a hydroxyl substituent at C-12 and a double bond between C-9 (\(\delta\) 153.3) and C-11 (\(\delta\) 120.7). In the g-NOSEY experiments, the observed NOE were similar to those found for **10**. In addition, the NOE of the H-12 (\(\delta\) 4.25) coming from H-17 (\(\delta\) 4.91) suggested a spatial proximity of H-17b to H-12, which requires the hydroxyl group at C-12 to be _anti_ (a) to H-17 (b). The structure of the new natural product **1** was thus established as 9,11-dehydro-12a-hydroxynortiolide A its structural assignment was also supported by comparing the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 2) with that of hortiolide A (**10**) (Suarez et al., 2002).



## Page 2

Compound **2** exhibited similar NMR spectra to **1** (Tables 1 and 2) except for the presence of a secondary acetyl group (\({}^{13}\)C NMR signals \(\delta\) 169.4, 20.8, \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal OCOMe \(\delta\) 2.02). A significant downfield shift for H-12 (\(\delta\) 5.28), when compared with **1**, determined the position of the acetoxyl at C-12. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR resonance at \(\delta\) 5.28 and a methyl \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal at \(\delta\) 2.02 showed long-range correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR resonances at \(\delta\) 169.4 (HMBC), confirming an acetoxyl group at C-12. In the g-NOSY experiments, the observed NOE were similar to those found for **1**. Thus, the structure of the new limonoid was characterized as 9,11-dehydro-12\(\alpha\)-acetoxyhoritiolide A (**2**).

The structure of compound **3** is more complex than those of **1** and **2**. The NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2) and extensive analysis of 2D NMR spectra confirmed the horitiolide-type (**10**, **11**) framework for 3. One of the changes observed in the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra was the replacement of the resonances for an \(\alpha\),b-unsaturated \(\delta\)-lactate D-ring by signals for a 15-hydroxy-\(\delta\)-lactate. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal for H-15 at \(\delta\) 4.40 (d, \(J\) = 1.8 Hz) showed one-bond correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR resonance at \(\delta\) 64.1 (HSCQ) and H-15 was coupled only to the hydrogen of a hydroxyl group (\(\delta\) 3.03, d, \(J\) = 1.8 Hz). Moreover, the existence of correlations between the \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal for H-15 and the \({}^{13}\)C NMR resonances at \(\delta\) 45.5 ( quaternary), 48.2 (quaternary), and 171.5 led to their assignments as C-13, C-14 and C-16, respectively. The COSY experiments showed correlation of the signals for H-11a and H-11b only with the resonances for H-12a and H-12b. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR signals for H-11a and H-11b showed a long-range correlations with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR resonances of C-10 (\(\delta\) 47.6, quaternary) and C-14 (\(\delta\) 48.2, quaternary). The methyl \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal at \(\delta\) 14.2, assigned to Me-19, showed cross-peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals for C-1, C-5, C-10 and at \(\delta\) 46.8 (quaternary), allowing the assignment of the resonance at \(\delta\) 46.8 to C-9, since it was the only carbon left in the skeleton for a \({}^{3}\)J correlation. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 2) for **3** exhibited resonances in close agreement with those for the corresponding carbons in horitiolide A (**10**) (Saurez et al., 1998, 2002). However, the quaternary carbons C-9 and C-14 could not be explained by the presence of a normal C-ring as in horitiolide A (**10**). The formation of a cyclopropane ring involving C-9, C-8 and C-14 in a 9,11-dehydrohoritiolide A precursor may have occurred, resulting in a horitiolide-A-bicyclo-[51\({}^{11-14}\),18\({}^{0,0,14}\)]-hexane system, whose spectroscopic properties were in accord with the above data. HEIMS showed the molecular formula C\({}_{27}\)H\({}_{32}\)O\({}_{8}\) and confirmed the structure **3** for this compound.

The relative stereochemistry of compound **3** was determined from g-NOSY experiments. The NOEs of the H-5 (\(\delta\) 2.52) and H-17 (\(\delta\) 5.35) coming from H-15 (\(\delta\) 4.40) suggested a spatial proximity of H-5H and H-178 to H-15, which requires the hydroxyl group at C-15 to be _anti_ (\(\alpha\)) to H-5 and H-17. In the same way, the NOEs of the H\({}_{2}\)-19 (\(\delta\) 1.42) and H-18 (\(\delta\) 1.18) coming from H\({}_{2}\)-30 (\(\delta\) 1.87), required the Me-30 to be _syn_ (\(\alpha\)) to Me-18 and Me-19. All these NOEs require rings A and D nearer to boat conformations and cyclopropane ring on the \(\alpha\)-side of the molecule. The structural assignment was also supported by comparing the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum with that of horitiolide A (**10**) (Saurez et al., 2002).

The final confirmation of the structure of **3**, named horitiolide C, came from a single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis (Fig. 2). The low temperature crystal structure of horitiolide C (**3**) shows the presence of two horitiolide molecules, one CH\({}_{3}\)OH and one water molecule per asymmetric unit (Tables S1 and S2). _Orteq_\({}^{4}\) type view of both horitiolide C conformers showing selected atoms labeling and the 50% probability ellipsoids are presented in Fig. 2a and b, respectively.

Figure 1: Structure of isolated compounds (**1**-**9**) and reported limonoids (**10**–**11**) in literature.



## Page 3



## Page 4

Compound **4** showed spectroscopic characteristics close to those of **3** (C\({}_{27}\)H\({}_{32}\)O\({}_{8}\)). HRESIMS indicated the molecular formula to be C\({}_{27}\)H\({}_{32}\)O\({}_{8}\) for compound **4**, requiring the presence of additional oxygen in comparison with **3**. The main change observed in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of compound **4** was the presence of an additional signal of hydrogen attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (\(\delta\) 4.89, hrs). This oxymine proton (\(\delta\) 4.89) showed one-bond correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR resonance at \(\delta\) 71.4 (HSQC) and a long-range correlation (HMBC) with the signals \(\delta\) 51.8 (C-5) and 175.4 (C-7), indicating the presence of a hydroxyl substituent at C-6. In the g-NOSEY experiments, the observed NOE were similar to those found for **3**. The structure of the new natural product **4** was thus established as 6-hydroxyhortiotide C.

Compound **5** displayed spectroscopic characteristics close to those of **4**. Analysis of the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of **5** established a pair of geminal doublets at \(\delta\) 2.23 and 2.02 (d, \(J\) = 10 Hz), which showed a long-range correlation (HMBC) with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR signal of C-16 (\(\delta\) 170.4), indicating that a methylene must be \(\alpha\) to C-16, requiring the D-ring as a saturated \(\delta\)-lactone. In HMBC experiments, the assignment of the unsubstituted C-12 could be determined from the correlation between the \({}^{1}\)H NMR H\({}_{3}\)-18 signal at \(\delta\) 1.24 and the \({}^{13}\)C NMR resonance at \(\delta\) 29.8, which showed a one-bond correlation with the \({}^{1}\)H NMR signals at \(\delta\) 1.65 and 1.30, ascribed to H-12a and H-12b, respectively. The hydrogens H\({}_{2}\)-12a,b were coupled to the hydrogen with \({}^{1}\)H NMR resonance at \(\delta\) 4.39 (brs) assigned to H-11. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal at \(\delta\) 4.39 and a methyl \({}^{1}\)H NMR resonance at \(\delta\) 2.27 showed long-range correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C NMR signal at \(\delta\) 170.7, indicating an acetyl-oxy group at C-11. In the g-NOSEY experiments, the observed NOE were similar to those found for **3**. However, the NOE of the H-5 (\(\delta\) 2.53) coming from H-11 (\(\delta\) 4.39), required the acetoxyl group at C-11 to be _anti_ (\(\alpha\)) to H-5. Thus, compound **5** was proposed as 11\(\alpha\)-acetoxy-15-deoxy-6-hydroxyhortiotide C.

The NMR spectra of compound **6** clearly indicated A and D rings, and side-chain C-6-C7 similar to **3**. HREIMS indicated the molecular formula to the \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal at \(\delta\) 116.8, which showed a \({}^{1}\)H NMR signal of H\({}_{3}\)-30 (\(\delta\) 1.73). In the g-NOSEY experiments, the observed NOE were similar to those found for **3**. However, the NOE of the H\({}_{3}\)-18 for **3**. However, the NOE of the H\({}_{3}\)-18 (\(\delta\) 1.42) coming from H\({}_{3}\)-30 (\(\delta\) 1.73), required the Me-30 to be _sin_ (\(\alpha

## Page 5

1.11) coming from H-30b (\(\delta\) 4.56), required the CH\({}_{2}\)-30 to be syn (\(\sigma\)) to Me-18. The g-NOESY experiments facilitate the elucidation of the relative configuration of C-9, which has the same stereochemistry as in guyanin (**9**, McLean et al., 1988). Thus, the structure of compound **8** was proposed as 12b-hydroxyhortiolide E.

## 3 Concluding remarks

As a result of this study and analysis of literature data (Jacobs and Ramdayal, 1986; Suarez et al., 1998, 2002), _Hortic_ produces highly specialized limonoids that are similar to those from the Flingdersi (Fllinderosioidae, Rutaceae; Breen et al., 1984), _Cederlepis_ (Ptaerocyalaceae, Mulholland et al., 1999, 2000, 2003, 2004), Melia-cea and Cheoreaceae families (A,B-seco-limonoids) (da Silva and Gottlieb, 1987). The taxonomy of _Hortic_ has been debatable and is in doubt. Groppo et al. (2008) in an analysis of sequence data from two noncoding regions of the chloroplast genome - _rps 16_ intron and _trnl-trmr_ from 65 species of 59 genera representing all the subfamilies and tribes of Rutaceae, suggested that _Adiscenthus_ and _Hortic_ formed a very strong clade in all their analyses. Because of its baccate fruit and syncarpous ovary, (Engler, 1931) included _Hortic_ as the single Neotropical genus in the Toddalioideae sub-trible Toddaliinae. On the basis of its follicular fruit and apocarpous ovary, he included _Adiscenthus_ in the Rutotieae, subtribe Galipei-nae, tribe Galipeae (names replacing the illegitimate Cusparininae and Cuspariae, proposed by Kallunli and Pirani, 1998). Based on chemical characteristics, da Silva et al. (1988) placed _Hortic_ within the Galipeae (_Cusparia_ informal tribe, da Silva). Considering the complexity of the isolated limonoids, _Hortic_ does not show any close affinity to the genera of the Rutotieae and Toddalioideae. The familial position of _Cederlepis_ has also been controversial. This genus was originally classified in the family Meliaceae and later in the Rutaceae and Ptaeroxylaceae (Pennington and Styles, 1975). Recently, molecular phylogenetic study classified Ptaeroxylaceae (including _Cederlepis_) in the Spathelioidae (Rutaceae; Razafimandimbison et al., 2010; Appelhans et al., 2011). Limonoid types of _Cederlepis_ suggest a strong affinity with the _Hortic_ genus. However, _Cederlepis_ contains chromes which do not seem to be common in all Rutaceae genera, and these have only been found in the Spathelioideae, Dictyolomatoideae and the Cheoreaceae

Figure 1: Proposed biogenetic pathway for compounds **3** and **5-9**.



## Page 6

(Sartor et al., 2003; Lima et al., 2005). Indeed many chemists were perhaps interested in alkaloids from the Rutaceae, and will rarely identify all potentially systematic important classes of compounds present in the plant. The low concentration of limonoids is also likely to be responsible for the complex limonoids must have remained undiscovered for many years in genera of the Toddaliola-deae. Thus, complex limonoids appear to be of little value in resolving the taxonomic situation of _Hortica_.

Little tracer work has been conducted to study biosynthesis of the limonoids, and ideas on their biogenesis are derived from hypothetical chemical relations between the compounds which have been isolated. Compound **3** appears to be formed via cyclization by electrophilic addition utilizing the unsaturated carboxyl at C-16, terminated by addition of hydride at C-11 in a 9,11-dehydro-hortiolide A precursor, followed by a reaction of the end with the molecular oxygen, hydroxylating C-15, as summarized in Scheme 1. The biogenesis of compound **5** appears to be similar to that proposed for **3**, however, by addition of water at C-11 and the end accepting the proton at C-15 to form the original carboxyl moiety (Scheme 1). Compound **6** appears to be produced from compound **3** by ring expansion of cyclopropane by a monooxygenase with hydroxylation at C-8, as summarized in Scheme 1. In guyanin (**9**), the biogenetic process is believed to be based on oxidation, followed by rearrangement and recylclization of reactive intermediates (McLean et al., 1988). Guyanin (**9**) was the only example of C-9 spirolimonoid, but now hortiolide E (**7**) and 128-hydroxyl-tiolide E (**8**) have the same spiro-ring arrangement. Thus, in principle, hortiolide E (**7**) can represent an intermediate stage in the formation of guyanin (**9**) from a 9,11-dehydro-hortiolide A precursor (Scheme 1).

## Experimental

### General

Optical rotations were measured by using a Perkin Elmer 241 spectropolarimeter, or DIP 370 Jasco. NMR: Bruker DRX 400, ARX 200, with TMS as internal standard. High resolution El-MS: VG Autospec-Fisons by using electron ionization technique at 70 eV (linked scan at 8 keV collisions with Helium); HRESI-MS analyses were performed on an UltraTOF-Q (Bruker Daltonics, USA) fitted with an electrospray ion source operating in the positive ion mode; the accuracy masses were obtained by using TFA-Na\({}^{+}\) (solidated CF\({}_{3}\)C\({}_{2}\)H) as internal standard; samples were directly infused into the ionization source at a flow rate of 10 mL min\({}^{-1}\); the source block and desolvation temperature was 150 degC. IR: Bomen-Ft/IR.

### Plant material

_H. oreadica_ was collected in the Forest Reserve Adolpho Ducke, Amazonas, Brazil, and identified by J.R. Pirani (Department of Botapany, University of Sao Paulo). A voucher specimen (Groppo Jr. 458) was deposited in the herbarium of the cited department.

### Extraction and isolation

Ground taproots (3.3 kg), and stems (2.4 kg) of _H. oreadica_ were successively extracted using hexane (3\(\times\), 5 L), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (3\(\times\), 5 L) and MeOH (3\(\times\), 5 L), at room temperature. The concentrated CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract (67.6 g) from the taproots was subjected to column chromatography (CC), over silica gel (70-230 mesh; 20 cm\(\times\) 8.0 cm) in vacuo. Elution with hexane, CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (1.0 L), EtOHAc (1.0 L) and MeOH (1.0 L) yielded five fractions. The CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) fraction was subjected to silica gel CC (230-400 mesh; 5.2 cm \(\times\) 28.0 cm). Elution with a hexane-acetone gradient yielded 11 new fractions, of which fraction 10 was purified further on silica (230-400 mesh; 3.0 cm \(\times\) 29.0 cm) two times with hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-acetone (17:2:1), and then hexane-acetone (4:1), to afford compound **6** (127.6 mg). Fraction 11 was purified further on silica gel CC two times as described above using hexane-acetone (6:1), and hexane-acetone (4:1), respectively, to afford three new fractions (11a-c) containing limonoids. Fraction 11a was subjected to additional silica gel CC as described above using hexane-acetone (2:0.4) and then to high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) purification (MeOH; detection UV \(\lambda\) 364 nm, flow rate: 3.0 mL min\({}^{-1}\), polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G), and yielded compound **7** (9.6 mg). Fraction 11b was also further purified by silica gel CC as described above using hexane-acetone (3:1) as eluant and then by HPLC (MeOH:CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\), 80:20; detection UV \(\lambda\) 364 nm, flow rate: 3.0 mL min\({}^{-1}\), polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G) purification, yielding compound **9** (4.4 mg). Fraction 11c was subjected twice to HPLC eluted with MeOH:CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (80:20), and then MeOH, with detection at UV \(\lambda\) 364 nm, and flow rate of 3.0 mL min\({}^{-1}\), using a polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G, to yield compound **2** (6.7 mg). The EtOHAc fraction from the concentrated CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract was subjected to silica gel CC (70-230 mesh, 5.3 cm \(\times\) 41.0 cm) in vacuo. Elution with hexane (500 mL), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (500 mL), EtOHAc (500 mL) and MeOH (500 mL) yielded several fractions. All fractions were monitored by \({}^{1}\)H NMR (200 MHz) and the fraction eluted with MeOH was examined, which showed features of limonoids. This fraction was subjected to silica gel CC (230-400 mesh, 10.0 cm \(\times\) 41.0 cm). Elution with a hexane-MeOH gradient yielded compound **8** (7.3 mg) and other fractions. Two of these fractions were subjected to HPLC (MeOH:CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\), 80:20, detection UV \(\lambda\) 364 nm, flow rate: 3.0 mL min\({}^{-1}\), polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G), yielding compounds **3** (20 mg) and **5** (8.7 mg), respectively.

The concentrated MeOH extract (3.0 g) from stems was partitioned into hexane (concentrated 0.28 g), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (concentrated 0.754 g) and MeOH (concentrated 1.069 g) soluble fractions. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR (200 MHz) spectra of these fractions showed that the major limonoids were in the CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) soluble fraction, this being subjected to CC over silica gel (70-230 mesh, 10.0 cm \(\times\) 41.0 cm). Elution with a hexane-MeOH gradient yielded new fractions, with two of these subjected to recycling high-performance liquid chromatography (R-HPLC) (MeOH:CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) 1:1; detection UV \(\lambda\) 217 and 254 nm, flow rate: 3.0 mL min\({}^{-1}\), polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G), to afford compounds **1** (8.0 mg) and **4** (6.0 mg) after recycling 2 times.

#### 4.3.1 9,11-Dehydro-12a-hydroxythotriolide A (1)

Amorphous white solid; [a\({}_{0}^{125}\)\({}^{+}\) 32.73 (\(c\) 0.010, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); IR (film) \(\nu_{\rm max}\)3436 (OH), 1732 (carboxyl), 1638 (\(\alpha\),b-unsaturated ketone) cm\({}^{-1}\); \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), HKBC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); H-2 \(\rightarrow\) C-1, C-4, C-10, H-5 \(\sim\) C-6, C-7, C-10, H-1 \(\sim\) C-5, C-7, C-10, H-1 \(\sim\) C-8, C-10, H-1 \(\sim\) C-1, C-12, C-13, H-12 \(\rightarrow\) C-9, C-11, C-14, C-17, H-15 \(\sim\) C-8, C-13, C-16, H-17 \(\sim\) C-18, C-20, C-21, C-22, H 

## Page 7



## Page 8



## Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.phytocchem.2011.12.016.

## References

* Appelhans et al. (2011) Appelhans, M.S., Smets, E., Razafimandimibson, S.G., Haevermans, T., van Marle, E.J., Couloux, A., Rabarison, H., et al., 2011. Phylogeny, evolutionary trends and classification of the _Spaelfielda-Pareoryton_ clade: morphological and molecular insights, Ann. Bot. 107, 1259-1277.
* Asakura et al. (1977) Asakura, J., Kasai, R., Yamasaki, K., Tanaka, O., 1977. \({}^{13}\)C NMR study of ginseng and integrins and their related damaname type triterpenes. Tetrahedron 33, 1935-1939.
* Breen et al. (1984) Breen, C.W., Picker, K., Raston, C.L., Skelton, B.W., Taylor, W.C., White, A.H., 1984. Chemical constituents of the _Findersia_: X0III Determination of the structure of flindero-alarm-2-a synthesis (35) (acetropy135,334,245,636,62,73,1042,1142).
* Breen and van der Vaart (2011) Breen, C.W., 2011. \({}^{5}\)7. \({}^{6}\)7. \({}^{7}\)-(furan-3-yl)-2-2-3,6/a,11-phenanth

