# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2005.06.019.pdf

## Page 1



# Phenylpropanol glucosides from leaves of _Coussarea hydrangeifolia_ (Rubiaceae)

Lidilhone Hamerski

Corresponding author. Tel.: +55 16 33016660; fax: +55 16 33227932. bolzaniv@iq.unesp.br

 Mauro Dionei Bomm

Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva

Maria Claudia Marx Young

Maysa Furlan

Marcos Nogueira Eberlin

Ian Castro-Gamboa

Alberto Jose Cavalheiro

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Corresponding author. Tel.: +55 16 33016660; fax: +55 16 33227932. solzaniv@iq.unesp.br

###### Abstract

Phenylpropanologlycosides, 1'-_O_-benzyl-**a**-**l**-rhamnopyranosyl-{1' \(\rightarrow\) 6'}-b-d-glucopyranoside (**1**) and **a**-l-xylopyranosyl-(4' \(\rightarrow\) 2')-(3-O-b-d-glucopyranosyl)-1'-_O_-_E_-caffeoyl-b-d-glucopyranoside (**2**), together with the known derivatives, 1,6-di-_O_-carfeoyl-b-d-glucopyranoside (**3**), 1-_O_-(_E_)-caffeoyl-b-d-glucopyranoside (**4**) and 1-_O_-(_E_)-feruloyl-b-d-glucopyranoside (**5**), were isolated from leaves of _Coussarea hydrangeifolia_. Their structures were determined by IR, HRESIMS, and 1D and 2D NMR experiments, and their antioxidant activities, evaluated by assaying the free radical scavenging capacity using the DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-pic-rylhydrazyl) radical as substrate. The antioxidant activities of **3** and **4** (IC50 values of 15.0 and 19.2 uM, respectively) were comparable to that of the standard positive control caffeic acid, whilst **2** and **5** were only weakly active and **1** was inactive.

keywords: _Coussarea hydrangeifolia_; Rubiaceae; Phenylpropanol glycosides; Antioxidant activity +
Footnote †: journal:

## 1 Introduction

Although _Coussarea_ is considered to be only a small genus within the taxon Rubiaceae, it is well represented in the main Brazilian biomes including the Amazonia and the Cerrado. _Coussarea hydrangeifolia_, commonly know as "falsa-quina", is characteristic of the vegetation of the Cerrado and of the semi-deciduous forests of Brazil, where it is considered to be a pioneer species (Correa, 1974). In the course of our studies concerning the bioactive principles of Brazilian plants, with special emphasis on the vegetation of the State of Sao Paulo (Pauletti et al., 2003; Hamerski et al., 2003), we found that the aqueous extract of the leaves of _C. hydrangeifolia_ showed antioxidant activity, as determined by a preliminary test with b-carotene, and strong free radical scavenging activity against 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical (DPPH). Fractionation of this extract provided five phenylpropanol glycosides including two new compounds, **1** and **2,** which had their structures determined by spectroscopic methods.



## Page 2



## 2 Results and discussion

Compound **1** was isolated from the aqueous extract of _C. hydrangeifolia_ as an amorphous powder with an \([a]_{\rm D}^{30}\) of \(-44.3^{\circ}\). A quasimolecular ion peak \([{\rm M}-{\rm H}]^{-}\) for **1** was observed at _m/z_ 415.1610 in the high-resolution electrospray ionisation mass spectrum (HRESIMS; negative mode) suggesting a molecular formula of C19H28O10. The IR spectrum exhibited strong absorption bands at 3430 and 1042 cm\({}^{-1}\) suggesting the presence of hydroxyl groups. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) displayed signals that could be attributed to a monosubstituted benzene ring [\(\delta\) 7.54 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, H-2,6), 7.30 (_m_, H-3,5), 7.23 (_m_, H-4)], a b-o-glucosyl moiety [\(\delta\) 4.90 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, H-1'), 4.06 (_dd_, \(J\) = 7.5, 8.0 Hz, H-2'), 4.19 (_t_ like, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-3'), 4.12 (_m_, H-4), 4.20 (_ddd_, \(J\) = 9.5, 7.5, 2.5 Hz, H-5'), 4.18 (_dd_, \(J\) = 11.0, 7.5 Hz, H-6'), 4.64 (_dd_, \(J\) = 11.0, 2.5 Hz, H-6'), and a rhamnosyl group [\(\delta\) 5.55 (_d_, \(J\) = 1.0 Hz, H-1''), 4.62 (_m_, H-2''), 4.55 (_dd_, \(J\) = 3.5, 9.0 Hz, H-3''), 4.26 (_t_ like, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz, H-4''), 4.97 (_m_, H-5), 1.62 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.0 Hz, H-6''). Additionally, the signals at \(\delta\) 4.85 (_d_, \(J\) = 11.5 Hz) and 5.15 (_d_, \(J\) = 11.5 Hz) could be ascribed to benzylic oxymethylene hydrogens, thus characterising the aromatic portion of **1** as a benzylic system. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed signals at \(\delta\) 137.8, 128.2 (\(\times\)), 127.9 (\(\times\)), 127.2 and 70.9, which were consistent with the presence of a monosubstituted benzylic ring. Two anomeric methane carbons at \(\delta\) 103.7 and 102.6, several hydroxymethines, one hydroxymethylene carbon at \(\delta\) 68.4 and one methyl group at \(\delta\) 18.7 resembled those of glucose and rhamnose, respectively, and clearly suggested that **1** possessed glucopyranosyl and rhamnopyranosyl units. Data from COSY and TOCSY experiments revealed the hydrogen sets belonging to the glucosyl and rhamnosyl moieties. The complete assignment of hydrogen and carbon signals and the positions of the bonds of the sugar moieties in **1** were determined by an HMBC experiment which showed long-range correlations between H-6' and C-4' and the anomeric C-1'', between H-1'' and the methylene C-6', and between H-7 of the benzylic system and C-1'

## Page 3

of the glucosyl moiety and C-2/C-6 of the aromatic system. Consequently, the structure of **1** was established to be 1'-_O_-benzyl-a-l-rhamnopyranosyl-(1'' - 6')-b-d-glucopyranoside, and this new compound has been named hydrangeifolin I.

Compound **2** exhibited a quasimolecular ion peak [M - H]- at _m_/_z_ 635.1828 in the HRESIMS (negative mode) suggesting a molecular formula C26H36O18. MS/MS analysis of the quasimolecular ion revealed a significant fragment ion at _m_/_z_ 502.1321 assigned to [M - H - deoxyhexose]-. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) clearly showed the presence of three sugar moieties together with nine additional signals that could be attributed to the aglycone moiety. Data from the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) indicated the presence of an (_E_)-caffeoyl system [1H, d 7.97 (_d_, \(J\) = 15.5 Hz, H-7), 6.56 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 15.5 Hz, H-8), 7.53 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-2), 7.16 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5), 7.10 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 2.0, 8.0 Hz, H-6)] together with three anomeric protons, two of which [5.35 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz) and 6.20 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz)] were assigned to the two b-glucose units, and one [d 5.90 (_d_, \(J\) = 3.5 Hz)], to an a-xylose moiety. From the 13C NMR spectrum it could be established that the aromatic unit was an ester of (_E_)-caffeic acid [d 165.3 (C-9), 145.5 (C-7), 114.4 (C-8), 126.6 (C-1), 115.8 (C-2), 147.0 (C-3), 148.7 (C-4), 116.7 (C-5), 122.2 (C-6)]. Complete assignment of the protons in each sugar system was achieved by considering the 1D and 2D TOCSY, 1D and 2D NOESY, and the 1H-1H COSY spectra, while the carbons were assigned from HMQC and HMBC data. A 1D TOCSY experiment obtained by irradiating at the well-resolved anomeric proton at \(d\) 5.35 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz) revealed a set of coupled oxymethine protons (_d_ 4.29, 4.14, 4.25 and 4.03) and a methylene proton (_d_ 4.39). These data, when analysed with the correlated 13C NMR signals in the HMQC spectrum, led to the identification of a b-d-glucosyl moiety. Its position at C-3 of the caffeic acid moiety was established unambiguously by HMBC correlations observed between the anomeric proton H-1'' at \(d\) 5.35 and C-3 (_d_ 147.0), and from the proton at \(d\) 7.10 (H-6) to C-2 (_d_ 115.8) and C-4 (_d_ 148.7). A 1D TOCSY experiment obtained by irradiating at the well-resolved anomeric proton at \(d\) 6.20 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) showed a set of coupled oxymethine protons (_d_ 4.27, 4.34, 4.36 and 4.08) and oxymethylene protons (_d_ 4.40 and 4.60). Analysis of the correlated 13C NMR signals in the HMQC spectrum led to the identification of an additional b-d-glucosyl moiety. From the HMBC correlation observed between the signals at \(d\) 6.20 (H-1') and \(d\) 165.3 [the carbonyl of the (_E_)-caffeoyl group], the site of esterification with the (_E_)-caffeoyl acid unit was determined to be at C-1' of the glucopyranosyl. The downfield shift of C-2' (_d_ 78.8) together with the upfield shift of C-1' (_d_ 96.1) of the b-glucopyranosyl unit also suggested that the a-xylopyranosyl unit was attached to C-2' of the glucopyranosyl moiety. The cross peak in the HMBC experiment between \(d\) 4.27 (_t_, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz, H-2') and \(d\) 75.5 (C-4''), and the correlation in the NOESY experiment between the signals at \(d\) 4.27 (_t_, \(J\) = 9.0, H-2') and at \(d\) 4.75 (_t_, \(J\) = 9.0, H-4''), confirmed the (4'' - 2') linkage of the disaccharide moiety. Acid hydrolysis of **2** afforded glucose and xylose, which were identified by TLC by comparison with authentic samples. Consequently, the structure of **2** was established as a-l-xylopyranosyl-(4'' - 2')-(3-_O_-b-d-glucopyranosyl)-1'-_O_ _E_-caffeoyl-b-d-glucopyranoside, and this new compound has been named hydrangeifolin II (see Fig. 1).

Compound **3** was identified as 1,6-di-_O_-caffeoyl-b-d-glucopyranose from physical and spectroscopic data (Akhmedov and Litvinenko, 1968). Although this compound was first isolated from _Scrophularia grossheim_ (a traditional medicinal plant used in Russia for the treatment of jaundice, hepatitis and rheumatism), to the best of our knowledge its 13C NMR spectroscopic data remain unreported. The assignment of the 13C NMR signals of **3**, based mainly on 1D and 2D NMR experiments, is provided in Table 1. Compounds **4** and **5** were identified as 1-_O_-(_E_)-caffeoyl-b-d-glucopyranose and 1-_O_-(_E_)-feruloyl-b-d-glucopyranoside, respectively (Birkofer et al., 1961, 1969).

Preliminary TLC autographic test using b-carotene as revealing agent (Silva et al., 2001) evidenced several anti-oxidant compounds in the aqueous extract from leaves of _C. hydrangeifolia_. Compounds **1**-**5**, isolated from this extract, were evaluated for their free radical scavenging activity towards the stable free radical DPPH (Pauletti et al., 2003), and compared to standard antioxidants

Fig. 1: Selected HMBC correlations (H → C) for hydrangeifolin I (**1**) and hydrangeifolin II (**2**), and NOESY correlations for **2**.



## Page 4

caffeic and _p_-coumaric acids, used as positive controls. As shown on Table 2, compounds **3** and **4** exhibited strong antioxidant activities, comparable with that of caffeic acid, probably due to the presence of the 3,4-dihydroxy (catechol) moiety in their structures. Compounds **2** and **5**, which bear only one free hydroxy group, showed weak free radical scavenging activities towards DPPH and compound **1** was inactive.

## Experimental

### General

IR and UV spectra were obtained using Perkin-Elmer model 1600 series FTIR and Lambda 14P UV/ VIS spectrometers, respectively. ES-MS were measured on a VG Platform Fisons instrument and HRESIMS on a VG Autospec (40 eV) spectrometer. 1H NMR (500 MHz), 13C NMR (125 MHz) and 2D NMR spectra were obtained using a Varian Inova model 500 spectrometer. The NMR data were measured in pyridine-\(d_{5}\) or DMSO-\(d_{6}\) and chemical shifts are expressed in \(\delta\) (ppm) values with reference to TMS. Preparative HPLC was conducted using a Phenomenex Luna ODS column (\(250\times 21.20\) mm i.d.; 10 \(\mu\)m) coupled to a Varian PrepStar S0-1 pump with flow rate of the mobile phase set at 10 mL/min; and a Varian ProStar 320 UV/VIS detector set at 254 nm. Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia), C-18 (Merck) and Si-gel (Merck) were used as stationary phases in CC fractionations. A Varian Star 9090 electrochemical detector (ElCD) composed of a glassy carbon

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c} Compound & DPPH (IC50, μM) \\ Hydrangeifolia I (**1**) & n.a.a \\ Hydrangeifolia II (**2**) & 33.2 \\
1,6-Di-O-caffeoyl-β-b-glucopyranoside (**3**) & 15.0 \\
1-_O-(E)_-caffeoyl-β-b-glucopyranoside (**4**) & 19.2 \\
1-_O-(E)_-feruloyl-β-b-glucopyranoside (**5**) & 35.5 \\ Caffeic acida & 13.7 \\ _p_-Coumaric acidb & 27.7 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Antioxidant activities of phenylpropanoids isolated from leaves of _C.hydrazofolia_ and standard compounds

## Page 5

working-electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode was employed in the DPPH' assay.

### Plant material

Leaves of _C. hydrangeifolia_ were collected in Mogi-Guacu (Sao Paulo State, Brazil) in December 1997 and identified and authenticated by Dr. Ines Cordeiro (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil). A voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden, Sao Paulo (number SP 167423).

### Antioxidant assay

The b-carotene test was performed on TLC plates according to a previously described method (Pratt and Miller, 1984;Silva et al., 2001). The stable radical DPPH' was used for the determination of free radical scavenging activity: a methanolic solution (200 mM, 2 mL) of DPPH was added to methanol (1 mL) containing an appropriate amount of each test compound in order to yield a final concentration of 100, 80, 40, 20, 10 or 5 mM. Caffeic and _p_-coumaric acids were used as standard positive controls, whilst a solution of DPPH (200 mM, 2 mL) in methanol (1 mL) served as blank. All samples were evaluated as triplicates (_n_ = 3). Each reaction mixture was shaken thoroughly and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The amount of the reduced form of the radical (DPPH-H) generated in situ was determined from the measured decrease in current (_I_) in the electrochemical cell of the EICD (Son and Lewis, 2002). The area measured on each chromatogram was normalised and compared with that obtained for the blank. The radical scavenging activity of each sample was expressed in terms of IC50 (the concentration in mM of test compound required to produce a 50% decrease in \(I\) caused by the formation of DPPH-H) (Pauletti et al., 2003).

### Extraction and isolation

Dried and powdered leaves (2.70 kg) of _C. hydrangeifolia_ were extracted with EtOH (3.0 L) for 24 h at room temperature, followed by solvent evaporation under reduced pressure to yield the crude extract (65.80 g). This extract was suspended in water (3.0 L) and partitioned with _n_-BuOH (3.0 L): the aqueous solution was evaporated to dryness and the resulting residue (2.0 g) subjected to gel filtration on a Sephadex LH-20 column (3.0 x 120 cm) eluted with MeOH. Fractions (10 mL each) were collected and analysed by TLC (CHCl3/ MeOH 6:4). On the basis of their TLC profiles, fractions 6-10 were combined (380.8 mg) and further subjected to over Sephadex LH-20 CC with MeOH as eluent. Fractions 8-12 from this second column fractionation were combined (54.3 mg) on the basis of their TLC profiles and purified by HPLC on an ODS column eluted with MeCN/H2 O (1:9) to yield **1** (12.0 mg; _t_R 12.54 min). Fractions 13-14 from the first Sephadex column were combined (500 mg) and subjected to CC over C-18 eluted with a MeOH/H2O step gradient (in ratios 1:19, 3:17 and 3:2, successively) to yield fractions A, B and C. Fraction A (132.7 mg) was further purified by HPLC on an ODS column eluted with MeCN/H2O (7:93) to yield **2** (35.8 mg; _t_R 10.25 min). Fraction B (67.5 mg) was subjected to HPLC on an ODS column eluted with MeCN/H2O (1:9) to yield, **3** (6.1 mg; _t_R 22.38 min) and **4** (16.9 mg; _t_R 14.64 min). Fraction C (145.9 mg) was purified under the same conditions and afforded **5** (8.4 mg, _t_R 18.91 min).

#### Hydrangeifolia I. 1'-O-benzyl-a-l-rhamnopyranoside-(1' ~ 6')-b-o-glucopyranoside (1)

Amorphous powder, \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{30} - 44.3^{\circ}\) (_c_ = 0.003, MeOH). UV \(\lambda^{\text{MeOH}}\) 264, 204. IR (film) cm\({}^{-1}\) 3450, 2920, 1600, 1550, 1460, 1100, 1020. ES-MS [M+Na]+ _m/z_ 439. HRESIMS [M - H]- _m/z_ 415.1610 (Calcd. for C19H28O10, 415.1604). 1H and 13C NMR (pyridine-_d_s), see Table 1.

Hydrangeifolia II. a-l-xylopyranosyl-(4' ~ 2')-(3-O-b-dglucopyranosyl)-1'-O-E-caffeoyl-b-o-glucopyranoside (2)

Amorphous powder, \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{30} + 6.5^{\circ}\) (_c_ = 0.0039, MeOH). UV \(\lambda^{\text{MeOH}}\) 282, 209. IR (film) cm\({}^{-1}\) 3445, 2940, 1650, 1560, 1520, 1098, 1010. ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m/z_ 659. HRESIMS [M - H]- _m/z_ 635.1858 (Calcd. for C26H36O19, 635.1821). 1H and 13C NMR (pyridine-_d_s), see Table 1.

#### 3.4.3 1,6-Di-O-caffeoyl-b-dglucopyranose (3)

Amorphous powder, \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{30} - 24.6^{\circ}\) (_c_ = 0.0058, MeOH). UV \(\lambda^{\text{MeOH}}\) 334, 299, 265, 209. ES-MS [M+Na]+ _m/z_ 529. HRESIMS [M - H]- _m/z_ 505.1355 (Calcd. for C24H24O13, 505.1345).1 H and 13C NMR (pyridine-_d_s) (see Table 1).

#### 3.4.4 1-O-(E)-caffeoyl-b-d-glucopyranoside (4)

Amorphous powder, \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{30} - 16.5^{\circ}\) (_c_ = 0.003, MeOH). UV \(\lambda^{\text{MeOH}}\) 332, 300, 264, 211. The IR, 1H and 13C NMR, and ES-MS data were in agreement with literature values (Birkofer et al., 1961).

#### 3.4.5 1-O-(E)-feruloyl-b-d-glucopyranose (5)

Amorphous powder, \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{30} - 13.5^{\circ}\) (_c_ = 0.0028, MeOH). UV \(\lambda^{\text{MeOH}}\) 281, 201. IR, 1H and 13C NMR, and ES-MS data were in agreement with the literature values (Birkofer et al., 1961).

#### 3.4.6 Acid hydrolysis of **2**

A solution of **2** (10 mg) in 2 M HCl (10 mL) was heated at 90 degC for 30 min and the mixture separated

## Page 6

by CC over Si-gel eluted with 15-70% MeOH to yield caffeic acid (3.5 mg), glucose and xylose. The sugars were identified by TLC using authentic standards for comparison.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Programa Biota-FA-PESP (Project 98/05074-0). L.H. acknowledges FAPESP for a Ph.D. fellowship: V. da S.B. and M.C.M.Y acknowledge CNPq for research fellowships. The authors thank Universidade de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas SP, Brazil for providing high-resolution mass spectra.

## References

* Akhmedov and Litvinenko (1968) Akhmedov, S.G., Litvinenko, V.I., 1968. Garashangin, phenolic compound from _Scophularia grossheimi_. Doklady Akademiya Nauk Azerbajdzhanskoj SSR 24, 89-92 [Chemical Abstracts, 70, 235, 1969, 118028p].
* Birkofer et al. (1961) Birkofer, L., Thomas, U., Nouvertn, W., Kaiser, C., 1961. Naturlich vorkommende Zuckrester von Phenolcarbonsuren. Z. Naturforsch. Pt B 16, 249-251.
* Birkofer et al. (1969) Birkofer, L., Kaiser, C., Hillges, B., Becker, F., 1969. NMR spectroscopic studies of acyl glycosides. Liebigs Ann. Chem. 725, 196-202.
* Correa (1974) Correa, M.P., 1974. Dictionaries de Plantas Uteis do Brasil. Ministerio da Agricultura, Rio de Janeiro.
* Hamerski et al. (2003) Hamerski, L., Furlan, M., Silva, D.H.S., Cavalheiro, A.J., Eberlin, M.N., Tomazela, D.M., Bolzani, V.S., 2003. Iridoid glucosides from _Randia spinosa_ Rubiaceae. Phytochemistry 63, 397-400.
* Pauletti et al. (2003) Pauletti, P.M., Castro-Gamboa, I., Silva, D.H.S., Tomazela, D.M., Eberlin, M.N., Young, M.C.M., Bolzani, V.da S., 2003. New antioxidant C-glucosylanthrones from stems of _Arrabidaea samydoides_. J. Nat. Prod. 66, 1384-1387.
* Pratt and Miller (1984) Pratt, D.E., Miller, E.E., 1984. A flavonoid antioxidant in Spanish peanuts _Arabia hypogoea_. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 61, 1064-1067.
* Silva et al. (2001) Silva, D.H.S, Pereira, F.C., Zanoni, M.V.B., Yoshida, M., 2001. Lipophyllic antioxidants from _Iryanthera juruensis_ fruits. Phytochemistry 57 (3), 437-442.
* Son and Lewis (2002) Son, S., Lewis, B.A., 2002. Free radical scavenging and antioxidative activity of caffeic acid amide and ester analogues: structure-activity relationship. J. Agr. Food Chem. 50, 468-472.



