# 10.1002@bscb.19810900913.pdf

## Page 1

Bull. Soc. Chim. Belg. vol.90/n' 9/1981

STUDIES OF BRAZILIAN MARINE INVERTEBRATES. VIII\({}^{1}\).

ZOANTHOSTEROL, A NEW STEROL FROM THE ZOANTHID

Zonthue socialus (Hexacorallia, Zoanthidea)

A. KELECOM

LaboratGrios Silva Araujo Roussel SA - Unidade de Pesquisas

Rua do Rocha 155 - CEP 20960 - Rio de Janeiro RJ BRAZIL

Received : 11/05/1981 - Accepted : 15/06/1981

ABSTRACT

The new marine sterol zoanthosterol, 4a-methyl-5a-ergosta-24(28)-en-38-ol, has been isolated, together with cholesterol and chalinasterol, from the zoan-

thid _zoanthus sociatus_. The structure of zoanthosterol was deduced from spectros-

copic data.

INTRODUCTION

In a previous communication\({}^{1d}\), we described the obtention of 23,24(-dime-

thylcholesta-5,22-dien-38-ol (I) from the gorgonian _Phyllogorgia dilatata_ and from

its associated zooxanthella. In order to establish, by \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectroscopy,

the geometry of the side chain double bond\({}^{2}\) and the absolute configuration at

C-24\({}^{3}\), we became interested in the model compound dinosterol (II) whose struc-

ture had been completely determined by X-ray diffraction analysis\({}^{4}\). Recently,

dinosterol and a series of 4a-methyl-5a-stanols were obtained from the cultured

zooxanthella isolated from the Jamaican _Zoanthue socialus\({}^{5}\)_. This prompted us to

investigate the Brazilian _Z. sociatus_ (Ellis, 1767) (Hexacorallia, Zoanthidea)

as a possible source of dinosterol.

The present work describes the identification of the new marine sterol,

zoanthosterol : 4a-methyl-5a-ergosta-24(28)-en-38-ol (Va), isolated together

with cholesterol (IIIa) and chalinasterol (IVa) from a Brazilian sample of

_Zoanthue socialus_.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Gas chromatographic analysis (GC) of the sterol mixture obtained from

_Z.__zoatiatus_ showed the presence of three major and two minor sterols with retention times relative to cholesterol (IIIa) of 0.65 (trace) - 1.00 (2%) - 1.26 (87%) - 1.39 (9%) and 1.64 (trace). This preliminary data proved the sterol

fraction we isolated to differ from the one produced by the cultured alga of

_Z.__zootiatus\({}^{5}\)_.

Separation of the sterols, as their acetates, by aragntic silica gel column

chromatography, afforded the three major sterol acetates, all of them over 93%

pure (by GC). Their retention times relative to cholesteryl acetate (IIIb) were

1,00 (2-1, 3 mg) - 1.31 (Z-2, 77 mg) and 1.50 (Z-3, 8 mg). The trace sterols

could not be obtained in the pure form.

Z-1 and Z-2 were identified respectively as cholesteryl acetate (IIIb) and 

## Page 2



## Page 3

ergosta-5,24(28)-dien-38-yl acetate (or chalina

## Page 4

EXPERIMENTAL

Melting points were determined on a BCHI SMP-20 apparatus and are uncorrected. Optical rotations were measured with a PERKIN-ELMER 241 polarimeter at 259, in CHCl3 solutions, IR spectra were recorded in CHCl3 solutions with a PERKIN-ELMER 735B spectrophotometer. MS were determined on a MICROMASS MM12F instrument ; intensities of the fragments are expressed as percentages of the base peak (100%). 1H NMR spectra were recorded with a VARIAN XL-100 or with a VARIAN EM 390 apparatus equiped with the VARIAN 3930 spin decoupler system ; unless otherwise mentioned, spectra were recorded in CDCl3 solutions using TMS as internal reference ; shifts are expressed in the 6 scale ; the following abreviations were used : b = broad, d = doublet, m = multiplet and s = singlet. Gas chromatographic (GC) analysis were performed on a VARIAN 2440 apparatus equiped with a FID system on a 7' x 1/8" stainless steel column packed with 3% OV-17 on VARAPORT 30, operating in isotherm mode at 2909. Column chromatographies were carried out on E. MERCK Kieselgel 60 (70-230 mesh). Analytical and preon-rative thin layer chromatography (tlc) were performed on E. MERCK Kieselgel 60 F 254 ready-to-use plates, the analytical chromatograms being revealed by spraying a 3% ethanolic solution of phosphomolybdic acid followed by heating at 1509.

Extraction

_z._\(\,\)_acodate_ was collected on rocky bottom at Cabo Frio (State of Rio de Janeiro) during May 1980 at about 1 m depth. Animals were stored in 70% EtOH until work up. The aqueous ethanol was filtered off, and the animals extracted several times with EtOH, then with methylene chloride. The organic extracts were combined and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was then triturated in methylene chloride to eliminate inorganic salts. Filtration and evaporation of the organic layer afforded 6.1 g of a brownish residue (10.5% of dry weight).

Isolation of the free mono-hydroxy sterol mixture

Silica gel column chromatography (eluent : oure CH2Cl2) of the dichloro-methane extract yielded the crude mono-hydroxy free sterol fraction. Two crys-tallizations from methanol-ether afforded 247 mg (0.5% of dry weight) of the sterol mixture suitable for GC and MS analysis, MS of the mixture : molecular ions observed at m/e = 414, 398 and 386 ; characteristic fragment ions at m/e = 330, 314, 299, 296, 287, 271, 255 and 229. The intense fragment ion at m/e = 330 results from a Mac Lafferty cleavage of the side chain of Va from molecular ion at m/e = 414 and constitutes a good diagnostic peak for zoanthosterol (Va). The GC trace is described in the text.

Acetylation of the sterol mixture

105 mg of the sterol mixture was treated with acetic anhydride (2 ml) in pyridine (2 ml) at room temperature for 15h. The excess of acetic anhydride was destroyed by addition of distilled water (10 ml) and the reaction mixture extracted several times with CH2Cl2. Filtration and evaporation of the organic layer afforded 110 mg of steryl acetates.



## Page 5

Separation of the steryl acetates
103 mg of the steryl acetates were chromatographed several times on columns of silica gel impregnated with 15% AgNO3 using a gradient elution of benzene (from 3 to 50%) in hexane). Eluted fractions were monitored by GC analysis. Combined fractions were finally purified by preparative tlc (eluent : hexane-benzene 1:1) ; the silica band corresponding to Rf 0.4 to 0.6 was extracted by a 1:1 mixture of CHCl3 and AcOEt. This yielded 3 mg of Z-1 (IIIb), 77 mg of Z-2 (IVb) and 8 mg Of Z-3 (Vb).

Compound IIIb : GC : 95% pure, RRT = 1.00, co-chromatographs with authentic \(\;

## Page 6

Bull. Soc. Chim. Belg. 89, 1013 (1980) ; e) part V : A.M. SOLE CAVA, A. KE-LECOM & G.J. KANNENGLESSER, Iheringia, in press ; f) part VI : A. KELECOM, Ciencia e Cultura, Supl. 33, 466 (1981) ; g) part VII : A. KELECOM, A.M. SOLE CAVA & A.M. BOAVENTURA in "Marine Natural Products - Chemical and Biological Perspectives", vol 5, Register of Known Compounds (P.J. SCHEUER ed), Acad. Press, N.Y. (1982) in press.
2. D.E. DOMNAN, M. JAUTELAT & J.D. ROBERTS, J. Org. Chem. 36, 2757 (1971).
3. J.L.C. WRIGHT, A.G. McINNES, S. SHIMIZU, D.G. SMITH, J.A. WALTER, D. IDLER & W. KHALIL, Can. J. Chem. 56, 1898 (1978).
4. J. FINER, J. CLARDY, A. KOBAYASHI, M. ALAM & Y. SHIMIZU, J. Org. Chem. 43, 1990 (1978).
5. W.C.M.C. KOKKE, N.W. WITHERS, I.J. MASSEY, W. FENICAL & C. DJERASSI, Tet. Letters 3601 (1979).
6. K.C. GUPTA & P.J. SCHEUER, Steroids 13, 343 (1969).
7. Y.M. SHEIKH & C. DJERASSI, Tetrahedron 30, 4095 (1974).
8. W.C.M.C. KOKKE, W. FENICAL & C. DJERASSI, Phytochemistry 20, 127 (1981).
9. D.H.R. BARTON, D.M. HARRISON, G.P. MOSS & D.A. WIDDOWSON, J. Chem. Soc. C, 775 (1970).
10. N.W. WITHERS, R.C. TUTTLE, G.G. HOLZ, D.H. BEACH, L.J. GOAD & T.W. GOODWIN, Phytochemistry 17, 1987 (1978).
11. N.W. WITHERS, L.J. GOAD & T.W. GOODWIN, Phytochemistry 18, 899 (1979).
12. F.F. KNAPP, S.T. TROWBRIDGE & G.J. SCHROEPFER Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97, 3522 (1975).
13. R.F. ZIRCKER, Helv. Chim. Acta 46, 2054 (1963).
14. L.J. GOAD in "Marine Natural Products - Chemical and Biological Perspectives" vol 2, chap 2, (P.J. SCHEUER ed), Acad. Press, N.Y. (1978).
15. W. SWENSON, B. TAGLE, J. CLARDY, N.W. WITHERS, W.C.M.C. KOKKE, W. FENICAL & C. DJERASSI, Tet. Letters 21, 4663 (1980).
16. D.A. SCHOENBERG & R.K. TRENCH, Proc. R. Soc. Lond, B 207, 405 (1980).



