# 10.1021@np50086a012.pdf

## Page 1



# MOLLUSCIDAL ACRIDONE ALKALOIDS FROM _Anogostura PANICULATA_: Isolation, Structures, and Synthesis

## Page 2

conclusion also established the position of the remaining MeO group at the 2 position of ring A. Therefore, the structure **1** was proposed for cuspanine.

Cusculine [**2**] is very closely related to cuspanine [**1**]. The only difference observed in the \({}^{1}\)H-nmr spectrum was an additional peak for an MeO group, suggesting the presence of five MeO groups in the molecule. In addition to this observation, the bathochromic shift observed in the uv spectrum of **1** was not detected with **2**, indicating that an MeO group was substituted for the phenolic group of **1**. This was further supported by the \({}^{13}\)C-nmr spectrum which showed three signals in lower field at 8 61.89, 61.53, and 60.94, indicating the presence of three hindered MeO groups (4) and leading to structure **2** for cusculine.

Cuspanine [**2**], 1,2,3,5,6-pentamethoxy-9-acridone, was synthesized from 2-bromo-3,4-dimethoxybenzoic acid [**6**]. The first method that was tried for the preparation of **6** was the bromination of isovanillin in refluxing CHCl3, followed by methylation (Me2SO4) and oxidation (Jones' reagent). However, the bromination gave a poor yield (18%), so the following alternate approach, using a directed metallation method, was adopted.



## Page 3

The methoxymethyl ether (MOM ether) [4], prepared from 3,4-dimethoxybenzyl alcohol [3] and methoxymethyl chloride, was lithiated in Et2O with _n_-butyllithium at 0deg. The resulting yellow precipitates were treated with \(1,1,2,2,\)-tetrabromoethane (5) at \(-78^{\circ}\), and the mixture was gradually warmed to room temperature to give a bromide **5** with a 66% yield. Hydrolysis of the MOM ether of **5** with HBr in warm EtOH, followed by oxidation with Jones' reagent, gave **6** in a 69% yield. Ullmann condensation (6) of **6** and \(3,4,5\)-trimethoxysaniline [7] in the presence of freshly prepared copper powder and K2CO3 in DMF gave **8** with a 56% yield appearing as orange plates. Treatment of **8** with polyphosphoric acid and xylene (7) at \(150^{\circ}\) gave **2** in the form of yellow prisms with a yield of 55%. Selective hydrolysis of the 1-MeO group of **2** was achieved by refluxing in MeOH with concentrated HCl and 70% HClO4 to afford **1** (Scheme 1). The physical data for both **1** and **2** were identical with those of the natural products. The structure of **1** was unambiguously determined by a single crystal **X**-ray analysis (Figure 1).

Both alkaloids exhibited moderate molluscicidal activity against the aquatic snail _Biomphalaria glabrata_. The LC50 of cuspanine [1] was 5 ppm and that of cuscline [2] was 20 ppm. There are only a few examples in the literature (8,9) where alkaloids exhibiting high toxicity to snails are observed. These two alkaloids also showed moderate cytotoxic activity against several carcinoma cell lines. The IC50's of **1** and **2** against HeLa epithelioid carcinoma cells were 2.5 and 8.5 mg/ml, respectively. In addition, they also inhibited the growth of BT-20 human breast carcinoma cells.

## EXPERIMENTAL

### General experimental procedures

All the procedures were the same as previously described (2).

Isolation of constituents.--The leaves of _A. paniculata_ were collected in Minas Gerais, Brazil, in February 1988, and identified by Dr. Jose R. Pirani, Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP. A voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of this institute. The dried pulverized leaves were first extracted with CH2Cl2 followed by MeOH at ambient temperature. A subsequent molluscicidal bioassay using _B. glabrata_ indicated the CH2Cl2 extract to be active. The CH2Cl2 extract (2.983 g) was chromatographed over Si gel, using CH2Cl2, ErOAc, and MeOH. This process yielded 11 fractions. The bioactive fraction, eluted with EtOAc, was rechromatographed over Si gel (Lichroprep), affording cuspanine [1] (60 mg). The fractions eluted with MeOH after the same procedure gave cuscline [2] (200 mg).

Figure 1: Molecular structure of 1,2,3,5,6-pentametrhodory-9-acridone [2] from **X**-ray crystallography.



## Page 4

_Cupanine, 1-hydroxy-2,3,5,6-tetramethyloxy-9-uridine_[1].--Yellow crystals: mp 164-166deg (from MeOH); uv l max (MeOH) nm (log e) 212 (3.84), 256 (4.83), 324 (3.78), 384 (3.60); ir l max (MeOH + AlCl3) nm 220, 250, 272, 340, 420; ir \(v\) max (KBr) cm-1 1635, 1620, 1570, 1520, 1290, 1210, 1030; 1H nmr (CDCl3, 500 MHz) d ppm 8.44 (1H, br s, NH), 8.06 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-8), 6.92 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-7), 6.23 (1H, s, H-4), 4.02, 4.00, 3.95, 3.90 (each 3H, s, OMe); 13C nmr (CDCl3, 125 MHz D ppm 181.14 (s, C-5), 159.41 (s, C-3), 155.53 (s, C-1), 154.52 (s, C-6), 138.06 (s, C-11), 135.02 (s, C-5), 133.72 (s, C-5), 130.27 (s, C-

## Page 5

were acidified with dilute HCl, extracted with CHCl3, dried, and evaporated. The residue was recrystallized from EOAc/_n_-hexane to afford orange plates (0.838 g, 56%): mp 162-164deg, if \(v\) max (Nujol) cm-1320, 2750-2500, 1650, 1595, 920, 840, 790, 740, 1H nmr (CDCl3, 60 MHz) 8 ppm 3.50 (3H, s, OMe), 3.80 (9H, s, 3 x OMe), 3.93 (3H, s, OMe), 6.21 (2H, s, H-2', H-6'), 6.68 (1H, d, \(J\) = 9 Hz, H-5), 7.90 (1H, d, \(J\) = 9 Hz, H-6), 8.27 (2H, br s, exchangeable with D2O, NH and COOH). _Anal._ found C 58.35, H 5.76, N 3.54; calcd for C18H21NO7-1%MeOH, C 58.57, H 6.11, N 3.69.

#### 1.2.3,5,6-Pantamethoxy-9-aridone

To a mixture of freshly prepared polyphosphoric acid (from 1 g of P2O5 and 1 ml of H3PO4) and 10 ml of xylene, a solution of 8 (0.364 g, 1 mmol) in 2 ml of EtOAc was added. The mixture was mechanically stirred vigorously at 140-150deg for 1 h. After the reaction flask was cooled to room temperature, H2O was added, and the solution was made basic with 5% aqueous NaOH and extracted with CHCl3. The organic layer was washed with saturated aqueous NaCl, dried, and evaporated. The residue was recrystallized from MeOH to afford yellow prisms (0.189 g, 55%), mp 241-243deg. Other physical data were identical with those of the natural product. Crystal data for 2: C18H19O6N, M=376.39, monoclinic, space group _P2_/_n_, \(a\) = 13.256 (6), \(b\) = 8.915 (3), \(c\) = 16.275 (3) A, a = \(g\) = 90, b = 101.93 (2)deg, V= 1881.9 (9) A3, Z=4, F(000)=796, _m_(MoxIon) = 0.95 cm-1, D_c_ = 1.328 g/cm3, graphite monochromated (Mo-K\(\alpha\)) radiation (\(\lambda\) = 0.7107 A); 1719 reflections with I>3.00_or_(I) used in refinement to R = 0.072. R_w = 0.098.1

#### 1.2.4-Hydroxy-2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-9-aridone

To a solution of 2 (212 mg, 0.614 mmol) in 4 ml of MeOH was added 2 drops of concentrated HCl. The mixture was refluxed under argon atmosphere for 18 h, after which 1 drop of 70% HCl04 was added and heating was continued for 4 h. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure, and the residue was extracted with CHCl3. The extract was washed with aqueous NaHCO3 and brine, dried, and evaporated. The residue was purified by chromatography [Si gel, elution with CHCl3-MeOH (99:1)] to afford 1 (123 mg, 60%) as yellow needles, mp 161-163deg (from MeOH). Further elution gave the recovered 2 (89 mg, 40%). Other physical data were identical with those of natural product.

### Cell lines and media

All cell lines used for the assay were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). They are HeLa ATCC CCL 219, epithelioid cervix carcinoma from human, and BT-20 ATCC HTB 19, breast carcinoma from human. Both cell lines were maintained on minimum essential medium (Eagle) with non-essential amino acids supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal calf serum, and incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air at 37deg. These human monolayer cultures were subcultured with a 0.25% trypsin/EDTA solution.

### Cytotoxicity assay

The cytotoxicity assays were performed by a microulture tetrazolium (MYT) (Sigma) method (12). Briefly, cells were harvested and inoculated into 96-well microtitre plates at 4000-6000 cells/well, with various concentrations of the samples. After incubation, 50 ml MTT (3 mg/ml in PBS, pH 7.2) was added. The formazan dye was solubilized by adding 100 ml DMSO to each well, followed by gentle shaking. The extinction coefficient was measured for each well using a Uniskan I Photometer Labsystems, at a wavelength of 620 nm.

## 2 Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Jose R. Pirani for the plant identification and Mr. J. Huang for technical assistance of the cytotoxicity assay. P.C.V. acknowledges CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, Brazil), for the award of a scholarship.

## References

* [1] P.C. Vieira and I. Kubo, _Phystechnitry,_**29**, 813 (1990).
* [2] T. Nakatsu, T. Johns, I Kubo, K. Milton, K. Sasaki, K. Chatani, Y. Saito, Y. Yamagiwa, and T. Kamikawa, _J. Nat. Prod.,_**53**, 1508 (1990).
* [3] I.H. Bowen and Y.N. Patel, _Phystechnitry,_**25**, 429 (1986).
* [4] D.W. Hughes, H.L. Holland, and D.B. MacLean, _Can. J. Chem.,_**54**, 2252 (1976).
* [5] E. Napolitano, E. Giannone, R. Fiaschi, and A. Marsili, _J. Org. Chem.,_**48**, 3653 (1983).
* [6] I.B. Taraporewala, _Tetrahedron Lett.,_**32**, 39 (1991).
* [7] A. Guy and J.P. Guette, _Synthesis,_ 222 (1980).
* [8] A. Marston and K. Hostetrmann, _Phystechnitry,_**24**, 639 (1985).



## Page 6

* [9] A.J. Aladesanmi, C.O. Adewunmi, C.J. Kelley, J.D. Leary, T.A. Bischoff, X. Zhang, and J.K. Snyder, _Phytochemistry,_**27**, 3789 (1988).
* [10] D. Bergenthal, I. Mester, Zs. Rozsa, and J. Reisch, _Phytochemistry_, **18**, 161 (1979).
* [11] R.Q. Brewster and T. Groening, "Org. Syn. Coll.," John Wiley, New York, 1943, Vol. 2, p. 446.
* [12] J. Carmichael, _Cancer Res.,_**47**, 936 (1987).



