# 10.1016@0305-0491(82)90526-0.pdf

## Page 1



# Comparative study of Zoanthid sterols, the genus _Palythoa_ (Hexacorallia, zoanthidea)*

Alphonse Kelecom

Nucleo de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Bloco H, 21941 Ilha do Fundao, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Antonio M. Sole-Cava

Laboratorio de Bioquimica, Fundacao Universidade do Rio Grande, 96200 Rio Grande, Brazil

18 December 1981

###### Abstract

The sterol composition of three _Palythoa_ species has been analysed and compared with literature data.

2. The mixture of sterols known as "palysterof" has been observed in all our samples suggesting that pulsterol might be considered as a fingerprint of _Palythoa_ species.

3. The sterols of _Palythoa caribaeorum_ did not show marked geographic, seasonal or sex variations and its zoxanthella showed about the same sterol composition as the host-symbiont association.

4. Biological implications are discussed.

## Introduction

Chemical studies of zoanthids have dealt principally with palytoxin (Moore & Bartolini, 1981), zoanthoxanths (Prota, 1980; Chevolot, 1981) and myxosporins (Hirata _et al._, 1979). In comparison, very little attention has been payed to zoanthid sterols (Goad, 1978).

Pioneer in zonathid sterol chemistry, Bergmann (1949) isolated "palysterof" from the caribbean _Palythoa mammilla_. Based on molecular rotation studies, pulsterol has been first believed to be the C-20 epimer of \(\gamma\)-sitosterol (I) (Bergmann _et al._, 1951), than to be a new sterol of unknown structure (Bergmann, 1962). Later Gupta & Scheuer (1969) isolated the sterol fraction of _P. tuberculosis_ from Eniwetold and showed it to be identical to Bergmann's palysterol. Analytical gas chromatography (GLC) proved the presence of five sterols which were separated by preparative GLC and identified as cholesterol (II), brissicasterol (III), \(\beta\)-sitosterol (V) and gorpgosterol (VI). From an unidentified _Palythoa_ collected near Okinawa island, Kanazawa _et al._ (1977) also isolated sterols II, III, IV and VI co-occurring with chaliansterol (VII), small amounts of cholesta-5,22(E)-dien-3\(\beta\)-ol (VIII) and traces of the very peculiar 23,245-dimirthcholestero-5,22-dien-3\(\beta\)-ol (IX). With this exception, the latter sterol is found only in octocords (Kanazawa _et al._, 1977; Kelecom _et al._, 1980) and is supposed to be an intermediate in the biosynthesis of gorpgosterol (VI) (Ling _et al._, 1970). Contrasting with the aforementioned results, another unidentified _Palythoa_ from Tahiti furnished only chalinasterol (VII) (Gupta & Scheuer, 1969).

As a part of our general screening on marine invertebrates from the Brazilian coast, we became interested in zoanthid sterols. In the two previous papers of this series (Kelecom, 1981; Kelecom & Sole-Cava, 1981), we studied the sterol composition of two species from the _Zoanthus_ genus. We now report on the sterol composition of some Brazilian _Palythoa_ species. In one case, the sterols of the associated alga have also been analysed.

## Materials and Methods

### Equipment

In addition to the equipment described previously (Kelecom, 1981), we used for centrifugation of the associated zooxanthelae a Heraeus-Christ Minifuge 2 instrument operating at 15degC.

### Animals

Three _Palythoa_ species were collected on rocky bottom, along the Brazilian coast. _Palythoa caribaeorum_ were obtained from various locations, at different periods of the year and also as sterile, male, female and hermaphrodite colonies. For convenience, samples have been distinguished by their collection number. Animals were then sun-dried or stored over 70% aqueous ethanol until examination. Data about the collection appear in Table 1. The associated alga have been obtained keeping the freshly collected _Palythoa caribaeorum_ (sample CF-72) for 3 days at 45-50degC. An abundant mucus is produced which revealed, under microscopic examination, to be extremely rich in intact zooxanthelae. The mucus suspended in saline water has been filtered over a 100 \(\mu\)m sieve. Repetitive suspension of the filtrate in saline water followed by centrifugation yielded a zooxanthella fraction practically not contaminated by zoanthellular detritus. The host was freeze-dried before extraction.



## Page 2



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{|l l l l l l|} \hline Animal \& local & Sample & Date & Dep th & conservation & yield in \% of \\  & & code & & & \(\text{Cu}_{2}\text{Cl}_{2}\) solubles \\ \hline P. caribaeorum & & & & & \\ Cabo Frio & (RJ) & CF-31 & 07.02.77 & 0-1 m & dry & 3.4 \\ Cabo Frio & (RJ) & CF-41 & 05.07.77 & 0-1 m & dry & 3.5 \\ Cabo Frio & (RJ) & CF-72 & 29.05.80 & 0-1 m & * & 2.0 \\ Abrolhos & (BA) & A-001 & 02.12.77 & 0-2 m & dry & 2.9 \\ Parati & (RJ) & D-036 & 13.03.80 & 1 m & 70\% aq EtOH & 3.1 \\ Angra dos Reis (RJ) & D-043 & 31.01.80 & 0-1 m & 70\% aq EtOH & 5.2 \\ P. variabilis & & & & & \\ Abrolhos & (BA) & A-015 & 09.12.77 & 0-2 m & 70\% aq EtOH & 2.9 \\ Palythoa sp & & & & & \\ Garaparari & (E5) & G-12 & 16.12.76 & 8-12 m & dry & 1.7 \\ Alga from CF-72 & - & 29.05.80 & - & - & 15.7 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: The _Palythoa_ collection

Fig. 1:

## Page 3



#### Extraction

Animals stored over 70% ethanol were extracted as described earlier (Kelecom, 1981). Dried animals were exhaustively extracted with methylene chloride. The yield in methylene chloride solubles appear in Table 1.

#### Obtention of the sterols

Obtention of the sterol mixtures and isolation of the sterols as their sterol acetates by a grenatic silica gel column chromatography have been carried out by previously described techniques (Kelecom, 1981; Kelecom & Sole-Cava, 1981). As crystallizations of the sterol mixtures altered the relative proportions of the sterols, sterol mixtures for GLC comparative analysis have been crystallized only once.

#### Palystcorl from P.

carbiaocum (CF-31)

m.p. 139.5-141.0deg [lit. 139.0-141.0deg (Gupta & Scheuer, 1969), 140-141.5 (Bergmann _et al._, 1951)]; [a]25 = -47.0deg in CHCl, (c = 1.7) (lit. -48.5deg (Gupta & Scheuer, 1969), -46.7deg (Bergmann _et al._, 1951)]; MS of the mixture: mol-ecular ions at _m_/_e_ 426 (6, C30H53O), 412 (1, C29H48O), 400 (57, C28H48O), 398 (9, C28H48O) and 386 (14, C29H48O), characteristic fragment ions at _m_/_e_ 385 (15, 400 - CH3, 383 8, 398 - CH3, 382 (2, 400 - H1, 380 - H1, 398 - H2O, 371 (3, 386 - CH3, 368 - H2O, 367 (14, 400 - CH3, H2O, 365 - H3, 298 - CH3, 200 35 (35, 436 - CH3, H2O, 339 (3, 336 40, 328 (3, 315 (22, 314 (14, MacLaffrey) rearrangement from a 2424(68) double bond and/or cleavage of the cyclopropane ring of gorgosterol), 300 (11), 289 (223, 273 (18, 271 (18, 255 (27), 213 (26),...; GLC: see Table 2.

Identical physico-chemical data have been recorded for the other sterol mixtures and will not be repeated here.

From _P. caribaeorum_ sample CF-72. we obtained by argentiate silica gel column chromatography sterols III, VII, VIII and X as the acetates, all of them over 90% pure by GLC. Physico-chemical data have been found essentially identical to reported data (Sheikh & Djerassi, 1974). Sterols II, IV and VI were obtained no better than 75% pure.

## RESULTS

Biological identification of our collection appeared to be a delicate task. First, there is no available systematic biological study of Brazilian zoanthids. Second, the sole strictly South American zoanthid, _Palythoa braziliensis_ Heider, 1895, had his holotype lost (Pax & Muller, 1957, p. 22) and could not be identified as none of our specimens due to the incomplete original description. Finally, systematics of zoanthids is rather confused at species level (Walsh, 1967). Based on gorgonian (Bayer, 1961) and porifera distributions (Sole-Cava _et al._, 1981), it can be assumed that the lower invertebrate marine fauna of the Brazilian tropical region can be best compared with the West Indies one. Consequently, final identifications of our specimens came from their comparison with zoanthids reported for the West Indies.

Sterol mixtures obtained from male or sterile colonies of _Palythoa caribaeorum_ (except CF-72) have been found by m.p., [a], MS and GLC practically identical to each other and also to the sterol mixture known as polystered (Bergmann _et al._, 1951; Gupta & Scheuer, 1969) (see Table 2). The only differences were the absence of the trace sterol _b_-sitosterol (V) (no molecular ion at _m_/_e_ = 414) and the presence in some of our samples of minute amounts of sterols with relative retention times (RRT) to cholesterol of 0.70 and 1.97.

The sterols of RRT of 1.00-1.13 and 2.09 have been identified by co-chromatography with authentic samples of cholesterol (II), brassicasterol (III) and gorgosterol (VI). Sterol of RRT 1.27 (molecular ion at _m_/_e_ = 400) has been identified as 22,23-dihydrobrassical (IV) on the basis of its RRT identical with literature data obtained in the same operating conditions (Popov _et al._, 1976) and by analogy with reported data for polystercol (Gupta & Scheuer, 1969). The sterols of RRT 1.50 and 1.97 could not be identified, by our techniques, due to their too low concentrations in the total sterol mixture.

Female or hermaphrodic colonies of _P. caribaeorum_ (sample A-001) showed slightly higher concentration of gorgosterol (VI) than observed for male colonies, which may reflect some sex or geographic

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c} Animals RAT & 0.70 & 1.00 & 1.13 & 1.27 & 1.50 & 1.97 & 2.09 & others & total \\ X & II & III & IV & & VI & & C28 \\ P. caribaeorum & & & & & & & & \\ CF-31 & - & 6 & 9 & 66 & \textless{} 1 & t & 18 & - & 75 \\ CF-41 & t & 6 & 8 & 66 & \textless{} 1 & 2 & 17 & \textgreater{} 2 & 74 \\ CF-72 & t & 6 & 27 & 58 & \textless{} 1 & t & 9 & t & 85 \\ D-036 & - & 8 & 7 & 65 & 1 & t & 19 & t

## Page 4

variations; however for all _P. caribaeorum_ samples but CF-72, no important sex, geographic or seasonal variations have been detected (see Table 2).

The sterol mixtures isolated from _P. caribaeorum_ sample CF-72 and from the unidentified _Palythoa_ species (sample G-12) have been found quite similar, particularly in the high concentration of brassicasterol (III) and the low one of 22,23-dihydrobrassicosterol (IV). The former animal was poor in symbiotic algae and the latter had been collected in deeper waters (see Table 1). The higher concentration in brassicasterol together with the lower one in derivative IV might thus reflect either low amounts of associated algae or reduced photosynthetic activity. Both animals also yielded lower amounts of extractable organic material (Table 1). On the contrary, the yield in organic matter isolated from the zooanthella of sample CF-72 was four times that from the host (Table 1). The sterol mixture obtained from the isolated alga appeared very similar to that of the host-symbiont association, but the concentration of gorgosterol is double in the alga as compared to the host. This will be discussed further.

Finally, the GLC trace of the sterol mixture from _P. variabilis_ (A-015) also showed considerable resemblance with the one of palystorel from _P. tuberculosa_ (Gupta & Scheuer, 1969) but with a somewhat higher concentration in sterol IV and a lower one in sterol VI.

The sterol fraction of sample CF-72 was the only one obtained in sufficient amounts to allow examination of trace sterols. Acetylation of this sterol mixture, in usual conditions, followed by argenic silica gel column chromatography afforded the sterol acetates of dominant sterols II, III, IV and VI, and, in addition, the acetyl derivatives of chalinasterol (VII), cholesta-5,22(E)-dien-3_b_-ol (VIII) and 24-_nor_-cholesta-5,22(E)-dien-3_b_-ol (X), identified by their physico-chemical properties identical to published data (Sheikh & Djerassi, 1974). Sterols VII and VIII had already been reported by Kanazawa _et al._ (1977) for an unidentified _Palythoa_ species; sterol X had never been reported as a zonanth sterol, however being found in many marine organisms (Goad, 1978).

## Discussion

As it has been observed for the genus _Zoanthus_ (Kelecom & Sole-Cava, 1981) and for Antozoans in general (Kanazawa _et al._, 1977), C28-sterols are also the major sterols of the genus _Palythoa_. However, contrasting with the results obtained for _Zoanthus_ species, the sterol composition of _Palythoa_ species appeared much more uniform. Considering the dominant sterols, one may conclude that _Palythoa variabilis_ and _Palythoa caribaeorum_ (except sample CF-72 commented separately) elaborate a mixture of sterols practically identical to that of _P. tuberculosa_ reported by Gupta & Scheuer (1969). All along this discussion, we shall use the name palysterel for this sterol mixture.

Palystorel has also been reported for the Jamaican _P. mammalosa_ (Silberberg, cited by Ciereszko & Karns, 1973, p. 189) and for the Pacific zoanthids _P. psamophilia_ and _P. vestitus_ (Quinn _et al._, 1974). Remarkably, the latter species was formerly known as _Zoanthus vestitus_ (Verrill, 1928) and has been recently reclassified as _Palythoa vestitus_ on the basis of biological considerations (Walsh & Bowers, 1971). Hence, albeit a small number of zoanthid species have been investigated up to now, all colonies of the genus _Palythoa_ seem to produce the same sterol mixture (at least for what concerns the major sterols). In addition, the specimens of _P. caribaeorum_ did not show marked sex, seasonal or geographic variations. Similarly, no geographic variations had been observed by Gupta & Scheuer (1969) for the sterol mixture of _P. tuberculosa_. It is thus tempting to consider palysterel as a fingerprint for zonaths of the genus _Palythoa_. Indeed, from the more than 80 marine invertebrates screened in our laboratory (among them sea stars, holothurans, sponges and gorgonians), only the sterol mixtures obtained from animals of the _Palythoa_ genus presented the GLC trace of palystorel. On the contrary, no species of the closely related genus _Zoanthus_ contained palystorel, since gorgosterol has never been found in this genus (Kelecom & Sole-Cava, 1981).

However, an unidentified Tahitian _Palythoa_ species (Gupta & Scheuer, 1969) and the Hawaiian _P. toxica_ (Quinn _et al._, 1974) have been reported to contain essentially a single sterol, chalinasterol (VII). This is in apparent contradiction with our assumption that palystorel might be a fingerprint of the genus _Palythoa_. As there seem to be no doubt about the biological identifications of both specimens, these observations may be in agreement with the suspicion that the genus _Palythoa_ might well be comprised of two different genera or sub-genera (Quinn _et al._, 1974). The question raises then whether the presence of palystorel can be used to divide the genus _Palythoa_ into two groups, in the same way as the presence of cholesterol characterises the division of red algae into the sub-classes Bangiophyceae and Florideophyceae (Brothers & Dickson, 1980). Since palystorel did not show sex, seasonal or geographic dependence and since palystorel is neither related to the liberate (i.e. digitated) vs immerase (i.e. incrusted) shape of the colony nor to the presence of palytoxin, known to be associated with female colonies (Kimura _et al._, 1972; Kelecom _et al._, 1982) (Table 3), it seems that the presence of palystorel might well be suitable to distinguish both genera or sub-genera comprised into _Palythoa_.

Since many marine invertebrates are known to be unable to biosynthetise sterols _de novo_ (Goad, 1978), the problem merges to know whether zoanthid sterols are from exogenous origin or not. Indeed, zoanthids contain large amounts of intracellular dinoflagellate algae named zooxanthellae. The role of these algae is still not well understood, but it is known that zooxanthellae furnish nutritive organic material to the host (Muscatine, 1973). It is thus reasonable to question about the algal origin of palystorel. But if palystorel was strictly from algal origin, one should expect the various palystorel producing _Palythoa_ species to be associated to identical or very similar zooxanthellae. This seems not to be the fact since two samples of _P. mammalosa_ collected from two locations around Bermudas have been shown to be associated with two different strains of zooxanthellae (isoenzyme studies) and that the similarity coefficient between both strains was very low (Schoenberg & Trench, 1980). The same observations have been made with two 

## Page 5

samples of another zoanthid, _Protopalythoa grandis_ (Schoenberg & Trench, 1980).

Are zonathid sterols thus strictly produced by the host, or are they from mixed (host-algal) origin? The following considerations on gorgosterol may answer this question.

As pointed out before, gorgosterol is in _P. caribaeorum_ (sample CF-72) twice as abundant in the sterol mixture isolated from the alga as compared with that from the host. The same observation had already been reported by Ciereszko _et al._ (1968) for gorgosterol from gorgonians. These authors concluded that the occurrence of gorgosterol in coelementates is associated with the occurrence of zooxanthellae, and it has been shown since then that zooxanthellae-free gorgonians did not contain gorgosterol at all (Kokke _et al._, 1981). Recently, gorgosterol has been isolated from the cultured non-zooxanthella dinoflagellate _Peridinium folicecum_ (Withers _et al._, 1979), but it has never been found in a _cultured_ zooxanthella isolated from an host known to contain gorgosterol, since cultured zooxanthellae produce principally 4_a_-methyl-sterols (Kokke _et al._, 1981). This might indicate that zooxanthellae are unable to produce gorgosterol or that a modification of the algal metabolism takes place when the zooxanthella is isolated from the host. More probably it means that gorgosterol is effectively produced by the host from an algal precursor. A candidate for precursor might be 4_a_-methyl-5_a_-gorgostanol (XI), a sterol which has been isolated from the cultured marine alga _Peridinium folicecum_ (Withers _et al._, 1979). Hence, gorgosterol should be from mixed (host-algal) origin. The same may be proposed for palystrol which contains gorgosterol as the second major sterol, but in the absence of any biosynthetic experiments envolving zoanthids, no final hypothesis can be proposed.

Further experiments are needed to solve the problem of the origin of palystrol in zoanthids; but it remains that palystrol is only produced by most of the zoanthids of the genus _Palythoa_ and that palystrol might be useful to divide the genus _Palythoa_ into two genera or sub-genera.

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are indebted to the Laboratorios Silva-Araujo Roussel S. A. (S.A.R.S.A.) for equipment facilities, to Prof. B. Tursch and colleagues (Free University of Brussels, Belgium) for a sample of gorgosterol and to the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq).

## References

* [1]Bayer F. M. (1961) The shallow-water octocorallia of the West-Indian region. In _Studies of the Fauna of Curacao and other Caribbean Islands_. Vol. 12, pp. 1-373. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague.
* [2]Bergmann W. (1949) Comparative biochemical studies on the lipids of marine invertebrates, with special reference to the sterols. _J. mar. Res._**8**, 2(1): 137-176.
* [3]Bergmann W., Feeney R. J. & Swift A. N. (1951) Contribution to the study of marine natural products XXXI. Palystrol and other lipids components of sea anemones. _J. org. Chem._**16**, (1): 1337-1344.
* [4]Bergmann W. (1962) _Comparative Biochemistry_, Vol. III, part A (Edited by Florkin M. & Mason H. S.), pp. 103-162. Academic Press, New York.
* [5]Brothers S. L. & Dickson L. G. (1980) Sterols of _Goniorichum elegans_. Phytochemistry_**19**, (11): 2357-2358.
* [6]Chevolot L. (1981) Guanidine derivatives. In _Marine Natural Products_.-_Chemical and Biological Perspectives_, Vol. IV, chap. 2, (Edited by Scheuer P. J.), pp. 53-91. Academic Press, New York.
* [7]Ciereszko L. S. & Karns T. K. B. (1973) Comparative biochemistry of coral reef coelementates. In _Biology and Geology of Coral Reefs_, Vol. II, _Biology_, chap. 6 (Edited by Jones O. A. & Endean R.), pp. 183-203. Academic Press, New York.
* [8]Goad L. J. (1978) The sterols of marine invertebrates: composition, biosynthesis, and metabolites. In _Marine Natural Products_.-_Chemical and Biological Perspectives_,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{|l c c c|c|} \hline \multicolumn{1}{|c}{species} & \multicolumn{3}{c|}{presence of} \\ \multicolumn{1}{|c}{} & \multicolumn{2}{c|}{palsyterol} & \multicolumn{1}{c|}{galytoxin} & \multicolumn{1}{c|}{references} \\ \hline P. mammals & imersae & + & + & a - b \\ P. tuberculosis & imersae & + & + & c - d \\ P. toxic & libere & - & + & d - d \\ P. psamophilia & libereae & + & - & d - d \\ P. vest t us & libereae & + & + & d - d \\ P. variabilis & libereae & + & + & e - f \\ P. caribbsecorum & & & & & \\ male colonies & & + & - & e - f \\ female colonies & & + & + & e - f \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Presence of palystrol and palytoxin in _Palythoa_ spp

## Page 6

Vol. II, chap. 2, (Edited by Scheuer P. J.) pp. 75-172. External Links: ISBN 978-3-010-72558-0 Cited by: SS1.
* [19]K. C. Gupta and P. J. Scheuer (1969) Zoanthid sterols. Steroids13 (3), pp. 343-356. External Links: ISSN 0001-8712, Document, Link Cited by: SS1.
* [20]Y. Hashimoto (1979) Marine Toxins and other bioactive marine metabolites. 4, pp. 248. External Links: ISSN 0001-8712, Document, Link Cited by: SS1.
* [21]Y. Hirata, D. Uemura, K. Ueda, and S. Takano (1979) Several compounds from _Palythoa tuberculosa_ (Coelenterata). _Pure appl. Chem._51 (9), pp. 1875-1883. External Links: ISSN 0001-8712, Document, Link Cited by: SS1.
* [22]A. Kanazawa, S. Ishima, and T. Ando (1977) Sterols of Coelenterates. _Comp. Biochem. Physiol._57B (2), pp. 317-323. External Links: ISSN 0001-8712, Document, Link Cited by: SS1.
* [23]A. Kelecom (1981) Studies of Brazilian marine invertebrates VIII. Zoanthosterol, a new sterol from the zoanthid _Zoanthus sociatus_ (Hexacorallia, Zoanthidea). _Bull. Soc. chim. Belg._90 (9), pp. 971-976. External Links: ISSN 0001-8712, Document, Link Cited by: SS1.
* [24]A. Kelecom and A. M. Scheuer (1981) Studies of Brazilian marine invertebrates IX. Comparative study of zoanthid sterols 1. The genus Zoanthus. _Mem. Inst. Butantan._ In press, Cited by: SS1.
* [25]A. K. K.



