# 10.1080@14786410903335232.pdf

## Page 1

This article was downloaded by: [Aston University]

On: 20 January 2014, At: 17:57

Publisher: Taylor & Francis

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Natural Product Research: Formerly

Natural Product Letters

Publication details, including instructions for authors and

subscription information:

[http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gnpl20](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gnpl20)

Suppression of TNF-a induced NFkB

activity by gallic acid and its semi-

synthetic esters: possible role in cancer chemoprevention

Mauro C.C. Morais a, Suaib Luqman a, Tamara P. Kondratyuk

a, Maicon S. Petronio, Luis O. Regasini, Duce H.S. Silva, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Christiane P. Soares, & John M. Pezzuto a

aCollege of Pharmacy, University of Hawaii, 34 Rainbow Drive, Hawaii, Hilo 96720, USA

bDepartment of Clinical Analyses, Cytology and Cellular Biology Laboratory, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Rua Expedicionarios do Brasil, n.1621, Centro, 14801-902, Araraquara-SP, Brazil

cIUSSTF Fellow, Genetic Resources and Biotechnology Division, Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (Council of Scientific and Industrial Research), Lucknow 226015, India

dDepartment of Organic Chemistry, NuBBE-Nucleus of Bioassays, Biosynthesis and Ecophysiology of Natural Products, Institute of Chemistry, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Rua Prof. Francisco Degni, SN, Bairro Quitandinha, 14801-970 CP 355, Araraquara-SP, Brazil

Published online: 21 Apr 2010.

To cite this article: Mauro C.C. Morais, Suaib Luqman, Tamara P. Kondratyuk, Maicon S. Petronio, Luis O. Regasini, Dulce H.S. Silva, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Christiane P. Soares & John M. Pezzuto (2010) Suppression of TNF-a induced NFkB activity by gallic acid and its semi-synthetic esters: possible role in cancer chemoprevention, Natural Product Research: Formerly Natural Product Letters, 24:18, 1758-1765, DOI: 10.1080/14786410903335232

To link to this article: [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786410903335232](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786410903335232)

## Page 2

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the "Content") contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, resulting, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

## Page 3

Suppression of TNF-\(\alpha\) induced NF\(\kappa\)B activity by gallic acid and its semi-synthetic esters: possible role in cancer chemoprevention

Mauro C.C. Morais\({}^{\text{ab}}\), Suaib Luqman\({}^{\text{ac}}\), Tamara P. Kondratyuk\({}^{\text{a}}\), Maicon S. Petronio\({}^{\text{d}}\), Luis O. Regasini\({}^{\text{d}}\), Dulce H.S. Silva\({}^{\text{d}}\), Vanderlan S. Bolzani\({}^{\text{d}}\), Christiane P. Soares\({}^{\text{c}}\) and John M. Pezzuto\({}^{\text{a}}\)

\({}^{a}\)College of Pharmacy, University of Hawaii, 34 Rainbow Drive, Hawaii, Hilo 96720, USA;

\({}^{b}\)Department of Clinical Analyses, Cytology and Cellular Biology Laboratory, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Rua Expedicionarios do Brasil, n.1621, Centro, 14801-902, Araraquara-SP, Brazil; \({}^{c}\)IUSSTF Fellow, Genetic Resources and Biotechnology Division, Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (Council of Scientific and Industrial Research), Lucknow 256015, India; \({}^{d}\)Department of Organic Chemistry, NuBBE-Nucleus of Bioassays, Biosynthesis and Ecophysiology of Natural Products, Institute of Chemistry, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Rua Prof. Francisco Degni, SN, Bairro Quitandinha, 14801-970 CP 355, Araraquara-SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Gallic acid (3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid), found in many plants either in free-form or part of tannins, is known to possess anti-microbial, antioxidant and cytotoxic properties. NF\(\kappa\)B regulates the expression of several genes involved in carcinogenesis. These include anti-apoptotic, cytokines and cell cycle-regulatory genes. It is well established that the transcriptional factor NF\(\kappa\)B is deregulated in many forms of cancer. Thus, agents that can suppress NF\(\kappa\)B activation have the potential of suppressing carcinogenesis. In the present investigation, gallic acid was isolated from _Alchornea glandulosa_ (Euphorbiaceae) and eight esters were synthesised. These compounds were evaluated against TNF-\(\alpha\)-induced NF\(\kappa\)B activation with stably transfected 293/NF\(\kappa\)B-Luc human embryonic kidney cells. Gallates with IC\({}_{50}\) values in a range of 10-56 uM mediated inhibitory activity higher than gallic acid (IC\({}_{50}\) 76.0 \(\pm\) 4.9 uM). In addition to inhibiting NF\(\kappa\)B activation, gallic acid mediated a modest cytotoxic effect, and some of the gallates affected cell viability at the tested concentrations. Based on these results, suppression of NF\(\kappa\)B activation by gallate esters could play a chemopreventive role in carcinogenesis.

gallic acid; NF\(\kappa\)B pathway; cytotoxicity; 293/NF\(\kappa\)B cells; _Alchornea glandulosa_; cancer chemoprevention 148010

## Page 4

Gallic acid (3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid), a secondary metabolite accumulates in nearly all plants, either in free form or part of tannins, is known to possess antimicrobial, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and cytotoxic properties (Aruoma, Murcia, Butler, & Halliwell, 1993; Fiuza et al., 2004; Kratz et al., 2008; Kroes, van den Berg, van Ulford, van Dijk, & Labadie, 1992; Kubo, Fujita, K. Nihei & A. Nihei, 2004). It is commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry as salts and esters. Some ointments used to treat psoriasis and external hemorrhoids contain gallic acid (Garcia de Hombre & Perez Penate, 2006; Hatton, 2000). Gallic acid has two major functional groups, hydroxyls and a carboxylic acid, which can yield numerous esters and salt derivatives. Some galloyl compounds are used as antioxidants in food and can exhibit important roles in prevention of inflammatory and atherosclerosis responses by blocking activation of NF_k_B (Murase et al., 1999).

NF_k_B consists of homo and heterodimeric protein complexes acting as a transcription factor, and is found in many animal cell types. It is involved in regulation of immune response and inflammation, cell lineage development, cell apoptosis, cell-cycle progression and oncogenesis due to stimuli such as stress, cytokines, free radicals, ultraviolet irradiation, oxidised LDL and microbial antigens, and has been shown to regulate the expression of several genes, including bcl-2, bcl-xl, cIAP, survivin, TRAF, COX-2, MMP-9, iNOS and cell cycle-regulatory components, whose products are involved in tumourigenesis (Aggarwal, Sethi, Nair, & Ichikawa, 2006; Chen, Castranova, & Shi, 2001; Melisi & Chiao, 2007; Thanos & Maniatis, 1995). Most carcinogens, proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF and IL-1, or tumour promoters, including cigarette smoke, phorbol esters, okadaic acid, H2O2, have been shown to activate NF_k_B, and resulting tumours have misregulated NF_k_B activity (Baldwin, 2001). It is now well established that aberrant regulation of NF_k_B, and the signalling pathways that control its activity, are involved in cancer development and progression, as well as in drug resistance, especially during chemotherapy and radiotherapy (Inoue, Gohda, Akiyama, & Semba, 2007). Blocking NF_k_B can cause tumour cells to stop proliferating, undergo apoptosis, or to become more sensitive to the action of antitumor agents (Frydrych & Mlejnek, 2008; Yamamoto & Gaynor, 2001). Thus, agents that can suppress NF_k_B activation have the potential to suppress carcinogenesis or tumourigenesis.

In the present investigation, gallic acid was isolated from _Alchornea glandulosa_ Poepp and Endl. (Euphorbiaceae), and eight semi-synthetic esters were prepared. All the compounds were evaluated for cytotoxicity as well as potential to inhibit TNF-_a_-induced NF_k_B activation with stably transfected 293/NF_k_B-Luc human embryonic kidney cells.

## Materials and methods

### Materials

Methanol, _n_-hexane, ethyl acetate and _p_-dioxane were of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade (JT Baker). Column chromatography was carried out over silica gel (0.06-0.20 mm, Acros Organics). Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was performed using Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia Biotech). Preparative HPLC was carried out using a Varian Prep-Star 400 system and a Phenomenex C-18 (250 mm x 21.2 mm) column. The monodimensional NMR experiments were 

## Page 5

recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer (11.7 T) at 500 MHz (\({}^{1}\)H) and 125 MHz (\({}^{13}\)C), using CDCl\({}_{3}\) and DMSO-\(d_{6}\) as solvent (Aldrich). Alkyl alcohols and DCC were purchased from Aldrich. Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) and sulphorhodamine B (SRB) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Inc. (St. Louis, MO). Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM), antibiotic-antimycotic, hygromycin B, and MEM sodium pyruvate were purchased from Invitrogen Co. (Carlsbad, CA). Reporter Lysis Buffer, Luciferase Assay System was purchased from Promega (Madison). Tumour Necrosis Factor-\(\alpha\) (TNF-\(\alpha\)) was purchased from Calbiochem (Gibbstown, NJ). Alcohol was purchased from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ).

### Isolation of gallic acid

The leaves of _A. glandulosa_ were collected in the Biological Reserve and Experimental Station at Mogi Guaqu, Sao Paulo State, Brazil, in March 2005. A voucher specimen (SP319257) has been deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Institute (Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil).

The shade-dried plant material (1.5 kg) was ground and defatted with _n_-hexane (3.5 L x 3) at room temperature and exhaustively extracted by maceration with MeOH (4.2 L x 3). The crude extract was concentrated under reduced pressure to yield 3.8 g of a syrup residue, which was diluted with MeOH : H2O (4 : 1) and then successively partitioned with EtOAc and _n_-BuOH. After evaporation under reduced pressure, the partition phases yielded 2.5 g and 0.8 g, respectively. The part of EtOAc residue (2.0 g) was chromatographed by gel permeation over Sephadex LH-20 eluted with methanol to afford 11 fractions (A1-A11). Fraction A2 (730 mg) was purified by RP-HPLC [MeOH : H2O : HOAc (7.5 : 92 : 0.5), UV detection at 265 nm; flow rate 15 mL min-1] to give compound **1** (335 mg). Compound **1** was identified as gallic acid based on analysis of the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data, as well as by comparison with authentic material in our laboratory (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Molecular structures of gallic acid (**1**) and semi-synthetic esters (**2–9**).



## Page 6



### Synthesis of esters 2-9

After being cooled at 5\({}^{\circ}\)C, the mixture of gallic acid (0.2 mmol) and alcohol (20 mmol) in _p_-dioxane (6.0 mL) was added to a solution of \(N\),_N_'-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC, 1.0 mmol) in _p_-dioxane (3.0 mL). The solution was stirred for 48 h, and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure. The residue was partitioned three times with EtOAc and then filtered. The filtrate was washed successively with saturated aqueous citric acid solution (three times), saturated aqueous NaHCO3 (three times), water (two times), dried over MgSO4, and evaporated under reduced pressure. The crude products were purified over a silica gel column using an isocratic system of CHCl3-MeOH (98 : 2) to give gallate esters **2-8**. Structures of the semi-synthetic esters, methyl gallate (**2**), ethyl gallate (**3**), _n_-propyl gallate (**4**), isopropyl gallate (**5**), _n_-butyl gallate (**6**), isobutyl gallate (**7**), _n_-pentyl gallate (**8**) and 3,4, 5-triacetoxybenzoic acid (**9**), were established by 1H and 13C NMR spectral analysis (Figure 1).

For synthesis of ester **9**, gallic acid (20 mmol) was dissolved in dry pyridine (5.0 mL) and anhydride acetic (5.0 mL) under hydrogen atmosphere. The mixture was stirred for 48 h at room temperature, carried to dryness under reduced pressure, and purified by column chromatography with a mixture of CHCl3-MeOH (85 : 15) to give a product (**9**). The NMR spectroscopic data of **9** were compatible with 3,4, 5-triacetoxybenzoic acid.

### NF_k_B luciferase assay

NF_k_B inhibition assay was conducted using a luciferase reporter gene bioassay as previously described (Homhual et al., 2006). Human embryonic kidney cells (293/NF_k_B-Luc) were used to monitor alteration of the NF_k_B pathway. This cell line is stably transfected with a luciferase reporter construct regulated by the NF_k_B response element. Transcription factor can bind to the response element when stimulated by TNF-a, allowing transcription of the luciferase gene. Luciferase reacts with substrate, emitting light that was detected using a luminometer. Cells were seeded (105 cells mL-1) on sterile white walled 96-well plates and grown to approximately 80% confluence by incubating for 48 h. Gallic acid and alkyl gallates were tested at 20 mg mL-1 following 1 : 3 serial dilutions. After treatment with tested compounds for 10 min, cells were incubated for an additional 6 h with or without TNF-a (5 ng mL-1). The cells were gently washed with PBS and kept at -80degC with luciferase lysis buffer (Promega Corporation). The luciferase assay was performed using the Luc assay system from Promega following manufacturer instructions. Luciferase activity was monitored (LUMIstar Galaxy BMG), dose-response curves were constructed, and results were expressed as IC50 values (i.e. concentration required to inhibit TNF-a induced NF_k_B activity by 50%).

### Cytotoxicity assay

Cytotoxicity was determined by the method of Skehan et al. (1990). The cells were fixed with trichloroacetic acid and stained for 30 min with 0.4% (w/v) sulphorhodamine B (SRB) prepared in 1% acetic acid. Unbound dye was removed by washing with 1% acetic acid, and protein-bound dye was extracted with 10 mM Tris base

## Page 7

[tris (hydroxymethyl)aminomethane] for determination of optical density in a computer-interfaced, 96-well microtiter plate reader.

### Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism(r) Version 5.01 (GraphPad Software Inc.). Results were subjected to one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and differences between means were located using Tukey's multiple comparison test. Differences between means at the 5% (\(p<0.05\)) level were considered significant. The data are expressed as \(\text{means}\pm\text{standard}\) error.

## 3 Results and discussion

Herein we report cytotoxic properties and suppression of TNF-a induced NFkB activation of gallic acid (**1**) and eight esters (**2-9**) determined with stably transfected 293/NFkB-Luc human embryonic kidney cells. Table 1 shows the concentrations of gallates **1-9** required to inhibit NFkB-induced activation in 50% (IC50). _N_-Tosyl-L-phenylalaninyl-chlormethylketone (TPCK) was adopted as positive control, exhibiting \(98.5\%\pm 0.5\%\) NFkB inhibition at 30 uM, with an IC50 value of about 5 uM. At the highest concentration tested (20.0 ug mL-1), gallic acid mediated a moderate cytotoxic effect (52.9% \(\pm\) 3.5% survival), but none of the gallate esters significantly affected cell viability. The most cytotoxic compound evaluated was **6**, with \(48.9\%\pm 3.3\%\) cell survival.

Among inhibitors of NFkB, salicylates, aspirin (Kopp & Ghosh, 1994), apigenin and curcumin (Gerritsen et al., 1995; Singh & Aggarwal, 1996) were reported to suppress activation of NFkB by preventing the degradation of the NFkB inhibitor (IkB), and therefore NFkB was retained in the cytosol.

The serine protease inhibitor TPCK can cause a complete block to NFkB activation. TPCK inhibits NFkB subunits processing and IkB degradation (Mellitis, Hay, & Goodbourn, 1993). It has also been demonstrated that TPCK inhibits DNA replication by G0-G1 growth arrest and thus promotes apoptosis by other cytotoxic stimuli (Kirillova, Chaisson, & Fausto, 1999).



## Page 8

The present study provides evidence that some gallates can act as inhibitors of NF\(\kappa\)B. Methyl gallate (**2**) demonstrated the greatest activity. The inhibitory actions of gallates do not appear to result from non-specific cellular toxicity but rather are specific for NF\(\kappa\)B-dependent gene transcription. In another study, it has been demonstrated that gallates can inhibit TNF-\(\alpha\)-induced nuclear translocation of NF\(\kappa\)B by way of a mechanism independent of I\(\kappa\)B degradation (Murase et al., 1999).

More recently, prevention of atherosclerosis, cancer, anti-plasmodial and antioxidant activity of a group of galloyl compounds was described, as well as structure-activity relationships yielding cytotoxic properties (Fiuza et al., 2004; Jagan, Ramakrishnan, Anandakumar, Kamaraj, & Devaki, 2008; Locatelli et al., 2008; Murase et al., 1999; Na et al., 2006; Petronio et al., 2007; Saxena et al., 2008). Based on these encouraging intracellular responses, we suggest suppression of NF\(\kappa\)B activation by gallate esters could play a chemopreventive role in carcinogenesis, and further investigations related to the actions of gallates, especially in NF\(\kappa\)B signaling pathway and _in vivo_ models, may provide new insights into the cancer chemopreventive ability.

## Acknowledgements

This study is supported by a programme project P01 CA48112 awarded by the National Cancer Institute and project 04/07932-7 of the Biota-Bioprospecta Program funded by Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP), Brazil. M.C.C. Morais is grateful to CAPES for a research fellowship. S. Luqman acknowledges the Indo-US Science and Technology Forum (IUSSTF), New Delhi for research fellowship.

## References

* Aggarwal et al. (2006) Aggarwal, B.B., Sethi, G., Nair, A., & Ichikawa, H. (2006). Nuclear factor-\(\kappa\)B: A holy grail in cancer prevention and therapy. _Current Signal Transduction Therapy_, \(1\), 25-52.
* Aruoma et al. (1993) Aruoma, O.I., Murcia, A., Butler, J., & Halliwell, B. (1993). Evaluation of the antioxidant and prooxidant actions of gallic acid and its derivatives. _Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry_, _41_, 1880-1885.
* Baldwin (2001) Baldwin, A.S. (2001). Control of oncogenesis and cancer therapy resistance by the transcription factor NF-\(\kappa\)B. _Journal of Clinical Investigation_, _107_, 241-246.
* Chen et al. (2001) Chen, F., Castranova, V., & Shi, X. (2001). New Insights into the role of nuclear factor-\(\kappa\)B in cell growth regulation. _American Journal of Pathology_, _159_, 387-397.
* A structure activity relationship study. Part 1: Methyl, propyl and octyl esters of caffeic and gallic acids. _Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry_, _12_, 3581-3589.
* Frydrych & Mlejnek (2008) Frydrych, I., & Mlejnek, P. (2008). Serine protease inhibitors N-\(\alpha\)-tosyl-L-lysinyl-chloromethylketone (TLCK) and N-tosyl-L-phenylalaninyl-chloromethylketone (TPCK) are potent inhibitors of activated caspase proteases. _Journal of Cellular Biochemistry_, _103_, 1646-1656.
* Garcia de Hombre & Perez Penate (2006) Garcia de Hombre, M.A., & Perez Penate, A. (2006). Topic usage of bismuth subgallate as a hemostatic in tonsillectomy. _Anales Otorrinolaringologicos Ibero-Americanos_, _33_, 301-305.
* Girao da Cruz & Penate (2006)

## Page 9

Gerritsen, M.E., Carley, W.W., Ranges, G.E., Shen, C.P., Phan, S.A., Ligon, G.F., et al. (1995). Flavonoids inhibit cytokine-induced endothelial cell adhesion protein gene expression. _American Journal of Pathology, 147_, 278-292.
* Hatton (2000) Hatton, R.C. (2000). Bismuth subgallate-epinephrine paste in adenotonsillectomies. _The Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 34_, 522-525.
* Hombual et al. (2006) Hombual, S., Zhang, H.J., Bunyapraphatsara, N., Kondratyuk, T.P., Santarsiero, B.D., Mesecar, A.D., et al. (2006). Bruguiesulfurol, a new sulfur compound from _Bruguiera gymnorrhiza. Planta Medica, 72_, 255-260.
* Inoue et al. (2007) Inoue, J., Gohda, J., Akiyama, T., & Semba, K. (2007). NF-kB activation in development and progression of cancer. _Cancer Science, 98_, 268-274.
* Jagan et al. (2008) Jagan, S., Ramakrishnan, G., Anandakumar, P., Kamaraj, S., & Devaki, T. (2008). Antiproliferative potential of gallic acid against diethylnitrosamine-induced rat hepatocellular carcinoma. _Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, 319_, 51-59.
* Kirillova et al. (1999) Kirillova, I., Chaisson, M., & Fausto, N. (1999). Tumor necrosis factor induces DNA replication in hepatic cells through nuclear factor _k_B Activation. _Cell Growth & Differentiation, 10_, 819-828.
* Kopp & Ghosh (1994) Kopp, E., & Ghosh, S. (1994). Inhibition of NFkB by sodium salicylate and aspirin. _Science, 265_, 956-959.
* Kratz et al. (2008) Kratz, J.M., Andrighetti-Frohner, C.R., Kolling, D.J., Leal, P.C., Cirne-Santos, C.C., Yunes, R.A., et al. (2008). Anti-HSV-1 and anti-HIV-1 activity of gallic acid and pentyl gallate. _Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 103_, 437-442.
* Kroes et al. (1992) Kroes, B.H., van den Berg, A.J., van Ufford, H.C., van Dijk, H., & Labadie, R.P. (1992). Anti-inflammatory activity of gallic acid. _Planta Medica, 58_, 499-504.
* Kubo et al. (2004) Kubo, I., Fujita, K., Nihei, K., & Nihei, A. (2004). Antibacterial activity of alkyl gallates against _Bacillus subtilis. Journal of Agricultural Food Chemistry, 52_, 1072-1076.
* Locatelli et al. (2008) Locatelli, C., Rosso, R., Santos-Silva, M.C., De Souza, C.A., Licinio, M.A., Leal, P., et al. (2008). Ester derivatives of gallic acid with potential toxicity toward L1210 leukemia cells. _Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry, 16_, 3791-3799.
* Melisi & Chiao (2007) Melisi, D., & Chiao, P.J. (2007). NF-kappa B as a target for cancer therapy. _Expert Opinion Therapeutic Targets, 11_, 133-144.
* Mellitis et al. (1993) Mellitis, K.H., Hay, R.T., & Goodbourn, S. (1993). Proteolytic degradation of MAD3 (IxB\(\alpha\)) and enhanced processing of the NF-kB precursor p105 are obligatory steps in the activation of NF-kB. _Nucleic Acids Research, 21_, 5059-5066.
* Murase et al. (1999) Murase, T., Kume, N., Hase, T., Shibuya, Y., Nishizawa, Y., Tokimitsu, Y., et al. (1999). Gallates inhibit cytokine-induced nuclear translocation of NF-kB and expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules in vascular endothelial cells. _Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology, 19_, 1412-1420.
* Na et al. (2006) Na, H.J., Lee, G., Oh, H.Y., Jeon, K.S., Kwon, H.J., Ha, K.S., et al. (2006). 4-O-Methyl gallic acid suppresses inflammation-associated gene expression by inhibition of redox-based NFkB activation. _International Immunopharmacology, 6_, 1597-1608.
* Nazaruk et al. (2008) Nazaruk, J., Czechowska, S.K., Markiewicz, R., & Borawska, M.H. (2008). Polyphenolic compounds and _in vitro_ antimicrobial and antioxidant activity of aqueous extracts from leaves of some _Crisium_ species. _Natural Product Research, 22_, 1583-1588.
* Petronio et al. (2007) Petronio, M.S., Regasini, L.O., Pauletii, P.M., Passalacqua, T.B., Castro-Gamboa, I., Bolzani, V.S., et al. (2007). Potential antimalarial and antioxidant activities of gallic acid and its semi-synthetic esters. Paper presented at the 1st Brazilian Conference on Natural Products, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
* Saxena et al. (2008) Saxena, H.O., Faridi, U., Srivastava, S., Kumar, J.K., Darokar, M.P., Luqman, S., et al. (2008). Gallic acid based indanone derivatives as anticancer agents. _Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 18_, 3914-3918.
* Singh & Aggarwal (1996) Singh, S., & Aggarwal, B.B. (1996). Activation of transcription factor NFkB is suppressed by curcumin (diferulolylmethane). _Journal of Biological Chemistry, 270_, 24995-25000.



## Page 10

* [Skehan et al.1990] Skehan, P., Storeng, R., Scudiero, D., Monks, A., McMahon, J., Vistica, D., et al. (1990). New colorimetric cytotoxicity assay for anticancer drug screening. _Journal of National Cancer Institute, 82_, 1107-1112.
* [Thanos and Maniatis1995] Thanos, D., & Maniatis, T. (1995). NF\(\epsilon\)B: A lesson in family values. _Cell, 80_, 529-532.
* [Yamamoto and Gaynor2001] Yamamoto, Y., & Gaynor, R.B. (2001). Therapeutic potential of inhibition of the NF-\(\kappa\)B pathway in the treatment of inflammation and cancer. _The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 107_, 135-142.



