# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)80173-9.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

A 13C NMR analysis of abutastperone and comparison of the chemical shift data with those of kaladasterone (**2a**) [4], ecdysterone (**2b**) [4] and pterosterone (**2c**) [5] proved the configuration of the tetracyclic ring system of the three substances to be identical and confirmed the hydroxy group attachment sites of the side chain (Table 1). Furthermore, inspection of the Dd-values of the side chain carbons for the **2a**-**2b** and **2c**-abutastperone pairs of ecdystones showed the four substances to possess the same C-20 and C-22 configuration, limiting abutastperone to structure **2d**.

## EXPERIMENTAL

The mps were obtained on a Reichert micro hot-stage and are uncorr. The IR spectrum of a KBr pellet and UV spectrum in MeOH soln were recorded on Pye Unicam 3-200 and Kontron Uvikon 810 spectrophotometers, respectively. 1H NMR spectra of a 4\(4\)4-MeOH soln with TMS as int. standard (d0) were taken on a 360 MHz NMR spectrometer with a highly modified Varian HR-220 console, an Oxford magnet and a Nicolet 1180-E computer system. 13C NMR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet NT-200, wide-bore, broad-band spectrometer, operating with an Oxford magnet at 50.31 MHz in the Fourier transform mode. Low-resolution MS were recorded on a Finnigan 4021 GC/MS spectrometer.

_Isolation of abutastperone_ (**2d**). An _Abuta velutina_ Gleason plant (INPA-Manaus herbarium No. 75,777) was collected on the Manaus-Itaootiara road. Its powdered, dried stem (6.20 kg) was extracted with 20 _l._ EtOH at room temp. over a 30-day period. Chromatography of 80 g of the extract (291 g) on 800 g Si gel and elution with C6H6-Me2CO (9:1) gave a yellow oil, which was not investigated further, and 200 mg of a mixture of sitoetors, mp 151-154deg, identified by GC/MS with an authentic specimen. Elution with CHCl3 gave 14 mg of an unidentified material, while elution with MeOH yielded a solid, whose crystallization from aq. Me2CO afforded 5.10 g (0.3% of stem dry wt) of colorless needles of abutastperone (**2d**), mp 257-259deg; [a]120 32deg (MeOH; \(c\) 2.0). (Found: C, 62.74; H, 8.93. C2;H4.0.0% H2.O requires: C, 63.04; H, 8.95%) 1H NMR (_d_4-MeOH): d0.89, 0.96, 1.14, 1.18, 1.22 (s, 3 each, Me5), 3.17 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8, 2 Hz, H-9), 3.54 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 9, 2 Hz, H-24), 3.68 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 9, 2 Hz, H-22), 3.85 (1H,

