# 10.1080@14786410802243271.pdf

## Page 1



**To cite this article:** Adriana Aparecida Lopes, Silvia Noeli Lopez, Luis Octavio Regasini, Joao Marcos Batista Junior, Daniela Luz Ambrosio, Massuo Jorge Kato, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Regina Maria Barretto Cicarelli & Naysa Furlan (2008) In vitro activity of compounds isolated from Piper crassinervium against Trypanosoma cruzi, Natural Product Research: Formerly Natural Product Letters, 22:12, 1040-1046, DOI: 10.1080/14786410802243271

**To link to this article:**[http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786410802243271](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786410802243271)

**PLEASE SCROLLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE**

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the "Content") contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or

## Page 2

howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, resulting, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

## Page 3



[

[

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, C.P. 355, CEP 14801-970, Araraquara, SP, Brazil; Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CEP 14801-902, Araraquara, SP, Brazil; Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, C.P. 26077, CEP 05599-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

This study describes the antichagasic potential of five compounds isolated from leaves of _Piper crassinervium_ (Piperaceae). Two prenylated benzoic acid derivatives, one prenylated hydroquinone and two flavanones, were evaluated. The _in vitro_ trypanocidal activity was determined against epimastiagite forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ (Y strain), the etiologic agent of Chagas disease. The most active compound was the prenylated hydroquinone [1,4-dihydroxy-2-(3\({}^{0}\),70-dimethyl-19-_oxo_-20-_E_,6\({}^{0}\)-octadienyl)benzene] with an IC\({}_{50}\) value of 6.10 mg mL\({}^{-1}\), which was in the same order of activity if compared with the positive control benzmidazole (IC\({}_{50}\) = 1.60 mg mL\({}^{-1}\)). This is the first report of trypanocidal activity for prenylated hydroquinone and benzoic acid derivatives.

prenylated benzoic acid; prenylated hydroquinone; flavanone; _Trypanosoma cruzi_, _Piper crassinervium_] _In vitro_ activity of compounds isolated from _Piper crassinervium_ against _Trypanosoma cruzi_ Adriana Aparcida Lopes, Silva Noeli Lopez, Luis Octavio Regasini, Joao Marcos Batista Junior, Daniela Luz Ambrosio, Massuo Jorge Kato, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Regina Maria Barretto Cicarelli, Mayas Furlan

## 1 Introduction

American trypanosomiasis or Chagas disease is a zoonosis caused by the hemoflagellate protozoan _Trypanosoma cruzi_. In Latin and South America millions of people (estimated at 16-18 million in the decade of the 1990s) have been infected, and more than 25% of the population is at risk of being contaminated by the parasite (Grael, Albuquerque, & Lopes, 2005). However, over the last 15 years, prevalence estimates have been reduced, largely due to intensive large-scale programs designed to halt transmission by eliminating domestic populations of the insect vectors and to improve the screening of blood donors (Jannin & Villa, 2007). Nevertheless, transmission of Chagas disease is still a major health problem because of the transfusion of infected blood. Moreover, a recent case report in Brazil suggested the oral transmission of parasites, renewing the discussions about this problem (Perez-Gutierrez, Agrelo Salvatella, & Figueroa, 2006). Currently available chemotherapy, based on nifurtimox and benzmidazole, is accepted for treating acute infections, but it is unsatisfactory in the prevalent chronic stage because of limited efficacy, besides the

## Page 4

-frequent toxic effects (Luize, Ueda-Nakamura, Dias Filho, Garcia Cortez, & Nakamura, 2006). At present, the only trypanocidal compound used to prevent infection in blood banks is gentian violet, but it shows toxic effects and its use is limited (Rosas et al., 2007). The lack of effective medicines against acute and chronic infection is the critical reason to find more efficient and less toxic drugs than those currently used on the way to a cure for this pan-Latin-American disease. In spite of the great advances in modern medicine in recent decades, plants still make an important contribution to health care, providing chemical diversity and bioactivity, as well as to the development of hundreds of pharmaceutical drugs (Luize et al., 2006). Piperaceae family, belonging to the largest basal Angiosperm order, includes two rich genera, _Piper_ (ca. 2000 species) and _Peperomia_ (ca. 1500-1700 species) (Wanke et al., 2007). Several _Piper_ species have been well studied, in which _Piper nigrum_ produce piperine, the active pungent principle of black pepper; from _P. hispidum, P. arborem_ and _P. tuberculatum_ were isolated antifungal and insecticide amides (Navickiene et al., 2000; Silva et al., 2002). Additionally, chromenes and polyketides with significant antifungal activity have also been isolated from _P. aduncum, P. hostmanianum_, P. crassinerium and _P. gandichaudianum_ (Baldoqui et al., 1999; Danelutte, Lago, Young, & Kato, 2003; Kato & Furlan, 2007).

Hydroquinones bearing prenyl moieties are natural products uncommon to land plants, but highly frequent in _Piper_ species (Lago et al., 2004). Reported biological activities for such compounds include antimuoral (Danelutte et al., 2003), analgesic (De Pasquale, Circosta, Occhiuto, De Rosa, & De Stefano, 1991), antioxidant (Yamaguchi, Lago, Tanizaki, Di Mascio, & Kato, 2006) and antimicrobial (Lago et al., 2004). Prenylated benzoic acid derivatives were also isolated from _Piper_ species, including _P. crassinerium_, and their bioactivity spectra are similar to prenylated hydroquinones. Here we report the evaluation of trypanocidal activity for five known compounds, **1** [4-hydroxy-(3',7'-dimethyl-1'-_oxo_-octa-2'-_E_6'-dienyl)benzoic acid] (Lago et al., 2004), **2** [4-hydroxy-3-(3',7'-dimethyl-3'-hydroxy-1'-_oxo_-6'-octenyl)benzoic acid] (Lago et al., 2004), **3** [1,4-dihydroxy-2-(3',7'-dimethyl-1'-_oxo_-2'-_E_-6'-octadienyl)benzene] (Danelutte et al., 2003), **4** isosakuranetin (5,7-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyflavanone) (Agrawal & Bansal, 1989) and **5** sakuranetin (5,4'-dihydroxy-7-methoxyflavanone) (Agrawal & Bansal, 1989; Danelutte et al., 2003), (Table 1) isolated from leaves of _P. crassinervium_, as a part of our program devoted to discover new hits in the development of drugs for treatment of Chagas disease. This constitutes the first report of trypanocidal activity for prenylated hydroquinone and benzoic acid derivatives.

## 2 Materials and methods

### Plant material

Leaves of _P. crassinervium_ Kunth were collected in the region of Vale do Ribeira, Atlantic Forest (Sao Paulo State, Brazil) and identified by Dr. Guillermo E.D. Paredes (Universidad Nacional Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Peru). A voucher specimen (KATO-0084) was deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of the constituents

Dried leaves (350 g) were extracted with EtOAc and concentrated to dryness under vacuum. The crude extract (20 g) was resuspended in MeOH : H2O (8 : 2) and partitioned 

## Page 5



## Page 6

with hexane and EtOAc. The hexane soluble portion (6.0 g) was fractioned using column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh; Merck, column size \(3.0\times 25\) cm), which was eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 30%) to yield 11 fractions. Fraction 4 (0.284 g) was further separated by column chromatography over reversed phase ODS (Merck; C-18; \(1.0\times 4.5\) cm column) with MeOH-H2O (4:1) to yield eight fractions; the first fraction (0.221 g) was submitted to column chromatography over silica gel (Merck; 230-400 mesh; \(1.0\times 3.0\) cm column) eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 30%) to yield six fractions, the third fraction yielded compound **3** (0.023 g). Fraction 6 (0.015 g) was applied to a column chromatography over reversed phase ODS (Merck; C-18; \(1.0\times 4.5\) cm column) with MeOH-H2O (4:1) to yield compound **1** (0.011 g).

The portion soluble in EtOAc (3.0 g) was fractioned by column chromatography over LH-20 (Merck, column size \(3.0\times 100\) cm) and eluted with MeOH to yield 16 fractions. Fraction 3 (0.050 g) was submitted to preparative TLC over silica gel (230-400 mesh; Merck), which was developed with hexane-acetone (6:4) to yield compound **2** (0.009 g). Fraction 11 (0.100 g) was chromatographed on preparative HPLC using hexyl-phenyl phase, which was eluted with MeOH-H2O (7:2), to yield **4** (0.030 g) and **5** (0.010 g). Compounds **1-5** were identified by comparison of their physical properties with literature values.

### Trypanocidal assay

The assays of the anti-parasitic activities of the isolates were conducted by screening their effects on the proliferation of epimastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ Y-strain, grown in axenic culture in LIT medium. Stock solutions (containing 1.0 mg mL-1) of all tested compounds were prepared in dimethylsulphoxide and serially diluted (1:3) in liver infusion tryptose medium to yield sample solutions with concentrations of 0.41, 1.23, 3.70, 11.1, 33.3, 100.0 and 300.0 mg mL-1. All assays were conducted in triplicate. The number of remaining viable protozoa was established by counting in a Neubauer chamber following incubation at 28\({}^{\circ}\)C for 72 h with the test sample. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) values and statistical data were determined by using Probit analysis statistical method with GW-BASIC 2.33 (Microsoft Software, 1987). The IC50 values for compounds **1-5** and for benznidazole (employed as positive control) are shown in Table 1.

## 3 Results and discussion

In this work, we have tested the inhibitory effects of five known compounds isolated from _P. crassinervium_ against epimastigote forms of _T. cruzi._ Results are presented in Table 1. Three groups of molecules were tested here, two benzoic acid derivatives (**1** and **2**), one hydroquinone derivative (**3**), and two flavanones (**4** and **5**). Moreover, compounds **1-3** are _C_-geranylated molecules.

The results showed that geranylated compounds were more active than the flavanones. Within the active compounds, the best activity was observed for **3** (IC50 value of 6.10 mg mL-1) followed by geranylated _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives **1** and **2**. The IC50 value observed for compound **3** [1,4-dihydroxy-2-(3',7'-dimethyl-1'-\(ox\)-\(ox\)-2'-\(E\)-6'-ocatdienyl)benzene], a _p_-hydroquinone derivative, represents an interesting hit 

## Page 7

if compared with positive control benznidazole (IC50 value 1.6 mg mL-1, Table 1). This molecule has two phenolic hydroxyl groups, one of them with a chelated function, which is also present at compounds **2** and **3**. The change of one phenolic hydroxyl group (compound **3**) by a carboxylic acid one (compound **1**) produced a loss of activity greater than 50% (IC50 value from 6.1 to 16.3 mg mL-1, Table 1), suggesting its crucial role in trypanocidal activity. This observation is in agreement with Luize, P.S. et al., who proposed that the loss of the hydroxyl group in neolignans isolated from _P. regnellii_ resulted in the complete loss of activity against epimastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (Luize et al., 2006). In addition, the phenolic hydroxyl group present in the active molecule is apparently able, through hydrogen-bond links with the specific molecules on the cell surface, to inactivate essential metabolic pathways within the parasite (Patrick, 1995). The decrease in the activity observed for compound **2** (IC50 value 15.8 mg mL-1, Table 1), is also in agreement.

Isosakuranetin (**4**) and sakuranetin (**5**) (Agrawal & Bansal, 1989; Danelutte et al., 2003), showed weak antichagasic activity with IC50 values of 119.6 and 111.7 mg mL-1, respectively (Table 1). Several types of flavonoids have been identified as antiprotozoal principles of plant extracts (Camacho et al., 2002; Grael et al., 2005; Jordao, Vichnewski, Souza, Albuquerque, & Lopes, 2004). However, there are few reports about the activity of flavonoids against epimastigotes of _T. cruzi._ Our results are in agreement with such observations, suggesting that the molecular topology is very important for adequate interactions at receptor level to exert trypanocidal effect. Flavanone skeleton was less active than geranylated hydroquinone derivatives, even with phenolic hydroxyl groups in the molecule.

The presence of lipophilic geranyl moiety oxygenated in benzylic position, in compounds **1**-**3** could be important to trypanocidal activity; this fact was also considered crucial to exert antioxidant activity, because of their better insertion into lipophilic surfaces (Kato & Furlan, 2007). Several studies were reported about the antileishmanisic activity of natural hydroquinone and related structures, however there are few results concerning their antichagasic potential. In this context, a prenylated dihydroquinone isolated from _Peperomia galioides_ (Piperaceae) displayed a promising toxicity against _Leishmania brasiliensis_, _L. donovani_ and _L. amazonensis_, but it was inactive on trypanastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (Mahiou et al., 1995; Mahiou et al., 1996).

The present investigation revealed that 3-geranylated hydroquinone and benzoic acid derivatives, isolated from leaves of _P. crassinervium_, showed potent trypanocidal activity. More extensive and detailed studies on the trypanocidal activity of natural and synthetic geranylated derivatives from Piperaceae species will be the target of future studies focusing on the understanding of the structural requirements of this group of natural products. Also, _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ unspecific toxicity should be investigated in order to evaluate their potential as new leader structures for the development of antichagasic drugs.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants provided by the Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP) (03/11524-9 and 05/57042-0) and was also supported by the BIOTA/FAPESP - Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br). A.A. Lopes and S.N. Lopez wish to thank FAPESP for the provision of scholarship and fellowship (03/01867-6 and 06/50086-5). M. Furlan, M.J. Kato and V.S. Bolzani are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships.



## Page 8



## References

* Agrawal & Bansal (1989) Agrawal, P.K., & Bansal, M.C. (1989). _Carbon-13 NMR of flavonoids_. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
* Baldoqui et al. (1999) Baldoqui, D.C., Kato, M.J., Cavalheiro, A.J., Bolzani, V.S., Young, M.C.M., & Furlan, M. (1999). A chromene and prenylated benzoic acid from _Piper aduncum. Phytochemistry__, 51_(7), 899-902.
* Camacho et al. (2002) Camacho, M.D.R., Phillipson, J.D., Croft, S.L., Marley, D., Kirby, G.C., & Warhurst, D.C. (2002). Assessment of the antiprotozoan activity of _Galphinia glauca_ and the isolation of new nor-secofriedelanes and nor-friedelanes. _Journal of Natural Products__, 65_(10), 1457-1461.
* Danelutte et al. (2003) Danelutte, A.P., Lago, J.H.G., Young, M.C.M., & Kato, M.J. (2003). Antifungal flavanones and prenylated hydroquinones from _Piper crassinerium_ Kunth. _Phytochemistry__, 64_(2), 555-559.
* analgesic and muscle-relaxant effects. _Phytotherapy Research: PTR__, 5_(2), 49-53.
* Grael et al. (2005) Grael, C.F.F., Albuquerque, S., & Lopes, J.L.C. (2005). Chemical constituents of _Lychophora polhii_ and trypanocidal activity of crude plant extracts and of isolated compounds. _Fitoterapia__, 76_(1), 73-82.
* Jannin & Villa (2007) Jannin, J., & Villa, L. (2007). An overview of Chagas disease treatment. _Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz__, 102_(1), 95-97.
* Jordao et al. (2004) Jordao, C.O., Vichnewski, W., Souza, G.E.P., Albuquerque, S., & Lopes, J.L.C. (2004). Trypanocidal activity of chemical constituents of _Lychophora salicifolia_ Mart. _Phytotherapy Research: PTR__, 18_(4), 332-334.
* Kato & Furlan (2007) Kato, M.J., & Furlan, M. (2007). Chemistry and evolution of the Piperaceae. _Chimie pure et appliquee__, 79_(20), 529-538.
* Lago et al. (2004) Lago, J.H.G., Ramos, C.S., Casanova, D.C.C., Morandim, A.A., Bergamo, D.C.B., Cavalheiro, A.J., et al. (2004). Benzoic acid derivatives from _Piper_ species and their fungitoxic activity against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphareospermum_. _Journal of Natural Products__, 67_(11), 1783-1788.
* Luize et al. (2006) Luize, P.S., Ueda-Nakamura, T., Dias Filho, B.P., Garcia Cortez, D.A., & Nakamura, C.V. (2006). Activity of Neolignans isolated from _Piper regnellii_ (MIQ.) C. DC. var. _pallescens_ (C. DC.) YUNCK against _Trypanosoma cruzi_. _Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin__, 29_(10), 2126-2130.
* Mahiou et al. (1995) Mahiou, V., Roblot, F., Hocquemiller, R., Cave, A., Barrios, A., Fournet, A., et al. (1995). Piperogalin, a new prenylated diphenol from _Peperomia galioides_. _Journal of Natural Products__, 58_(2), 324-328.
* Mahiou et al. (1996) Mahiou, V., Roblot, F., Hocquemiller, R., Cave, A., DeArias, A.R., Inchausti, A., et al. (1996). New prenylated quinones from _Peperomia galioides_. _Journal of Natural Products__, 59_(7), 694-697.
* Navickiene et al. (2000) Navickiene, H.M.D., Alecio, A.C., Kato, M.J., Bolzani, V.S., Young, M.C.M., Cavalheiro, A.J., et al. (2000). Antifungal amides from _Piper hispidum_ and _Piper tuberculatum_. _Phytochemistry__, 55_(6), 621-626.
* Patrick (1995) Patrick, G.L. (1995). _An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry_ (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Perez-Gutierrez et al. (2006) Perez-Gutierrez, E., Agrelo Salvatella, R., & Figueroa, R. (2006). _Technical recommendation on Chagas' disease epidemiology and prevention, focussing its transmission as a disease transmitted by food_ (Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical, _39_(5)) Brasilia: Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical.
* Rosas et al. (2007) Rosas, L.V., Cordeiro, M.S.C., Campos, F.R.S., Nascimento, K.R., Januario, A.H., Franca, S.C., et al. (2007). _In vitro_ evaluation of the cytotoxic and trypanocidal activities of _Ampelozizyphus amazonicus_ (Rhamnaceae). _Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research__, 40_(5), 663-670.



## Page 9

Silva, R.V.D., Navickiene, H.M.D., Kato, M.J., Bolzani, V.S., Meda, C.I., Young, M.C.M., et al. (2002). Antifungal amides from _Piper arboreum_ and _Piper tuberculatum_. _Phytochemistry_, _59_(5), 521-527.
* [Wanke et al.(2007)] Wanke, S., Jaramillo, M.A., Borsch, T., Samain, M.S., Quandt, D., & Neinhuis, C. (2007). Evolution of Piperales--_matK_ gene and _trnK_ intron sequence data reveal lineage specific resolution contrast. _Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution_, _42_(2), 477-497.
* [Yamaguchi et al.(2006)] Yamaguchi, L.F., Lago, J.H.G., Tanizaki, T.M., Di Mascio, P., & Kato, M.J. (2006). Antioxidant activity of preynylated hydroquinone and benzoic acid derivatives from _Piper crassinervium_ Kunth. _Phytochemistry_, _67_(16), 1838-1843.



