# 10.1002@hlca.200890233.pdf

## Page 1

Phenolic Derivatives from Fruits of _Dipteryx lacunifera_Ducke and Evaluation of Their Antiradical Activities

Gerardo Magela V. Junior

Centro de Ciencias da Natureza, Universidade Federal do Piaui, 05599-970, Teresina - PI, Brazil

Cleyton Marcos de M. Sousa

Centro de Ciencias Exatas e da Terra, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, 09972-270, Diadema - SP, Brazil

Alberto J. Cavalheiro

Centro de Ciencias da Natureza, Universidade Federal do Piaui, 05599-970, Teresina - PI, Brazil

Joao Henrique G. Lago

Centro de Ciencias Exatas e da Terra, Universidade Federal do Piaui, 05599-970, Teresina - PI, Brazil

Mariana H. Chaves

Centro de Ciencias da Natureza, Universidade Federal do Piaui, 05599-970, Teresina - PI, Brazil

###### Abstract

The fruits of _Dipteryx lacunifera_, known as 'fava de morcego' and 'garampara', comprise pleasant tasting kernels that contain high amounts of fatty acids (mainly oleic acid) and are commonly consumed by inhabitants of the northeast of Brazil. In the present study, the crude EtOH extract of the fruit kernels was separated into hexane-, Et\({}_{\text{O}}\)-, AcOEt-, and H\({}_{\text{2}}\)O-soluble fractions. The Et\({}_{\text{2}}\)O fraction was found to exhibit the highest 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical-scavenging activity _in vitro_, and was subjected to further fractionation. Column chromatography over silica gel and _Sephadex LH-20_, followed by preparative HPLC-\(C_{Is}\), afforded (\(-\))-eriodictyl (**1**), (\(-\))-butin (**2**), luteolin (**3**), 3',4',7-trihydroxyflavone (**4**), lutein (**5**), and sulfuretin (**6**). The antiradical activities of compounds **1**, **2**, **4**, and **6**, together with the positive controls rutin, butylated hydroxy toluene (BHT), and _tert_-butylhydroquinone (TBHQ), were evaluated with the DPPH assay and were found to decrease in the order rutin \(>\)**4**\(>\)**1**\(>\)**6**\(>\)**2**\(>\)TBHQ \(>\) BHT.

## Introduction

Various classes of metabolites have been isolated from members of the genus _Dipteryx_ (family Leguminosae-Papilionoideae) including coumarins, isoflavones, fatty acids, triterpenoids, and furanocassane diterpenoids [1-7]. Kernels of the fruits of _Dipteryx lacunifera_Ducke, a species that is widely distributed in the northeast of Brazil, where it is popularly known as 'fava de morcego' or 'garampara', are prized for their pleasant flavor, high energy content, and anti-oxidant activities [8][9]. In previous studies, the fruits of this species have been found to contain sesquiterpenoids [1], furanocassane diterpenoids and fatty acids [1][9], but no information is available concerning the occurrence of the polar constituents that are associated with its antiradical properties.

Free radicals are known to play a key role in biological damage and are implicated in the etiology of several degenerative conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, coronary arterial disease, diabetes, and cancer. The consumption of various plant products, including vegetables, fruits, and herbal medicines, possessing radical-scavenging activities is apparently associated with low risk for these diseases [10-13]. In the present study, an activity-guided fractionation of an Et\({}_{\text{2}}\)O-soluble fraction obtained from a crude ethanolic extract of fruit kernels of _D. lacunifera_ was conducted, and four 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical-scavenging flavonoids were isolated and identified. Since the fruits are already accepted for human consumption in Brazil, the 

## Page 2

results reported herein will be of value in developing a functional product from the plant material by exploiting its antioxidant activity.

## Results and Discussion

The phenolic derivatives **1** - **6** were isolated by column chromatography and preparative HPLC from the DPPH-active Et2O fraction of a crude EtOH extract of the fruit kernels of _D. lacunifera_ (_Fig. 1_). The structures of **1** - **6** were deduced by interpretation of their 1H- and 13C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135deg), HMQC, and HMBC spectra, and by comparison of the spectral data with those reported in the literature.

Compound **1** was determined to be a flavanone on the basis of peaks in the 1H-NMR spectrum at d(H) 5.17 (_dd_, \(J\) = 12.5, 3.0), 2.96 (_dd_, \(J\) = 17.0, 12.5), and 2.61 (_dd_, \(J\) = 17.0, 3.0), assigned to Hax-C(2), Hax-C(3) and Heq-C(3), respectively, together with the presence of an intense band at 287 nm in the UV spectrum [14]. Substitution patterns in the \(A\) and \(B\) rings were deduced from the signals at d(H) 5.79 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H-C(6)), 5.80 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H-C(8)), 6.83 (br. \(s\), H-C(2')), and 6.68-6.71 (_m_, H-C(5'), H-C(6')) in the 1H-NMR spectrum. The 13C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135deg) spectra of **1** showed 15 peaks associated with two aliphatic C-atoms at d(C) 80.4 (C(2)) and 44.0 (C(3)), twelve aromatic C-atoms at d(C) 103.3-168.3 (attributed to C(5)-C(10) and C(1')-C(2')), and a conjugated C=O group at d(C) 197.7 (assigned to C(4)). Important HMBC correlations (_Fig. 2_) were observed between H-C(2) and C(4)/C(2')/C(6'), H-C(6) and C(8)/C(10), and H-C(2') and C(2)/C(4')/C(6'), and these confirmed the proposed structure. Finally, HR-ESI-MS showed a _pseudo_-molecular ion peak at _m/z_ 287.0701 ([_M_ - H]-), which is in accord with a molecular formula of C13H12O6. Comparison of spectral and optical rotation data with those reported in the literature [15-17] allowed the identification of **1** as (2_R_)-2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-2,3-dihydro-5,7-dihydroxy-4_H_-chromen-4-one ((-)-eriodictyl).

Fig. 1: _Phenolic derivatives_**1** - **6** _isolated from the fruit kernels of Dipteryx lacunifera

## Page 3

With respect to compound **2**, an intense band at 277 nm in the UV spectrum, together with \({}^{1}\)H-NMR peaks associated with H\({}_{\rm ax}-\)C(2), H\({}_{\rm ax}-\)C(3), and H\({}_{\rm eq}-\)C(3) at \(\delta\)(H) 5.33 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 13.0, 3.0), 3.01 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 17.0, 13.0), and 2.71 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 17.0, 3.0), respectively, characterized the compound as a flavanone [14]. Aromatic H-atoms were observed at \(\delta\)(H) 7.73 (\(d\), \(J\) = 8.5, H\(-\)C(5)), 6.51 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 8.5, 2.5, H\(-\)C(6)), and 6.37 (\(d\), \(J\) = 2.5, H\(-\)C(8)), suggesting a 1,2,4-trisubstituted \(A\) ring, a pattern dissimilar from that observed in **1**. However, aromatic H-atoms of ring \(B\) were detected at \(\delta\)(H) 6.94 (\(d\), \(J\) = 1.5, H\(-\)C(2)) and 6.79 - 6.82 (\(m\), H\(-\)C(5'), H\(-\)C(6')), indicating a pattern that was similar to **1**. The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\)) spectra of **2** showed 15 peaks, including two associated with aliphatic C-atoms at \(\delta\)(C) 81.0 (C(2)) and 44.9 (C(3)), and one conjugated C\(=\)O group at \(\delta\)(C) 193.5 (C(4)). However, the multiplicities of the aromatic C-atoms, the chemical shift of the signal attributed to C(5) (\(\delta\)(C) 129.8), and data from HMBC spectral analysis (_Fig. 2_), indicated the absence of a OH group at C(5). A molecular formula of C\({}_{15}\)H\({}_{12}\)O\({}_{5}\) was confirmed for **2** by the HR-ESI-MS, in which a _pseudo_-molecular ion peak at \(m/z\) 271.0765 ([\(M\) - H]\({}^{-}\)) was observed. Comparison of spectral and optical rotation data with those reported in the literature [17 - 20] allowed the identification of **2** as (2\(S\))-2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-2,3-dihydro-7-hydroxy-4\(H\)-chromen-4-one ((\(-\))-butin).

The UV spectrum of **3** exhibited bands at 256 and 396 nm, which could be assigned, respectively, to benzoyl and cafeoyl chromophores of a flavone derivative [14]. The

Figure 2: Important \(HMBC\) (H \(\rightarrow\) C) data in the structures of phenolic derivatives **1** – **6** isolated from the fruit kernels of Dipteryx lacunifera



## Page 4

1H-NMR spectrum of **3** showed aromatic H-atoms attributed to a flavone at d(H) 7.37 - 7.40 (_m_, H-C(2'), H-C(6')), 6.92 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.5, H-C(5')), 6.23 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H-C(6)), and 6.46 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H-C(8)), together with a _singlet_ at d(H) 6.56, which could be assigned to H-C(3). The 13C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135deg) spectra showed 15 sp2 C-atoms, one of which (d(C) 183.8, C(4)) was characteristic of a conjugated C=O group, and six were characteristic of oxygenated C-atoms at d(C) 165.9 (C(2)), 163.2 (C(5)), 166.3 (C(7)), 159.4 (C(9)), 147.0 (C(3')), and 150.9 (C(4')). All of the other C-atom signals could be assigned from the HSQC and HMBC spectra (_Fig. 2_). The HRESI-MS presented a _pseudo_-molecular ion peak at _m_/_z_ 285.0400 ([_M_ - H]-), which was consistent with a molecular formula of C13H10O6. This, taken together with the other spectral data, allowed the identification of **3** as 2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-4_H_-chromen-4-one (luteolin) [17].

Bands at 235 and 340 nm in the UV spectrum of **4** could be assigned to benzoyl and cafeoyl chromophores of a flavone derivative [14]. The 1H-NMR spectrum of **4** showed a profile similar to that observed for **3** with aromatic H-atoms at d(H) 6.64 (_s_, H-C(3)), 6.93 - 6.95 (_m_, H-C(6), H-C(8), H-C(5')), and 7.40 - 7.42 (_m_, H-C(2'), H-C(6')). However, the spectrum of **4** showed an additional _doublet_ at d(H) 7.98 (_J_ = 8.1), which could be assigned to H-C(5) because of the coupling with the signal of H-C(6), which was observed in the DQ-COSY spectrum. The 13C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135deg) spectra of **4** showed 15 sp2 C-atoms, one of which was characteristic of a conjugated C=O group at d(C) 180.2 (C(4)), and five were characteristic of oxygenated C-atoms at d(C) 166.0 (C(2)), 165.0 (C(7)), 159.7 (C(9)), 147.0 (C(3')), and 150.8 (C(4')). Cross-peaks between H-C(3) and C(10)/C(1'), H-C(5) and C(4)/C(7), H-C(8) and C(6)/C(10), and H-C(2') and C(2)/C(4')/C(6') observed in the HMBC spectrum, and a HR-ESI-MS _pseudo_-molecular ion peak at _m_/_z_ 269.0626 ([_M_ - H]-) corresponding to a molecular formula of C15H10O5, allowed **4** to be identified as 2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-7-hydroxy-4_H_-chromen-4-one. Comparison of the spectroscopic data with those reported in the literature [21] confirmed the proposed structure of **4**.

The UV spectrum of **5** showed bands at 260 and 379 nm, which were assigned to benzoyl and cafeoyl chromophores of a chalcone derivative [14]. The 1H-NMR spectrum exhibited _doublets_ at d(H) 7.54 (_J_ = 15.0) and 7.73 (_J_ = 15.0), assigned to the \(a\) and \(b\) H-atoms of a chalcone, and three aromatic H-atoms at d(H) 6.30 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0), 6.43 (_dd_, \(J\) = 8.5, 2.0), and 7.95 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.5), assigned to H-C(6), H-C(8), and H-C(9), respectively, of ring \(A\). Three other aromatic H-atoms were observed at d(H) 7.20 (_d_, \(J\) = 1.5), 6.83 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0), and 7.12 (_dd_, \(J\) = 8.0, 1.5), and were attributed to H-C(2'), H-C(5'), and H-C(6'), respectively, of ring \(B\). The 13C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135deg) spectra of **5** exhibited 15 signals corresponding to twelve aromatic C-atoms at d(C) 103.8 - 167.4, and two signals associated with non-cyclic C=C bond C-atoms at d(C) 118.3 (CH) and 146.8 (CH). These two latter signals, together with the C=O signal at d(C) 193.5, indicated the presence of a chalcone, which was identified as (2_E_)-1-(2,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)prop-2-en-1-one (butein). Comparison of the spectral data with those reported in [18] indicated that the signals assigned to C(a), C(b), C(5), C(6), C(8) and C(9) should be corrected. Complete assignment of the C- and H-atom signals of **5** was possible following analysis of the HMBC spectrum, which revealed cross-peaks between H-C(2') and C(b)/C(4),

## Page 5

\({\rm H}-{\rm C}(\alpha)\) and \({\rm C}(1^{\prime})/{\rm C}(10)\), and \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(9)\) and \({\rm C}(5)/{\rm C}(7)/{\rm C}(\beta^{\prime})\). The HR-ESI-MS showed a _pseudo_-molecular ion peak at \(m/z\) 271.0612 (\([M-{\rm H}]^{-}\)) corresponding to a molecular formula of \({\rm C}_{15}{\rm H}_{12}{\rm O}_{5}\) thus confirming the complete structure of **5**.

With regard to compound **6**, the UV spectrum showed bands at 256 and 393 nm characteristic of an aurone derivative [14]. In the \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum, a _singlet_ at \(\delta({\rm H})\) 6.58 could be assigned to \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(2)\), whilst signals of \({\rm H}\)-atoms in the \(A\) ring were observed at \(\delta({\rm H})\) 7.51 (\(d\), \(J\!=\!8.5\)), 6.59 (\(dd\), \(J\!=\!8.5\), 2.0), and 6.61 (\(d\), \(J\!=\!2.0\)), and assigned to \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(5)\), \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(6)\), and \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(8)\), respectively. Three further aromatic \({\rm H}\)-atoms were observed at \(\delta({\rm H})\) 7.42 (\(d\), \(J\!=\!2.0\), \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(2^{\prime})\)), 6.75 (\(d\), \(J\!=\!8.5\), \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(5^{\prime})\)), and 7.14 (\(dd\), \(J\!=\!8.5\), 2.0, \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(6^{\prime})\)). The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (BBD and DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\)) spectra showed 15 signals, one being associated with a conjugated C\(=\)O group at \(\delta({\rm C})\) 184.3 (C(4)), and five attributed to oxygenated C-atoms at \(\delta({\rm C})\) 147.7 (C(3)), 169.8 (C(7)), 168.3 (C(9)), 146.7 (C(3')), and 149.4 (C(4')). Analysis of the HMBC spectrum (\({}^{3}J\)) showed that there was a strong correlation between \({\rm H}-{\rm C}(2)\) and \({\rm C}(4)/{\rm C}(2^{\prime})/{\rm C}(6)\), and this could only occur with an aurone structure as proposed. A molecular formula of \({\rm C}_{15}{\rm H}_{10}{\rm O}_{5}\) was determined for **6** on the basis of the HR-ESI-MS analysis, which showed a _pseudo_-molecular ion peak at \(m/z\) 269.0630 (\([M-{\rm H}]^{-}\)). On the basis of this information, and by comparison with published spectral data [22][23], the structure of **6** was determined as \((2Z)\)-2-(3,4-dihydroxybenzylidene)-6-hydroxy-1-benzofuran-3(2\(H\))-one (sulfuretin).

This is the first report of the occurrence of flavanone, flavone, chalcone, and aurone derivatives in a species of _Dipteryx_, and the occurrence of flavonoids **1**-**6** in _D. lacunifera_ is reported here for the first time.

The radical-scavenging capacity of a compound is commonly evaluated by reduction of the stable free radical DPPH in MeOH or EtOH solution to form DPPH\({}_{2}\)[10]. As presented in the _Table_, the crude EtOH extract of kernels of _D. lacunifera_ fruits showed weak scavenging activity (\(485.91\pm 77.30\)\(\mu\)g/ml). However, the \({\rm Et}_{2}{\rm O}\)-soluble fraction of the ethanolic extract, obtained by serial extraction with hexane, \({\rm Et}_{2}{\rm O}\), AcOEt, and \({\rm H}_{2}{\rm O}\), showed moderate activity (\(141.86\pm 7.92\)\(\mu\)g/ml), and

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c} Extracts/compounds & \(EC_{50}\) [\(\mu\)g/ml \(\pm\) SD]a  & \(EC_{50}\times 10^{-2}\) [\(\mu\)m \(\pm\) SD]a  \\ EtOH extract & \(485.91\pm 77.30\) & n.d.b) \\ \({\rm Et}_{2}{\rm O}\) fraction & \(141.86\pm 7.92\) & n.d. \\
**1** & \(31.39\pm 1.45\) & \(10.90\pm 0.50\) \\
**2** & \(33.54\pm 2.58\) & \(12.33\pm 0.94\) \\
**4** & \(28.19\pm 1.74\) & \(10.44\pm 0.64\) \\
**6** & \(32.12\pm 1.43\) & \(11.90\pm 0.52\) \\ \({\rm Rutin}^{\rm c}\)) & \(31.93\pm 0.52\) & \(5.20\pm 0.85\) \\ \({\rm BHT}^{\rm c}\)) & \(67.19\pm 6.04\) & \(30.54\pm 2.74\) \\ \({\rm TBHQ}^{\rm c}\)) & \(30.01\pm 0.87\) & \(18.07\pm 0.52\) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table.: _Anitradical Properties, as Determined by DPPH Assay, of a Crude EtOH Extract of the Fruit Kernels of Dipteryx lacunifera, and an \({\rm Et}_{2}{\rm O}\)-Soluble Fraction and Flavonoids **1**, **2**, **4**, and **6** Derived therefrom, together with Rutin, BHT, and TBHQ as Positive Controls_

## Page 6

was subjected to purification procedures with the aim of isolating the active components. Following chromatographic separation, six phenolic derivatives (**1** - **6**) were obtained, and four of them (**1**, **2**, **4**, and **6**) were subjected to the DPPH assay together with the positive controls rutin, butylated hydroxy toluene (BHT) and _tert_-butylhydroquinone (TBHQ). The results obtained (_Table_) revealed that **4** possessed the highest hydrogen-donating capacity, with an _EC_50 value of \(28.19 \pm 1.74\) mg/ml (\(10.44 \pm 0.64 \times 10^{- 2}\) mm) showing an activity superior to those of BHT and TBHQ but lower than that of rutin. The antiradical activities of the isolated compounds and the positive controls decreased in the following order: rutin > **4** > **1** > **6** > **2** > TBHQ > BHT.

_Fig. 3_ shows that, similar to rutin, compounds **1**, **2**, **4**, and **6** exhibited concentration-dependent DPPH radical-scavenging activities in the concentration range 25 - 100 mg/ml. At concentrations > 100 mg/ml, the DPPH radical-scavenging activity showed no significant change with respect to the concentration of the analyte. Statistical analyses (ANOVA and Tukey) revealed that the radical-scavenging activity of flavonoid **4** was not significantly different (_p_ < 0.05) from that of the positive control rutin within the range 25 - 250 mg/ml.

Fig. 3: _Estimation of the percentage free radical-scavenging activities of the flavonoids_ **1**, **2**, **4**, and **6** from fruit kernels of Dipteryx lacunifera, _together with the positive control_ (rutin), _measured after 30 min of reaction_

## Page 7

In conclusion, the phenolic compounds isolated from fruit kernels of _D. lacunifera_ exhibited strong radical-scavenging activities indicating that this plant may represent a valuable source of natural antiradical derivatives.

The authors are grateful to _CNPq_ and _FAPESP_ for financial support.

## Experimental Part

_General._ DPPH and BHT from _Sigma_; TBHQ from _BASF_; other chemicals were of analytical reagent grade. Column chromatography: silica gel _60_ (SiO2, 70-230 mesh; _Merck_) column (38 x 5.5 cm, 250 g); _Sephadex(r) LH-20_ (_Sigma_) column (65 x 1.5 cm). Prep. HPLC: _Varian PrepStar SD-1_ chromatograph, _Varian 320_ UV-VIS detector, _Rheodyne 7725i_ injector, _Phenomenex Luna C18_ column (250 x 21 mm; 10 mm), at 11 ml/min. UV Spectra: _Hitachi U-3000_ spectrometer, in MeOH (pure compounds) or methanolic DPPH soln. (radical-scavenging assay). 1H-NMR (500 MHz), 13C-NMR (125 MHz), HMQC, and HMBC Spectra: _Varian Inova 500_ spectrometer, in CD3OD, \(d\) in ppm rel. Me_i_Si_, \(J\) in Hz. HR-ESI-MS: _Bruker Daltonics ultraOTOFq_ (ESI/TOF), negative mode.

_Plant Material._ Fruits of _D. lacunifera_ (1532 g) were collected during August 2003 in the district of Bom Jesus, Piaui State, Brazil. The plant material was identified by Dr. _Haroldo Cavalcante Lima_, Instituto de Pesquisa Jardim Botanico do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. A voucher specimen is deposited with the Herbarium Graziela Barroso, Universidade Federal de Piaui, Brazil under reference TEPB 18246.

_Extraction and Isolation Procedures._ The fruits of _D. lacunifera_ were separated into seeds (122 g) and kernels (1410 g) and exhaustively extracted with hexane to remove waxy material. Following removal of solvent, the dried kernels were ground and extracted consecutively with hexane and EtOH. The resulting EtOH soln. was concentrated under vacuum to yield 79 g of a crude extract, which was fractionated by serial extraction with hexane, Et2O, AcOEt, and H2O to yield residues of 23, 33, 2.5, and 11.5 g, resp., after solvent removal. Part of the DPPH-active Et2O fraction (10 g) was subjected to CC over SiO2 with gradient elution from CHCl3 to MeOH to yield 30 fractions. DPPH-active fractions _16_ (429 mg), _19_ (326 mg), and _22_ (209 mg) were submitted to CC over _Sephadex LH-20_, eluted with MeOH to yield **1** (94 mg, 0.02%), **6** (174 mg, 0.04%), and **6** (19 mg, 0.004%). The DPPH-active fraction _18_ (400 mg) afforded sub-fractions _I-X_ following chromatography over _Sephadex LH-20_ with MeOH as eluent. Sub-fraction _II_ (197 mg) comprised pure **2** (0.05% yield), whilst sub-fraction \(V\) (35 mg), after prep. HPLC eluted with MeOH/AcOH 0.5% in H2O (53 : 47), afforded **1** (7 mg, 0.002%), **5** (12 mg, 0.003%), and **3** (10 mg, 0.002%). DPPH-active fraction _20_ (756 mg) was subjected to CC over _Sephadex LH-20_ with MeOH as eluent to yield 9 sub-fractions (_I-IX_). Sub-fraction _VII_ (100 mg) comprised pure **6** (0.02%) whilst sub-fraction _IV_ (81 mg), after prep. HPLC eluted with MeOH/AcOH 0.5% : H2O (1:1), afforded **4** (52 mg, 0.01%).

_DPPH Radical-Scavenging Assay._ The DPPH-scavenging activities were determined using the method of _Valco et al._ [12][13]. Aliquots (0.3 ml) of the positive control, or of solns. containing 250, 200, 150, 100, 50, and 25 mg/ml of pure **1**, **2**, **4**, and **6** individually dissolved in MeOH, were incubated at 25\({}^{\circ}\) with 100 mm DPPH in MeOH (2.7 ml). Absorbance values at 516 nm were recorded every 10 min until the reaction was complete (typically 60 min). The percentage of antiradical activity was calculated from \(\left[ {A_{DPPH} - \left( {A_{sample} - A_{blank}} \right)} \right] \times 100/A_{DPPH}\) (where _ADPPH_ is the absorbance of DPPH, _A__sample_ is the absorbance of DPPH plus sample and _A__blank_ is the absorbance of the blank). Activities were determined in triplicate and the results reported as mean values +- standard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses of the results were carried out using Microcal Origin(r) 7.5 and SPSS(r) 13.0. The antiradical activities of **3** and **5** could not be measured since the compounds were obtained in amounts that were only sufficient for spectral analysis.

_(-)-Eridocityol_ (=_(2R)_-2-(3,4-Dihydroxyphenyl)_-2,3-dihydro-5,7-dihydroxy-4H-_chromen-4-one_; **1**). Yellow amorphous solid. [_a_]D = - 17.8 (_c_ = 0.1, MeOH). UV (MeOH): 287. 1H-NMR (500 MHz, CD3OD): 6.83 (br. \(s\), H - C(2')); 6.68 - 6.71 (_m_, H - C(5'), H - C(6')); 5.80 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H - C(8)); 5.79 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0, H - C(6)); 5.17 (_dd_, \(J\) = 12.5, 3.0, H - C(2)); 2.96 (_dd_, \(J\) = 17.0, 12.5, Hax - C(3)); 2.61 (_dd_, \(J\) = 17.0, 3.0, Hga - C(3)). 13C-NMR (75 MHz, CD3OD): 197.7 (C(4)); 168.3 (C(7)); 165.4 (C(5)); 164.8 (C(9));

## Page 8

146.8 (C(4')); 146.4 (C(3')); 131.7 (C(1')); 119.2 (C(6')); 116.2 (C(5')); 114.7 (C(2')); 103.3 (C(10)); 97.0 (C(6)); 96.2 (C(8)); 80.4 (C(2)); 44.0 (C(3)). HR-ESI-MS (neg.): 287.0701 ([_M_ - H]-, C15H1O5; calc. 287.0554).

_(-)-Butin_ (=_(2S)_-2-(3,4-Dihydroxyphenyl)_)_-2,3-dihydro-7-hydroxy-4H-chromen-4-one_; **2)**. Yellow amorphous solid. [a]D = - 59.6 (_c_ = 0.1, MeOH). UV (MeOH) 277. 1H-NMR (500 MHz, CD3OD): 7.73 (_d_,\(J\) = 8.5, H - C(5)); 6.94 (_d_,\(J\) = 1.5, H - C(2')); 6.79 - 6.82 (_m_, H - C(5'), H - C(6')); 6.51 (_dd_,\(J\) = 8.5, 2.5, H - C(6)); 6.37 (_d_,\(J\) = 2.5, H - C(8)); 5.33 (_dd_,\(J\) = 13.0, 3.0, H - C(2)); 3.01 (_dd_,\(J\) = 170, 13.0, Hax-C(3)); 2.71 (_dd_,\(J\) = 170, 3.0, Hax-C(3)). 13C-NMR (75 MHz, CD3OD): 193.5 (C(4)); 166.9 (C(7)); 165.5 (C(9)); 146.8 (C(4')); 146.4 (C(3')); 132.0 (C(1')); 129.8 (C(5)); 119.2 (C(6')); 116.2 (C(5')); 114.9 (C(10)); 114.7 (C(2')); 111.7 (C(6)); 103.8 (C(8)); 81.0 (C(2)); 4

## Page 9

* [9] G. M. Vieira Jr., H. R. Silva, T. C. Bittencourt, M. H. Chaves, C. A. Simone, _Quim. Nova_**2007**, _30_, 1658.
* [10] A. Kumaran, R. J. Karunakaran, _Food Chem._**2007**, _100_, 356.
* [11] G. C. Yen, P. D. Duh, _J. Agric. Food Chem._**1994**, _42_, 629.
* [12] M. Valko, M. Izakovic, M. Mazur, C. J. Rhodes, J. Telser, _Mol. Cell. Biochem._**2004**, _266_, 37.
* [13] C. M. M. Sousa, H. R. Silva, G. M. Vieira Jr., M. C. C. Ayres, C. L. S. Costa, D. S. Araujo, L. C. D. Cavalcante, E. D. S. Barros, P. B. M. Araujo, M. S. Brandao, M. H. Chaves, _Quim. Nova_**2007**, _30_, 351.
* [14] T. J. Mabry, K. R. Markham, M. B. Thomas, 'The Systematic Identification of Flavonoids', Springer-Verlag, New York, 1970.
* [15] C.-C. Shen, Y.-S. Chang, L.-K. Hott, _Phytochemistry_**1993**, _34_, 843.
* [16] C. Moretti, M. Sauvain, C. Lavaud, G. Massiot, J.-A. Bravo, V. Munoz, _J. Nat. Prod._**1998**, _61_, 1390.
* Studies in Organic Chemistry', Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1989.
* [18] A. R. Jassbi, P. Singh, V. Krishna, P. K. Gupta, S. Tahara, _Chem. Nat. Comp._**2004**, _40_, 250.
* [19] G. Tian, U. Zhang, T. Zhang, F. Yang, Y. Ito, _J. Chromatogr., A_**2004**, _1049_, 219.
* [20] H.-F. Hsu, J.-Y. Houng, C.-L. Chang, C.-C. Wu, F.-R. Chang, Y.-C. Wu, _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2005**, _53_, 6117.
* [21] J. B. Harborne, 'The Flavonoids: Advances in Research Since 1986', Chapman and Hall, London, 1994.
* [22] H. E. Westenburg, K.-L. Lee, S. K. Lee, H. H. S. Fong, R. B. Van Breemen, J. M. Pezzuto, A. D. Kinghorn, _J. Nat. Prod._**2000**, _63_, 1696.
* [23] A. Braca, N. De Tommasi, L. Di Bari, C. Pizza, M. Politi, I. Morelli, _J. Nat. Prod._**2001**, _64_, 892.



