# 10.1016@0031-9422(75)80372-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Isoflavonoids from _Cyclolobium_ species*

Otto R. Gottlieb

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo

and

Alaide Braga de Oliveira, Terezinha M. Machado Goncalves, Geovane G. de Oliveira and Sebastiao A. Pereira

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil

###### Abstract

(3_R_)-Claussequinone (7-hydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavanquinone) is the principal constituent of _Cyclolobium clausseni_ Benth. and _C. vecchii_ A. Samp. extracts. _C. clausseni_ contains additionally (3_R_)-mucroquinone (7-hydroxy-8,4'-dimethoxysioflavanquinone), (3_R_)-vestitol (7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-isoflavan). (3_R_)-a,a-dimethylallycyclolobin [5'-(1,1-dimethylallyl-7,3',4'-trihydroxy-2'-methoxyisoflavan], biscyclolobin, 3'-hydroxyformonenti and isoliquiritigenin. The structural proposals for vestitol and claussequinone were confirmed by synthesis.

_Dalbergia, Machaerium_ and _Cyclolobium_ (Legininosae-Lotoideae) are morphologically closely related [3]. Previous work on 25 _Dalbergia_ and _Machaerium_ species has shown that the affinities of the two genera extend to their chemical composition [4]. Only a few _Cyclolobium_ species are known, all of very restricted geographical distribution; _C. clausseni_ Benth., trivial name sucpira carim, and _C. vecchii_ A. Samp. occur in the State of Minas Gerais.

The benzene extracts of the trunk wood of both species contain an orange pigment (1a), which gave a monoacetate (1b) and was named claussequinone after it was found that the compound is amenable to reduction to a quinol which, upon acetylation, gives a triacetate (2a). The structural analysis, involving UV, IR, PMR and MS, was confirmed by synthesis. 2,4-Dimethoxyphenylacetic acid [5], obtained by the Wilgerodt reaction [6] from 2,4-dimethoxyacetophenone, was condensed with resorcinol in CHCl3/BF3 [7] to 2,4-dihydroxyphenyl 2,4-dimethoxybenzyl ketone [8]. Application of the orthoformate method [7] to this deoxybenzoin led to 7-hydroxy-2',4'-dimethoxysioflavone (3a) [8], which was selectively demethylated by AlCl3 in C6H5NO2 [9] to 7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavone (3b) [8]. The catalytic reduction of isoflavans is not uniformly successful [10] and it was deemed necessary to test its applicability on several common isoflavones (3c-f). In these model reactions the hitherto undescribed (+-)-7,3',4'-trimethoxy- (2b), (+-)-7-hydroxy-6,4'-dimethoxy- (2c) and (+-)-7-hydroxy-4'-methoxy- (2d) isoflavans were prepared. Finally also the reduction of 7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavone was attempted, leading without difficulty to (+-)-7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavan (2e) whose oxidation with Fremy's salt gave a compound, identical in all

## Page 2

respects with natural claussequinone (**1a**), except for mp and optical activity. The synthetic material was, of course, inactive, while natural claussequinone showed a positive Cotton effect. (3_S_)-Clausequinone (**1a**), obtained by CrO3/AcOH oxidation of (+)-7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisofla-van, the (3_S_)-vestiol (**2**e) of _D. variabilis_ Vog. [11]_D. ecastophyllum_ (L.) Taub. [12] and _M. vestitum_ Vog. [11], showed a negative Cotton effect [13]. The (3_R_)-configuration must, consequently, correspond to the claussequinone (**1a**) from _Cyclobium._

From the heartwood extract of _C. clausseni_, available in comparatively much larger quantity, an additional pigment was isolated. This was recognised as (3_R_)-macroquinone (**1c**) by spectral data and direct comparison with (3_S_)-microquinone _ex M. mucronulatum_ Mart. [11, 13]. Again, only the antipodal ORD curves of both derivatives were not coincident.

_A priori_, it would seem reasonable to consider **1a** and **1c** artifacts, produced by oxidation respectively of **2c** and **2f**. Although at least one of the required precursors, namely (3_R_)-vestiol (**2**c**), was isolated from the _C. clausseni_ extract, the presence of yellow pigments is consistent with the bright colour of the wood samples. (3_R_)-Vestiol was identified by comparison with the synthetic (+)-7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavan (**2**e**), described above, as well as with natural (3_S_)-vestiol, differing from these products in the appropriate manner only with respect to the ORD curves.

Two additional isoflavan derivatives were obtained from the same source. They were characterized as such through inspection of their IR and UV spectra. The PMR spectrum of **4** confirmed this proposal through the characteristic signals due to the 5 protons of the heterocycle and revealed substitution by an a,a-dimethylallyl group. MS evidence shows that this, together with 2 hydroxyls and 1 methoxyl, can only be placed on ring B (retro-Diels-Alder fragment: _m_/_e_ 234). Ring A is monohydroxylated (retro-Diels-Alder fragment: _m_/_e_ 122) as shown in **4**, since a _meta_-split doublet is located at the high field PMR limit (+3:63. _d. J_ 2*0 Hz) of the 3-proton system and must thus keep _ortho_-relations to two oxi-functions. The lone aromatic proton of ring B (t 3*39, _s_) can only be placed _para_ (or _ortho_) _meta_, _meta_ to the oxi-functions. The _ortho_-alternatives (**5**, **6**), however, can be safely disregarded. The hydroxyls, which form a catechol system (H3BO3 UV shift), are highly hindered, derivatization of the compound being very difficult, and must both be vicinal to substituents as in **4**. Furthermore, the pyridine induced solvent shift [14] of the ring B aromatic proton signal is very weak. The 3_R_-configuration can be attributed to a,a-dimethylallylcyclolobin (**4**) upon comparison of its ORD curve with published data [13].

Insolubility in the usual solvents prevented the measurement of a reasonable PMR spectrum for the additional isoflavan. The MS, however, showed that this must be a dehydrative dimer based on cyclolobin such as 7. The molecular ion suffers two consecutive losses of ring-A fragments leading to [M-122]+ and [M-244]+ ions.

The biosynthesis of isoflavan derivatives should involve pterocarpan, isoflavone and chalcone intermediates [4], and the two latter classes are indeed represented in _C. clausseni_ through 7.3'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavone (**3g**) and isoliquitiigenin. The chalcone was previously isolated from _Dalbergla_ and _Machaerium_ species [12] and identified by direct comparison with an authentic 

## Page 3

sample. The isoflavone (**3**g) gave a diacetate, which contributed to the spectral determination of its structure, and the known dimethyl ether (cabreuvin, **3**c) [15], identified by direct comparison with an authentic sample. 3'-Hydroxy-mononetin (**3**g) was isolated previously from _Peterocarpus dalbergioides_[16] and subsequently also from _Machaerium vestitium_ Vog., _Myroxylon periverum_ L.f. and _M. balsamum_ (L.) Harms [17].

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of the constituents of_ Cyclolobium clausseni. The trunk wood of a specimen collected in the vicinity of Pedro Leopoldo, Minas Gerais, and identified by the botanist A. Pereira Duarte, was separated into bark, hearwood and softwood. The ground hearwood (3*kg) was extracted successively with C6H6 and EtOH. The C6H6 extract (160 g) was extracted exhaustively with hot petrol (bp 60-80deg). Chromatography on silica (1*kg) of the petrol insoluble portion (140 g) gave three main fractions with the indicated diametus: A1 (C6H6-CHCl3, 1:1), A2 (CHCl3) and A3 (CHCl3)-MeOH, 19:1), A (5:5 g) was chromatographed on silica (100 g). Crystallization of the C6H6-CHCl3 (19:1) eluate from MeOH gave (60 mg), while crystallization of the C6H6-CHCl3 (1:3) eluate from MeOH afforded (3_R_)-1a (600 mg). Crystallization of A2 (510 g) from MeOH gave (3_R_)-1a (600 mg). Crystallization of A2 (510 g) from MeOH gave (3_R_)-1a (4-9). The filtered MeOH soln was evaporated and residue (47*0 g) was chromatographed on silica (500 g) yielding the following useful fractions with the indicated solvents: B1 (C6H6-CHCl3, 1:1), B2, B3 (C6H6-CHCl3, 1:3), B4 (CHCl3), B5 (CHCl3-MeOH, 19:1). Crystallization of B1 (6*3 g) from MeOH gave (3_R_)-1a (260 mg). The filtered MeOH soln was evaporated and the residue (60 g) was chromatographed on silica (120 g) giving the following useful fractions: C1 (C6H6-CHCl3, 1:3) and C2 (CHCl3). Crystallization of C1 from MeOH gave (3_R_)-1a (104 mg). C2 (1*8 g) was chromatographed twice on Sephadex LH-20 (MeOH) giving (3_R_)-2e (241 mg). B2 (11-9) was chromatographed on silica (400 g). Crystallization of the CHCl3-MeOH 19:1:1 eluate from EtOH gave **3**g (202 mg). The mother liquor was evaporated and residue (1*8 g) chromatographed on Sephadex LH-20 (MeOH). Intermediate fractions were recrystallized from EtOH giving **3**g (166 mg) and the later fractions yielded, after preparative TLC, isoliquiritigen (10 mg). Crystallization of B3 (11*2 g) from MeOH gave (3_R_)-1a (540 mg). The filtered MeOH soln was evaporated and residue (107 g) was chromatographed on silica (200 g). The CHCl3 clause (46*g) was crystallized from MeOH giving (3_R_)-1a (138 mg). Filtered MeOH soln was evaporated and residue (4*5 g) was chromatographed on Sephadex LH-20 (MeOH) yielding (3_R_)-1c (60 mg). B4 (8*3 g) was chromatographed 2 x on Sephadex LH-20 (MeOH) of B5 (1*8 g) from MeOH gave 7 (17 mg). A3 (4*6 g) was chromatographed on silica (100 g). Crystallization of the C6H6-CHCl3 (1:1) eluate from EtOH yielded (3_R_)-1a (88 mg).

_Isolation of the constituents of C._. _c. _c. _c. _c. _c. _c. _c. _c. _c._c. _c. _c. _c._c. _c. _c._c. _c._c. _c. _c._c. _c. _c._c. _c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c. _c._c.



## Page 4

3'-Hydroxyformontein_ (3g). Mp 228-231deg and 240-242deg (lit [15] mp 245-247deg). PMR (C75_C_COOH, t): 1-28 (s, H-2), 1:52 (_dd, J_ 85, 1-5 15's H2, H-5). 2-49 (_dd, J_ 85, 3-0 Hz, H-6). 259 (_d, J_ 3-0 Hz, H-8). 2.86 (s, H-2; H-5; H-6). 594 (s, OMe). MS (_m/e_) 284 (100%) M, 283 (18, 269 (18), 241 (13), 213 (13), 137 (28), 126 (18), 112 (26), 105 (20). Other data, as well as data for _acetate_, identical to data from lit [16].

_x,x-Dimethylalkylcyclobolin_ ([3R]*7,3'-4'-trihydroxy2'-_methanol_-_xy_-_5_-_1,1-dimethylyl-_isoflavan_, 4). Needles, mp 76-79deg. (Found: C, 70-60; H, 6-75. C2,H2*O5 requires: C, 70-79deg; H, 6-79deg), \(\delta^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (per cm): 3375, 1660, 1625, 1590, 1600, 1550, 1155, 1120, 1060, 1028, \(\delta^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (nm): 219, 285 (e 9300, 2300): \(\delta^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (nm): 231, 296 (e 10700, 3900): \(\delta^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (nm): 229, 285 (e 9600, 3700): \(\delta^{\prime}_{\rm max}\) (nm): 219, 284, 302, 355 (e 9500, 3800), PMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz, r): 308 (_d, J_ 90 Hz, H-5), 3:39 (s, H-6): 360 (_dd, J_ 90-20 Hz, H-6), 3:63 (_d, J_ 20 Hz, H-8), 3:90 (_dd, J_ 180, 100 Hz, H-b), 430 (s, OH): 502 (_dd, J_ 180, 20 Hz, H-y); 504 (_dd, J_ 100, 20 Hz, H-y); 5-66 (_dd, J_ 100, 35 Hz, H2-2): 5-93 (_t, J_ 100 Hz, H-2); 6-25 (s, OMe); 6-6:6 (_m, H-3_), 6-8:72 (nm, 2H-4): 8:60 (s, ME); 6-(C5,D5N, 100 MHz, r): 295 (_d, J 

## Page 5

* (4) Braga de Oliveira, A., Gottlieb, O. R., Ollis, W. D. and Rizzini, C. T. (1971) _Phytochemistry_**10**, 1863.
* (5) Pschorr, R. and Knoffler, G. (1911) _Ann. Chem._**382**, 50.
* (6) Schwenk, E. and Bloch, E. (1942) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**64**, 3051.
* (7) Karmakar, S. S., Shah, K. H. and Venkataraman, K. (1955) _Proc. Indian Acad. Sci._**41**A, 192.
* (8) Cocker, W., McMurry, T. B. H. and Staniland, P. A. (1965) _J. Chem. Soc._ 1034.
* (9) Whalley, W. B. and Lloyd, G. (1956) _J. Chem. Soc._ 3213.
* (10) Robertson, A., Suckling, W. C. and Whalley, W. B. (1949) _J. Chem. Soc._ 1571.
* (11) Kurosawa, K., Ollis, W. D., Redman, B. T.; Sutherland, I. O., Braga de Oliveira, A., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes Alves, H. (1968) _Chem. Commun._ 1263.
* (12) Abreu Matos, F. J. de, Gottlieb, O. R. and Souza Andrade, C. H. (1975) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 825.
* (13) Kurosawa, K., Ollis, W. D., Redman, B. T., Sutherland, I. O., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes Alves, H. (1968) _Chem. Commun._ 1265.
* (14) Demarco, P. V., Farkas, E., Doddrell, D., Mylari, L. and Wenkert, E. (1968) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**90**, 5480.
* (15) Gottlieb, O. R. and Taveria Magalhaes, M. (1959) _Anais Assoc. Brasil. Quim._**18**, 89.
* (16) Parthasaraty, M. R., Puri, R. N. and Seshadri, T. R. (1964) _Indian. J. Chem._**7**, 118.
* (17) Braga de Oliveira, A., Gottlieb, O. R., Machado Madruga, I., Paula Reis, J. E. and Oliveira, G. G. de, unpublished work.



