# 10.1016@S0031-9422(99)00532-4.pdf

## Page 1



# 6-[o-aryalkenyl]-5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones from _Cryptocarya moschata_ (Lauraceae)

Alberto Jose Cavalheiro

albieava@iq.unesp.br

Massayoshi Yoshida

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CEP 14800-900 Araraquara -- SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CEP 05599-970 Sao Paulo -- SP, Brazil

Received 29 March 1999; received in revised form 31 August 1999

###### Abstract

Eleven 6-[o-aryalkenyl]-5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones, cryptomoscatones D2, E1, E2, E3 and F1 and cryptopyranoscatones A1, A2, A3, B1, B2 and B4, in addition to goniothalamin and cryptofolione, were isolated from branch and stem bark of _Cryptocarya moschata_, Lauraceae. Their structures were established by spectroscopic methods. \(\copyright\) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Keywords:__Cryptocarya moschata_; Lauraceae; 6-[o-aryalkenyl]-5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrone; Cryptomoscatone; Cryptopyranmoscatone; Cryptofolione; Goniothalamin; Styryl-pyrone +
Footnote †: journal:

## 1 Introduction

_Cryptocarya moschata_ (Lauraceae) is a tree growing up to 30-40 m high, which is found in the Atlantic Forest, mainly in the Southeastern Region of Brazil. It is popularly known as "canela batalha", "canela branca", "canela noz-moscada", "nhutinga-branca" or "anhuvinha-branca".

_Cryptocarya_ spp. contain alkaloids, and some species have \(\alpha\)-pyrones as additional secondary metabolites. Indeed, the occurrence of 5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones (substituted at C6 by alkyl or arylalkyl groups) has been noted in 13 botanical families and 20 species of fungi (Davies-Coleman & Rivett, 1989). These metabolites are biosynthesized from either acetate or mixed acetate-shikimate pathways (Leete, Muir & Towers, 1982).

Naturally occurring 6-aryl-5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones originating from the mixed biosynthetic pathway have been observed in only six genera: _Aniba_ (Franca, Gottlieb & Suarez, 1973) and _Cryptocarya_ (Lauraceae), _Goniothalamus_ (Annonaceae), _Piper_ (Piperaceae), _Psilotum_ and _Timesiptera_ (Psilotaceae) (Davies-Coleman & Rivett, 1989).

The 6-aryl- or 6-aryalkyl-5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones from lauraceous species are characteristics of _Aniba_ and _Cryptocarya_ species. The \(\alpha\)-pyrones of _Aniba_ sp. possess a C4 methoxyl group, and a saturated or unsaturated carbonaceous side chain on C6. On the other hand, the pyrones of _Cryptocarya_ are not substituted on C4 and instead have a styryl group attached to the C6 side chain. Some 5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones derived only from the acetate pathway, were also found in _Cryptocarya_ species (Drewes, Horn & Mavi, 1997; Drewes, Horn & Wijewardene, 1996; Drewes, Horn & Scott-Shaw, 1995).

The present work describes the occurrence of 13 6-[o-aryalkenyl]-5,6-dihydro-\(\alpha\)-pyrones, including the known goniothalamin (**1**) and cryptofolinoe (**2**), and 11 new pyrones (**3**-**13**) in the branch and stem bark of _C. moschata_.



## Page 2



## 2 Results and discussion

Compounds **1**-**13** were purified as described in Section 3; (+) Goniothalamin **(1)** had been previously isolated from _C. caloneura_ (Hlubucek & Robertson, 1967), _C. latifolia_ and _C. wyliei_ (Drewes et al., 1995) and from _Goniothalamus_ species (Jewers et al., 1972).

The 1H- and 13C-NMR spectroscopic signals of the other isolated compounds revealed certain common features, viz. a styryl group and a 5,6-dihydro-a-pyrrol-one group (Tables 1-4). In compounds **2**-**7, these groups are connected by a linear and hydroxylated carbonic chain, and by a carbonic chain with a dihydroxy-tetrahydropyrane ring in compounds **8**-**13**. In addition, compounds **4**, **5**, **7**, **9**, **11** and **13** have a _trans_-disubstituted double bond at C1'-C2' [~

## Page 3

shifts of C2' and C4' in the compound **3** point to an _erythro_ configuration, where at least one substituent (styryl or pyrone ring) possesses an axial conformation.

Compounds **4** and **5**, with an additional _trans_-vinyl moiety as compared to compounds **2** and **3**, possess a molecular formula C19H22O4, and constitute another pair of 1,3-diols (Table 2). Thus, the lower field chemical shifts of C4' and C6' point to an _erythro_ configuration for compound **4** and the higher field chemical shifts of C4' and C6' indicate a _threo_ configuration for compound **5**.

The molecular formula of **6** (C19H24O5) differs from the molecular formula of **7** (C21H26O5) only by a C2H2 unit, attributed to a _trans_-vinyl moiety. The relative configurations of three oxymethine carbons of compounds **6** and **7** were established based on comparison of their 13C-NMR chemical shifts with those of compounds **2** or **3** and **4** or **5**, respectively. It was possible to propose a _threo_ relationship between OH-2' and OH-4' of compound **6** and between OH-4' and OH-6' of compound **7** when C2' (_d_ 64.5) of **6** was compared with C2' (_d_ 64.7) of **3** and when C4' (_d_ 68.1) of **7** was compared with C4' (_d_ 68.1) of **5**, respectively. Similarly, C6' (_d_ 73.8) of compound **6** and C8' (_d_ 73.6) of compound **7** were compared with C4' (_d_ 73.7) of **2** and C6' (_d_ 73.5) of **4**, respectively, indicating an _erythro_ relationship between OH-4' and OH-6' of **6** and OH-6' and OH-8' of **7**.

The 1H-1H COSY correlation spectra and the 1H-NMR coupling constants observed for **8**-**13** are in accordance with a dihydroxy-tetrahydropyrane ring, probably originated by dehydration and cyclization of polyhydroxyalkenyl chain. The diacetates **8a** and **9a** obtained from compounds **8** and **9** confirmed two hydroxyl groups. The assignment of 1H- and 13C-NMR chemical shifts for compounds **8**-**10** and **12**-**13** was carried out by 1H-1H and 1H-13C COSY, and for compound **11** the assignment was based on comparison with spectral data of compounds **12**-**13** (Tables 3 and 4).

The stereochemistry of the dihydroxy-tetrahydropyrane ring of compound **8** was determined by analysis of

1H-NMR coupling constants. The H5' signal (_d_ 3.22, _dd_, \(J\) ~ 9 Hz) indicated a _trans_-diaxial relationship with H6' and H4'; H34'a (_d_ 1.46, _dd_, \(J\) ~ 12 Hz) shows, besides geminal coupling, a _trans_-diaxial relationship with H4' and H2'. Therefore, H2', H4', H5' and H6' are in axial positions.

For compound **9**, the stereochemistry of dihydroxy-tetrahydropyrane ring was also determined by the 1H-NMR coupling constant of H7' (_d_ 3.22, _dd_, \(J\) ~ 9 Hz) and of H54'a (_d_ 1.43, _ddd_, \(J\) ~ 12 Hz) signals, which indicated the axial position of H4', H6', H7' and H8'.

The H6' and H8' signals in the 1H-NMR spectrum of compound **10** are overlapped. However, the contour lines of H6'-H7' cross-peak in the 1H-1H COSY spectrum were used to determine the multiplicity of H6' (_d_

## Page 4



## Page 5

4.21, _dd_, \(J\)  9 Hz), showing the axial positions of H6' and H5', and the multiplicity of H5' (_dd_, \(J\) = 9.5 and 3 Hz), which defined the equatorial position of H4'. The position of H2' can not be determined by 1H-NMR spectroscopy. However, comparison of the diamagnetic shift observed on a, b and g carbons, when the hydroxyl group on C4' (**8** and **10**) or on C6' (**9** and **11**) changes from an equatorial to an axial position, confirms the same configuration of the tetrahydropyrane rings in compounds **8**/**9** and **10**/**11**, respectively.

The configuration of compound **11** was determined in a similar way. The contour lines of H8'-H9' cross-peak observed in the 1H-1H COSY spectrum showed that H8' is a double doublet (_J_  9 Hz), allowing the assignment of the axial position to H8' and H7'. Therefore, H6' is in an equatorial position because H7' signal is a double doublet (_J_ = 9 and 3 Hz). The axial position of H4' was determined through the multiplicity of H5'ax (_d_ 1.58, _ddd_, \(J\)  12, 12 and 5 Hz), which can be explained by the geminal coupling H5'ax-H5'eq (_J_ = 12 Hz), _trans_-diaxial coupling H5'ax-H4'ax (_J_ = 12 Hz) and H5'ax-H6'eq (_J_ = 5 Hz).

In compound **12**, the multiplicity of H3'ax (_d_ 1.58, _ddd_, \(J\) ~ 12 Hz) points to axial position of H2' and H4', and the coupling constant of 1 Hz observed in H3'eq (_d_ 1.68, _dddd_, \(J\) = 13, 5, 2.5 and 1 Hz) in 1H-NMR spectra in CD3CN, results from a long range W coupling constant between H3'eq and H5'eq. The signal of H6' (d 4.03, ddd, \(J\) = 5.5, 1.5 and 1.5 Hz, in CD3CN) does not allow establishment of the stereo-chemistry at C6'.

For compound **13**, the axial position of H4' and H6' was determined by the H5'ax signal (_d_ 1.65, _ddd_, \(J\) ~ 13, 10 and 10 Hz), and the equatorial position of H7' was deduced from the multiplicity of H6' (_d_ 3.98, _ddd_, \(J\) = 10, 5 and 3 Hz). The resonance of H8' (_d_ 4.68, _ddd_, \(J\) = 5.5, 3 and 2 Hz), as in the case of H6' in compound **12**, does not indicate the configuration at C8'.

Fig. 1: Chair-like conformation of _erytho_ and _three_ 1,3-diols **2–5**.



## Page 6

However, C6' of **12** (d 78.4) is less shielded than C8' of **13** (d 76.1), and it is possible to propose an equatorial position for the styryl moiety on compound **12** and an axial position on compound **13**. This is reinforced by the chemical shifts of H6' and H8', d 4.11 and d 4.68, respectively, in the 1H-NMR spectra of **12** and **13**.

The C6 \(R\) configuration of compounds **2**-**13** was determined using the Snatzke rule (Snatzke, 1968), considering the _pseudo-equatorial_ orientation of the C6 substituent and the positive signal of the Cotton effect in CD curves at 254-272 nm, due to _n_-_p_-_p_- transition, for all compounds. The conformation of a-pyrone ring was inferred by steric factors (Davies-Coleman & Rivett, 1989) and reinforced by the H5pseudo-ax-NMR signal (d 2.32, _dddd_, \(J\) = 18, 10, 3 and 3 Hz) of compound **12**, which shows a _trans_-diaxial H5-H6 coupling constant (_J_ = 10 Hz) and by the H6-NMR signal of compounds **4**, **5**, **7**, **9**, **11** and **13** (d 4.9, _ddd_, \(J\) = 9, 6 and 6 Hz), in CD3CN (data not shown), which show _trans_-diaxial H5-H6 coupling constants (_J_ = 9 Hz).

## Experimental

### Plant material

Branch and stem bark of _C. moschata_ were collected at Parque Estadual da Cantareira, Sao Paulo -- SP, Brasil, in April 1989 and November 1991, respectively. The botanical material was identified by Dr. Joao Batista Baitello from the Instituto Florestal de Sao Paulo. A voucher specimen is deposited in Herbario Dom Bento Pickel (SPSF 8074).

### General

The silica gel and solvents used for either VLC or flash chromatography were obtained from Merck, whereas the solvents used for HPLC were from either Merck (Lichrosolv grade) or Aldrich (HPLC grade). The HPLC used for analytical analyses was a quaternary pump system Perkin-Elmer Series 4, equipped with a UV/VIS HP 1050 detector and Perkin-Elmer 3600 Data Station; for preparative analyses, a binary pump system (Perkin-Elmer Series 3B) was employed, equipped with a UV/VIS Perkin-Elmer LC-85B detector and an HP 3396 integrator. The 1H-NMR (200 MHz) and 13C-NMR (50 MHz) spectra were recorded on a Bruker-AC 200, using either CDCl3 or CD3CN (Aldrich) as solvent, with TMS as internal standard.

The elemental analyses were measured on a Elemental Analyser Perkin-Elmer model 2400 CHN. EI-MS data was obtained at 70 eV using a Hewlett Packard HP 5988-A mass spectrometer, and ES-MS data was collected on a Fisons VG Platform II in the positive mode. UV spectra were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer \(l\). 3B Spectrometer; infra-red spectra were obtained with a Nicolet FT 510 Spectrometer. CD curves were obtained using a ISA Jobin Yvon CD 6 dicrograph.



## Page 7



### Extraction and isolation of constituents

Branch bark (197 g) and stem bark (360 g) were individually dried at 50degC, then milled, and each extracted with EtOH-H2O (96:4 v/v) at room temperature. The EtOH extracts were separately concentrated in vacuo and then partitioned between petrol/EtOH/H2O (5:3:2 v/v) (3x) and CHCl3/EtOH/H2O (5:3:2 v/v) (3x). The CHCl3 phase of the branch bark solubles was concentrated in vacuo yielding 5.0 g, and then divided into four fractions (I -- 400 mg, II -- 900 mg, III -- 600 mg, IV -- 3000 mg) by VLC (Si-60, 10 x 4.7 cm, 63-200 mm), using a gradient of increasing polarity (petrol/CH2Cl2/CHCl3/MeOH 76:10:8:6 to petrol/CH2Cl2/CHCl3/MeOH 21:33:25:21). Fraction II was fractionated by VLC (Si-60, 10 x 3.4 cm, 63-200 mm) with the same eluents, yielding IIa (380 mg) and IIb (500 mg). Fraction IIa was then purified by HPLC (Lichrosorb Si-60 250 x 10 mm, 7 mm), with petrol/CH2Cl2/CHCl3/MeOH 94:2.5:2:1.5, 5.0 ml/min (280 nm), to give 20 mg of goniothalamin (**1**). Fraction III gave IIIa (210 mg), IIIb (73 mg) and IIIc (85 mg) by flash chromatography (Si-60, 15 x 3 cm, 40-63 mm) eluting with petrol/CH2Cl2/CHCl3/MeOH 68.5:13:10:8.5. Fraction IIIc was purified on HPLC (Perkin-Elmer RP-8 250 x 22 mm, 10 mm), eluted with THF/HOAc 5% 19:81, 17 ml/min (250 nm) yielding 5.8 mg of **6** and 7.9 mg of 7. The CHCl3 phase of stem bark was concentrated in vacuo yielding 10.6 g, and then separated into five fractions (I' -- 25 mg, II' -- 934 mg, III' -- 3000 mg, IV' -- 3500 mg, V' -- 600 mg) by VLC (Si-60, 10 x 8 cm, 63 -200 mm), using a gradient of increasing polarity (CH2Cl2 to MeOH). Flash chromatography (Si-60, 15 x 2.5 cm) of fraction II', eluted with CH2Cl2/Et2O/MeOH 48:4, yielded eight fractions (IIa' -- 200 mg, IIb' -- 47 mg, IIc' -- 58 mg, IId' -- 45 mg, IIe' -- 47 mg, IIf' -- 37 mg, IIg' -- 30 mg, IIh' -- 415 mg). Fractions IIb-IIg, separately, were purified by HPLC (Perkin-Elmer RP-8 250 x 22 mm, 10 mm), eluted with MeOH/H2O 45:55, 8 ml/min, 270 nm. Fraction IIb' yielded, in order of elution, compounds **4**, **5** and **11**; fraction IIc' yielded **2**, **3**, **10**, **4**, **5** and **11**; fraction IId yielded **2**, **3**, **10**, **5** and **9**; fraction IIc' yielded **12**, **8** and **9**; fraction IIc' yielded **12**, **8** and **9**; fraction IIc' yielded **12**, **8** and **13**. The total amount obtained of each compound was 2.9 mg of cryptofolione (**2**), 5.8 mg of (**3**), 4.5 mg of (**4**), 13.3 mg of (**5**), 12.0 mg of (**8**), 12.9 mg of (**9**), 5.7 mg of (**10**), 4.4 mg of (**11**), 6.0 mg of (**12**) and 2.5 mg of (**13**).

### Acetylation of **5**, **8** and **9**

100 ml of pyridine and 100 ml of acetic anhydride were added to 2 mg of each compound. After standing overnight at room temperature, the reaction mixture was dried with N2. The residue was dissolved in CDCl3 for NMR experiments.

#### 3.4.1 Goniothalamin (**1**)

White crystal, mp 85degC, C13H12O2; D_e_max (255 nm) = 5.1 (MeOH \(c\) 0.2); IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{CHCl}_{1}}\) cm-1: 1716, 1381, 1245, 1055, 1021, 969, 818, 751, 693; UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MeOH}}\) nm (log _e_): 210 (5.05, 258 (5.03), 300 (3.95), 310 (3.71); ES-MS, _m/z_ (rel. int.) (40 V, positive mode): 201 [M + H]+ (100), 223 [M + Na]+ (75), 239 [M + K]+ (20); 1H- and 13C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

#### 3.4.2 Cryptofolione (**2**)

Brown oil, C17H2O2O4; D_e_max (260 nm) = 2.5 (MeOH, \(c\) 2.0); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MeOH}}\) nm (log _e_): 205 (4.15), 250 (3.78), 282 (3.38), 291 (3.37); ES-MS, _m/z_ (rel. int.) (40 V, positive mode): 327 [M + K]+ (98), 311 [M + Na]+ (86), 287 [M - H]+ (13), 271 [M - H2O + H]+ (3), 269 [M - H2O - H](6), 253 [M - 2H2O + H]+ (6); 1H- and 13C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

4.3 Cryptomoscatone D2: (6R )-5,6-dihydro-6-[(2

## Page 8

[M - H2O + H]+ (50), 296 [M - H2O]+ (10), 295 [M - H2O - H]+ (40), 279 [M - 2H2O + H]+ (75), 278 [M - H2O]+ (15), 277 [M - 2H2O - H]+ (25); 1H- and 13C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

#### Cryptomoscatone E2 diacetate (5a)

Brown oil, C23H26O6 (calc. 69.35% C, 6.53% H; obs. 69.04% C, 6.57% H); \(\Delta\)emax (258 nm) = 7.0 (MeOH, \(c\) 0.5). UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm MeOH}\) nm (log _e_): 204 (4.35), 249 (4.11), 281 (3.29), 290 (3.19); ES-MS, _m/z_ (rel. int.) (40 V, positive): 437 [M + K]+ (13), 422 [M + Na + H]+ (25), 421 [M + Na]+ (100), 280 [M - 2OAc]+ + (13), 279 [M - 2 HOAc + H]+ (76). 1H- and 13C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

#### Cryptopyranoscatone A1 diacetate (8a)

Brown oil, C23H26O7 (calc. 66.67% C, 6.28% H; obs. 66.34% C, 6.25% H); \(\Delta\)emax (248 nm) = 4.0 (MeOH, \(c\) 1.0); \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm MeOH}\) UV nm (log _e_): 205 (4.31), 250 (4.02), 281 (3.24), 291 (3.24); ES-MS, _m/z_ (rel. int.) (40 V, positive): 437 [M + Na]+ (100), 295 [M - 2HOAc + H]+ (10), 293 [M - 2HOAc - H]+ (5); 1H- and 13C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 3 and 4, respectively.

#### Cryptopyranoscatone B1 diacetate (9a)

Brown oil; \(\Delta\)emax (269 nm) = 1.1 (MeOH, \(c\) 0.5); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm MeOH}\) nm (log _e_): 204 (4.32), 250 (4.01), 280 (3.52), 291 (3.40); ES-MS, _m/z_ (rel. int.) (40 V, positive): 479 [M + K]+ (40), 463 [M + Na]+ (100); 1\({}^{1}\)H- and 13C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 3 and 4, respectively.

Cryptopyranoscatone A2: (6R )-5,6-dihydro-6-[

## Page 9

(MeOH, \(c\) 1.0); UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}^{\rm MeOH}\) nm (log _e_): 206 (4.35), 248 (4.16), 280 (3.27), 290 (3.09); ES-MS, \(m/z\) (rel. int.) (40 V, positive mode): 369 \(\left[{\rm M\ +\ K}\right]^{+}\) (15), 353 \(\left[{\rm M\ +\ Na}\right]^{+}\) (100), 295 \(\left[{\rm M\ -\ 2H_{2}O\ +\ H}\right]^{+}\) (10). \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C -NMR spectral data, see Tables 3 and 4, respectively.

4.16 Cryptopryammoscatone B4: (6R )-5,6-dihydro-6-(4 'S',6'R',7'R',8'S',1'E,9'E )-4',8'-epoxy-6',7'-dihydroxy-10'-phenyl-1',9'-decadienyl]-2-pyrone (13)

Brown oil, C\({}_{21}\)H\({}_{24}\)O\({}_{5}\); \(\Delta\)\(\varepsilon_{\rm max}\) (256 nm) = 3.3 (MeOH, \(c\) 0.5); UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}^{\rm MeOH}\) nm (log _e_): 204 (4.20), 254 (3.83), 280 (3.59); ES-MS, \(m/z\) (rel. int.) (40 V, positive mode): 395 \(\left[{\rm M\ +\ K}\right]^{+}\) (100), 379 \(\left[{\rm M\ +\ Na}\right]^{+}\) (90), 355 \(\left[{\rm M\ -\ H}\right]^{+}\) (20), 337 \(\left[{\rm M\ -\ H_{2}O\ -\ H}\right]^{+}\) (15), 321 \(\left[{\rm M\ -\ 2H_{2}O\ +\ H}\right]^{+}\) (25), 319 \(\left[{\rm M\ -\ 2H_{2}O\ -\ H}\right]^{+}\) (12). \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectral data, see Tables 3 and 4, respectively.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) and Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP).

## References

* Davies-Coleman and Rivett (1989) Davies-Coleman, M. T., & Rivett, D. E. A. (1989). Naturally occurring 6-substituted 5,6-dihydro-a-pyrones. _Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products_, _55_, 1.
* Drewes et al. (1997) Drewes, S. E., Horn, M. H., & Mavi, S. (1997). _Cryptocarya liebertiana_ and _Ooceta Bulatta_ -- their phytochemical relationship. _Phytochemistry_, _44_, 437.
* Drewes et al. (1995) Drewes, S. E., Horn, M. H., & Scott-Shaw, R. (1995). \(\alpha\)-Pyrones and their derivatives from two _Cryptocarya_ species. _Phytochemistry_, _40_, 321.
* Drewes et al. (1996) Drewes, S. E., Horn, M. H., & Wijewardene, C. S. (1996). \(\alpha\)-Pyrone from _Cryptocaryaifolia_ -- a structural isomer of unuravumvolbide. _Phytochemistry_, _41_, 333.
* Franca et al. (1973) Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R., & Suarez, A. M. P. (1973). 6-Phenylethyl-5,6-dihydro-2-pyrones from _Aniba gigantifolia_. _Phytochemistry_, _12_, 1182.
* Jewers et al. (1972) Jewers, K., Davis, J. B., Dougan, J., Manchanda, A. H., Blunden, G., Kyi, A., & Wetchapinon, S. (1972). Goniothalamin and its distribution in four _Gontiothalamus_ species. _Phytochemistry_, _11_, 2025.
* Hlubucek Robertson (1967) Hlubucek, J. R., & Robertson, A. V. (1967). (+)(_S_S_)-d-lactone from 5-hydroxy-7-phenylhepta-2,6-dienoic acid. A natural product from _Cryptocarya calonera_ (Scheff) Kostermans. _Australian Journal of Chemistry_, _20_, 2199.
* Hoffmann and Wiedmann (1985) Hoffmann, R. W., & Wiedmann, U. (1985). _three_/_erythro-_Assignment of 1,3-diol derivatives based on \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectra. _Chemische Berichte_, _118_, 3980.
* Leete et al. (1982) Leete, E., Muir, A., & Towers, G. H. N. (1982). Biosynthesis of psilitoin from [2'-3'-13C2, 1'-14C, 4'-3H] phenylalanine studied with \({}^{13}\)C-NMR. _Tetrahedron Letters_, _23_, 2635.
* Sehlapelo et al. (1994) Sehlapelo, B. M., Drewes, S. E., & Scott-Shaw, R. (1994). A 6-substituted 5,6-dihydro-a-pyrone from two species of _Cryptocarya_. _Phytochemistry_, _37_, 847.
* Snatzke (1968) Snatzke, G. (1968). Circular dichroism and optical rotatory dispersion-principles and application to the investigation of the stereochemistry of natural products. _Angewandte Chemie International Edition_, \(7\), 14.



