# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89891-X.pdf

## Page 1



# The Flavones of _Apuleia Leiocarpa*+_

R. Braz Filho, O. R. Gottlieb

Abstract-The wood of _Apuleia leiocarpa_ (Vog.) Macbr. (Leguminosae, subfamily **C****aesalpinioideae**) yielded (+)-pinitol, _b_-sitosterol and ten flavones. Three of these flavones are the known compounds ayanin (X), oxyayanin-A (VIIa) and oxyayanin-B (IX). The constituents of the seven new flavones, **apulein (Ia), **S-O-demethylaqulein (Ib)**, aupuleitin (Va), aupuleirin (VIa), aupuleidin (VIIa) and **S-O-methyl-oxyayanin-A (VIIIb)** were established. A structural proposal is also advanced for leiocarpin (XVI), a new pterocarpan isolated from the bark. The unusual oxygenation pattern of the flavones is discussed.

## INTRODUCTION

_Apuleia_ **leiocarpa** **(Vog.)** Macbr. (= A. **_praccox_** Mart.) (Leguminosae-Caesalpinioideae) is a tree which may attain considerable proportions. The fine-textured durable yellow timber is highly appreciated for heavy construction, flooring, door frames, wheel-wright work, shafts of vehicles and fence posts.' The species occurs over a huge territory from Northern Argentine. **Ducke** cites also A. **_molaris_** Spr. ex Bh, which grows in the Amazon valley.2 More recently, however, the opinion prevails that the genus Apuleia Mart. is monotypic and that **_A._** leiocarpa** is the binomial to be retained.3 We have compared, by TLC, extracts of different parts of specimens of A. **_molaris,_** collected near **B****elem,****Para** State, and classified by the botanist J. **Murca** Pires, and of A. **_leiocarpa,_** collected near Brasilia, D. F., and classified by the botanist E. P. Heringer, and were unable to detect any difference in chemical composition.

The trunk of the last mentioned specimen was separated into heartwood, **sapwood** and bark, which were extracted separately. By a combination of fractional crystallization and column chromatography (+)-pinitol, **b**-**sitosterol** and nine flavones were isolated from the heartwood extract. A tenth flavone was shown to be present by TLC. The same flavones and **b**-**sitosterol** were also detected in the sapwood extract. The composition of the bark extract, however, was found to be different. Instead of the flavones, a new pterocarpan and **b**-sitosterol were present.

The derivation from a flavone skeleton of the group of nine heartwood constituents was immediately apparent upon inspection of their UV spectra. In order to classify the substances

## Page 2



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c c c} Compound & MHz & 6-H & 8-H & 2′-H & 3′-H & 5′ - H & 6′-H & 5-OH & 2′-OH & OH & OH \\ \(\ldots\) & & & & & & & & & & & \\ Ia & 100 & & 3.26 & \(\ldots\) & 3\(\cdot 40\) & \(\ldots\) & 2\(\cdot 77\) & \(\ldots\) & 2\(\cdot 00\) &

## Page 3



## Page 4

into groups with identical oxygenation patterns, all were exhaustively methylated with **dimethyl** sulphate and **K2CO3.** Counting the number of the methoxyl groups of the derivatives by NMR spectroscopy revealed that five compounds were heptaoxygenated, while three were hexaoxygenated and one was pentaoxygenated.

#### Heptaoxygenated Flavones

Two of the heptaoxygenated flavones yielded an identical methyl ether. A hydroxyl-methoxyl count revealed that one of the parent compounds, for which we propose the name apulein, is a dihydroxypentamethoxyflavone (Table 1, Compound **Ia),** and the other one is a trihydroxytetramethoxyflavone (Table 1, Compound Ib). The hydroxylproton signals in the NMR spectra of apulein (2.00 and **4**:**55_t_) and of the trihydroxyflavone (-2.28, **2**:**13 and **4**:**67_t_) indicated not only that a pair of OH groups may be situated in identical environments in both compounds, but also that the additional hydroxyl in the latter compound must be strongly chelated. The structure of **5**-_O_-demethylapulein had thus to be considered for this compound. Aq. HCI promotes selective demethylation of 5-methoxyl groups in **flavones4** and the use of this reagent to convert apulein to the trihydroxy derivative confirmed their structural relationship.

The two remaining hydroxyls must be located in different environments, the one represented by a proton signal at about **2_t_** (Table I, Compounds **Ia** and b) being involved in a weak intramolecular hydrogen bond. Since a hydroxyl at position 3 gives rise to a proton signal at about **0**:**5_t_**,5** the OH group in question was placed at **C**-**2_t_**, where it would be 

## Page 5

subjected to the polarizing influence of the heterocyclic oxygen. This seemed reasonable, if considered in conjunction with evidence pointing to the presence of the other hydroxyl at the _para_ position: The UV spectrum of apulein is not altered upon addition of **AICl3, H3BO3** or **NaOAc,6** but revealed that decomposition of the substance takes place upon addition of **NaOH**.

A preliminary indication of the localization of the four methoxy groups in the partial structures of apulein **(IIa)** and **5-O-demethylapulein (IIb)** was obtained by mass **spectrometry**. The well known fragmentation mode, through compensated displacement of electrons in the heterocyclic,7, led to ions (Table 2, Compounds Ia and Ib) whose mass revealed the presence of two of these methoxyls in ring A, while the third one must be located either on the heterocycle or, together with the fourth one, on ring B. These assignments, however,

## Page 6

are somewhat ambiguous. Not only are the pertinent ions of low relative abundance, but, as Table 2 also shows, fragments of identical mass may be formulated as arising either from ring A (ions V) or ring B (ions X). Confirmation was secured through the more reliable information contained in Table 3. Loss of 43 mass units from the molecular ion, as featured in the reactions M-0-S and M-S, is typical of 3-methoxyflavones.9 Since at this stage the presence of a hydroxyl at position 2' had already been ascertained, the highly favoured losses of 17 (M-P) and of 31 mass units (M-R) were to be expected10 and constitute additional evidence for the presence of a methoxyl group at C-3.

Footnote 9: J. H. Bowle and D. W. Cameron, _Australian J.Chem._**19**, 1627 (1966).

Mass spectral analysis thus authorized the expansion of the partial formula IIa and b respectively to IIIa and b. The proton signals in the aromatic region of the NMR spectra of all apulein derivatives (Table 1, Compounds Ia-e) were represented by singlets, indicating the absence of ortho or _meta_ related aromatic hydrogens. This fact assigned the methoxyl of ring B to position 4'. The NMR signals at 2-7 and 3-

## Page 7

ment with alkali, 2,3,4-trimethoxybenzoic acid, besides the **6'-hydroxy-2**,2',3',4'-tetra-methoxyacetophenone which had also been obtained upon degradation of the apuleins. The _ortho_ relationship of the two ring B protons which was thus indicated, could also be appreciated through examination of the NMR spectrum of apuleisin (Table 1, Compound Va) which shows two _ortho_ split doublets at 2*76 and 3*26 \(t\).

As in **5-O-demethylapulein**, two of the free hydroxyls in apuleisin must occupy positions 5 and **2'**, since their protons also gave rise to NMR signals respectively at -2*24 and 2*02\(t\). Both these hydroxyls form part of ortho-dihydroxy systems. This was ascertained by heating apuleisin with dichlorodiphenylmethane. As indicated by mass spectrometry (Tables 2, and 3, Compound Vd), a diphenylmethylenedioxydihydroxy trimethoxyflavone resulted. The two hydroxyls of this derivative form an ortho-quinol function involving the hydroxyl at C-5, since the compound is labile in alkali and originates a PMR signal at -2*53\(t\) (Table 1, Compound Vd). On this evidence, the structure **2',3',5,6**-tetrahydroxy-3**,4',7-trimethoxyflavone (Va) is proposed for apuleisin.

Apuleitrin and apuleirin, the fourth and fifth heptaoxygenated flavones of Apuleia Zeiocarpa, again yielded an identical methyl ether. Apuleitrin differs structurally from apuleisin **(Va)** only with respect to ring B. Indeed, while its mass spectrum (Tables 2 and 3, Compound VIa) reproduces fully all peaks originating through fragmentation of ring A of apuleisin, alkaline degradation of tri-O-methylapuleitrin afforded 3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoic acid. The structure of this methyl ether must consequently be represented by **VIb**. Confirmation was obtained by direct comparison with **3**,3',4',5,5',6,7-heptamethoxyflavone prepared by methylation of **3',5,5'-trihydroxy-3**,4',6,7-tetramethylavone (VIc)** kindly supplied by Prof. P. R. Jefferies.**14**

The mass spectral indication of the substitution of ring A in apuleitrin was confirmed by NMR and UV spectrometry. The existence of a chelated hydroxyl (-2.43 \(t\), Table 1, Compound VIa) and of an ortho-dihydroxy-system (positive shift in u.v. spectrum with borate) was easily demonstrated. At this point only the relative site of one hydroxyl and two methoxyls at positions **3',**4' and 5' remained to be established. The protons at C-2' and 6' of apuleitrin gave rise to a single NMR band at 2*64\(t\) (Table 1, Compound VIa). In spite of this fact, ring B must be asymmetrically substituted, because the corresponding signals in the spectrum of tri-O-acetylapuleitrin were characterized by two distinct chemical shift values (Table 1, Compound VId). Only **3',5,6-trihydroxy-3**,4',5',7-tetramethylavone (VIa)** can thus represent the structure of apuleitrin.

Apuleirin is a dihydroxymethylavory derivative (Table 1, Compound VIe). Since the structure of its methyl ether VIb had already been determined, only the relative positions of the substituents remained to be established. NMR (Table 1, Compound VIe) and UV data (no shift with **AlCl3)** showed the absence of hydroxyls from both the **3-** and 5-positions. The NMR spectrum contains a two-proton singlet at 2*55\(t\) which can only be attributed to the hydrogens at C-2' and 6'. The magnetic equivalence of these protons does not persist in apuleirin acetate, since they are represented by two _meta_-split doublets in the spectrum of this derivative (Table 1, Compound VIf). Asymmetric substitution of ring B requires the presence of a hydroxyl at C-3'. The only alternative asymmetric substitution pattern, namely a 3',4'-dihydroxy-5'-methoxy grouping, could be ruled out, because apuleirin is stable in alkali and no alteration of its W spectrum was observed upon addition of **H3BO3.** Absence of a paramagnetic shift of the H-8 NMR signal upon acetylation, and a bathochromic shift of the UV band II upon addition of NaOAc,**6** can only be rationalized if 

## Page 8

the remaining OH group is at C-6. The mass spectral data (Tables 2 and 3) are in accord with the structure of 3',6-dihydroxy-3,4',5,5',7-pentamethoxyflavone (VIe) which was consequently assigned to apuleirin.

### Hexaoxygenated Flavones

The distribution of hydroxyls and methoxyls on the skeleton of apuleidin, one of the hexaoxygenated flavones, was determined by mass spectrometry (Table 3, Compound VIIa). The masses of ions of types _T, U_ and \(V\) (Table 2, Compound VIIa) indicated the existence of a hydroxy-methoxidated A-ring, while the masses of the ions Y and \(Z\) were compatible with a dihydroxy-methoxidylated B-ring. The UV spectrum revealed the vicinal relationship of the two hydroxyls in ring B (spectral shifts with H3BO3 and decomposition in NaOH). Consequently, when the characteristic bands at -2.46 and 1*95\(t\) were found in the NMR spectrum of apuleidin (Table 1, Compound VIIa), the location of the hydroxyls at positions 5 and 2',3' had to be considered. The same spectrum indicated also the presence of four aromatic protons in _meta_ and _ortho_ related pairs. The chemical shifts of the corresponding signals suggested their situation respectively on ring A and ring B. All these data lead to structure 2',3',5-trihydroxy-3,4',7-trimethoxyflavone (VIIa) for apuleidin.

The fully 0-methylated derivatives of the two other hexaoxygenated flavones isolated from _Apuleia leiocarpa_ were identical. Mass spectra characterized one of the parent compounds (Table 3, Compound VIIIb) as a dihydroxy tetramethoxyflavone and the other one (Table 3, Compound VIIIa) as a trihydroxytrimethoxyflavone. The NMR spectra indicated, through a proton signal at -2.35 \(t\), the presence of a 5-OH group only in the trimethoxyflavone (Table 1, Compound VIIIa). This suggested again a 5-OMe/5-OH relationship and, indeed, the tetramethoxyflavone was easily converted into the trimethoxyflavone upon heating with aqueous HCl.

UV, NMR (Table 1, Compound VIIIa) and mass spectral (Tables 2 and 3, Compound VIIIa) measurements, as well as degradation by alkali (see Experimental), indicated that the 5-hydroxy-compound was 2',5,5'-trihydroxy-3,4',7-trimethoxyflavone (VIIIa) and the 5-methoxy-compound 2',5'-dihydroxy-3,4',5,7-tetramethylflavone (VIIIb). VIIIa is the structure of oxyayanin-A, a constituent of _Distemonanthus benthamianus_.15

Jain _et al._16 synthesized 2',5,5'-trihydroxy-3,4',7-trimethoxyflavone (VIIIa) and found it to be different, by IR spectroscopy, from a sample of oxyayanin-A supplied by Prof. F. E. King, although they recorded close agreement in colour reactions, UV spectra and m.p. This, in addition to the fact that the reported15 procedure for the isolation of oxyayanin-A from _Distemonanthus benthamianus_ included alkaline treatment which destroys VIIIa, forced the Indian workers to consider the structural proposal VIIIa advanced for the natural compound as erroneous,16,17 and stimulated Dreyer and Bertelli to suggest that a 2',6'-disubstituted B-ring might be present in oxyayanin-A.18 Such a hypothesis would, of course, never have been formulated, had the authors been able to examine the NMR spectrum. This shows (Table 1, Compound VIIIa) two doublets whose chemical shifts and coupling constant allow correlation only with protons at C-6 and C-8, and two singlets revealing a pair of _para_ related protons. These can only be placed on ring B, which must consequently be substituted at positions 2',4' and 5'.

## References

* [1]F. E. King, T. J. King and P. J. Stokes, _J.Chem. Soc._**4587** (1954).
* [2]A. C. Jain, S. K. Mathur and T. R. Seshadri, _Indian J. Chem. 4,365 (1966)._
* [3]_S. C. Datta, V. V. S. Murti and T. R. Seshadri, _Zndian J. Chem. 7,110_ (1969).
* [4]D. L. Dreyer and D. J. Bertelli, _Tetrahedron_ **23,** 4607 (1967).



## Page 9

We were able to identify the **5**-hydroxyflavone of Apul e ia l'ocarpa with oxyayanin-A by direct comparison (IR and UV spectra, TLC and mixed m.p.) with an authentic sample from Dr. T. J. King. Consequently, when Prof. T. R. Seshadri kindly informed us that he found our oxyayanin-A ex A, l'oocarpa identical with his synthetic **VIIIa**, the structural proposal originally advanced for oxyayanin-A was established as correct, and the remaining question concerned only the nature of the sample which had been sent from Nottingham to Delhi.

This problem was solved when it was found that oxyayanin-A, crystallized from ethyl acetate-light petroleum, ethyl acetate-benzene or methanol, gave an i.r. spectrum (in **KBr**) identical with that published by Seshadri **et al.16** for synthetic VIIIa. When oxyayanin-A, however, was dissolved in chloroform and the solvent removed by evaporation, the residue, although indistinguishable from oxyayanin-A by UV all other methods, gave rise to an IR spectrum (in **KBr**) identical to that published by Seshadri **et al.16** for the natural oxyayanin-A received from England.

Distemonanthus benthamianus Baill. is an African timber closely akin to Apuleia **leiocarpa.19** Interestingly, both species belong to monotypic genera. The finding of oxyayanin-A in A. l'oocarpa stimulated the search for other constituents of D. benthamianus in the Brazilian species. Indeed, the presence in the corresponding extract of still another hexaoxygenated flavone, namely oxyayanin-B **(IX),15** could be demonstrated by TLC.

### Pentaoxygenated Flavone

The sole pentaoxygenated flavone isolated from A. l'oocarpa was, at this stage, identified easily through spectral measurements (cf. Tables 1-3, Compound X; Experimental) with yet another constituent of D. benthamianus, namely ayanin **(X),20**

### Mass Spectra

Table 4 summarizes some of the mass spectral data contained in Table 2. Clearly, the substitution at C-2' and 6' of **3**-methoxyflavones** can be recognized upon examination of the relative abundances of their M-l, M-17 and M-31 ions. Absence of substitution confers high stability to the molecular ion, favouring only the expulsion of a hydrogen atom. Substitution by hydroxyl favours the expulsion of OH and OMe radicals, while substitution by methoxyl favours expulsion only of OMe.



## Page 10



### Leiocarpin

The aromatic constituent of A. leiocarpa bark was classified as a pterocarpan by means of its very typical NMR21-23 and UV24 spectra. The mass spectrum suggested, through its molecular ion, substitution by a methylenedioxy- and a 2,2-dimethylchromene unit. The prominent M-15 peak was attributed to the benzopyrilium ion, formed by loss of a methyl radical from the chromene portion of the molecule. Direct assignment of the substituents to rings A or B of the pterocarpan skeleton through mass spectrometry was not feasable for, as shown previously,8,25 the major fragments can be reasonably formulated as arising from either ring (e.g. XI, XII). As expected, however, the interpretation of the mass spectrum of the isoflavan, derived from leiocarpin by catalytic hydrogenation, was straightforward. The retro-Diels Alder fragmentation mode yielded the ions XIII and XIV in high relative abundance. The 2,2-dimethylchromane-group can thus be located only on ring A, while the methylenedioxy-group must occupy positions of ring B.

The aromatic region of the NMR spectrum of the isoflavan showed four bands, each representing one proton : two doublets centered at 3*16 and 3*70 \(t\) (_J_ 8*6 Hz) and two singlets at 3*31 and 3*49 \(t\). Clearly, the chemical shift of the low field signal reveals the existence of a proton which keeps neither an ortho- nor apara relationship to an oxy-group,26 a condition which can be met only by a H at C-5 of a C-7-oxygenated A-ring. Since the proton signal under scrutiny is characterized by an ortho-coupling constant, a second H must occur at C-6. The ring B protons gave rise to two singlets and must be _para_ related. Structure XV had consequently to be assigned to the tetrahydrogenated derivative of leiocarpin.

The 3S-configuration for the isoflavan XV was deduced upon inspection of its ORD curve. This showed a negative Cotton effect in the 260-300 nm region, in analogy with the curves of known 3S-isoflavans27 which do not bear an additional substituent at **C-6.25**

It was now possible to formulate structure and configuration of leiocarpin (XVI) on the reasonable assumption that the heterocyclic rings are _cis_ fused.28 Confirmation of the structure was provided by all features of the NMR spectrum. Observed (3*31,3*58_t_) and expected (3*40,3*66 _t_)25 chemical shift values for the singlets due to the C-7 and C-10 protons are in agreement. Confirmation of the absolute configuration was obtained by inspection of the ORD curve. This followed, between 3.50 and 220 nm, precisely the course expected for 6aS,11aS- pterocarpans.25,29

## discussion

Methylation of the 4'-hydroxyl in preference to the 3'-hydroxyl is relatively rare in natural flavonoids.30 Two additional conspicuous examples are eupatin (XVIIa) and eupatoretin (XVIIb), not only on account of their close structural relationship with oxyayanin-B (IX), but also because they show moderate cytotoxicity against human carcinoma of the nasopharynx.31

## References

* [1]D. R. Perrin, _Tetrahedron Letters 29 (1964)_.
* [2]K. G. Pachler and W. G. E. Underwood, _Tetrahedron_ 23, 1817 (1967)_.
* [3]K. Fukui, M. Nakayama and T. Harano, _Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 42,233 (1969)_.
* [4]B. L. Van Duuren, _J. Org. Chem. 26_, 5013 (1961)_.
* [5]A. Pelter and P. I.Amenechl, _J. Chem. Soc. (C) 887 (1969)_.
* [6]J. A. Ballantine and C. T. Pillinger, _Tetrahedron_23, 1691 (1967)_.
* [7]K. Karkosawa, W. D. Ollis,R. T. Redman, I. O. Sutherland, O. R. Gottlieb and H. Magalhaes, _Alves, Chem. Commun. 1265_ (1968).
* [8]H. Sujonome, _Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 39,409_ (1986).
* [9]H. Sujonome and T. Iwadare, _Experientia_ 18,163 (1962).
* [10]C. A. Henricke and P. R. Jefferies, _Australian J. Chem. 17,934 (1964)_.
* [11]S. M. Kupchan, C. W. Sigel, J. R. Knox and M. S. Udayamurthy, _J. Org. Chem. 34, 1460 (1969)_.



## Page 11



## Page 12



## Page 13

The postulated derivation of trioxygenated B-rings of Apuleia constituents from **dioxy**-genated precursors is presented in Chart 2. It seems obvious that the hydroxyl, and not the methoxyl, controls the orientation of electrophyllic attack by **+OH** to its _para_ or _ortho_-positions. Effects of this nature were attributed to the ability of the hydroxyl groups to establish a hydrogen bond with the neighbouring methoxy **group.32** As a result of such intramolecular hydrogen bonding, **mesomeric** and inductive electron release toward _ortho_ or _para_ positions would be expected to be enhanced for the hydroxyl, and repressed for the methoxyl. This may explain why the usual **4'**-hydroxy-**3'**-methoxy substituion in natural diarylpropanoids leads to the usual **3'**,**4'**,**5'**-trioxygenated derivatives, while, at least in Distemonanthus and Apuleia species, the unusual **3'**-hydroxy-**4'**-methoxy substitution leads to the unusual **2'**,**4'**,**5'**- and **2'**,**3'**,**4'**-trioxygenation patterns.

That the **3'**,**4'**,**5'**-oxygenation pattern is indeed usual among flavonoids was again brought out in the present work with respect to apuleitrin **(VIa)** and apuleirin **(VIe)**. Identically substituted derivatives have been located in such unrelated species as _Eremophila fraseri_ F. Muell. **(Myoporaceae)14** and _Murraya paniculata_ (L.) Jack, **(Rutaceae).33** In contradistinction, while 2'-hydroxylated B-rings are reasonably widespread among the isoflavonoids of the **Leguminosae,34** and a proposal has been advanced which rationalizes this fact mechanistically,35 oxyayanin-A was until now the only 2'-hydroxyflavanoid

## Page 14

reported in the family. Nevertheless, recent papers17,36,37 mention 27 additional representatives of this class from members of the Acanthaceae, Daticsaceae, Labiatae, Meliaceae, Moraceae and Rutaceae. Their biosynthesis, however, does not necessarily follow the course which is suggested for the _Apuleia_ constituents, and at least some of these compounds may be derived by some departure from the usual acetate-shikimate pathway.38

Finally, it has been reported that ayan wood _(Distemonanthus benthamianus)_ may cause dermatitis due to the presence of oxyayanin-A and oxyayanin-B.39 Clearly, this is another indication designed to stimulate an investigation into the physiological activity of the constituents of garapa wood _(Apuleia leiocarpa)_.

## EXPERIMENTAL

NMR spectra were determined in CDCl3 using TMS as an internal standard. M.ps were determined using a Kofler hot stage microscope and are uncorrected. Separations by column chromatography were carried out using Merck **Kieselael** 0*05-0*20 mm. Merck's **Kieselgel** G was used for TLC. During isolation processes the appropriate combination of fractions was determined by examination of their i.r. spectra and TLC behaviour. TLC plates were examined under UV illumination and after exposure to iodine vapour. The majority of NMR and mass spectral figures are given in Tables 1-3.

### Isolation of Apuleia Constituents

_Benzene extraction of the heartwood of A._ leiocarpa. _Isolation of ten flavones and b-sitosterol_. The powdered heartwood (5*0 kg) was continuously extracted with hot benzene. Upon partial evaporation of the solvent separated an oil which solidified by standing (Hi). Further concentration of the benzene solution produced a crystalline precipitate which was separated into an acetone insoluble (H2) and an acetone soluble portion. The acetone soluble portion was chromatographed on silica giving fractions \(\mathbf{H_{3}}\)-\(\mathbf{H_{6}}\), in this order, by elution with benzene-AcOEt(!]. Two more successive crops of crystals (\(\mathbf{H_{7}}\) and \(\mathbf{H_{8}}\)) of the original benzene solution were collected. The remaining benzene solution was divided into two parts, \(\mathbf{H_{9}}\) and \(\mathbf{H_{10}}\).

Hi was washed with a small quantity of benzene, and freed from an insoluble portion by treatment with **CHCl3**. The **CHCl3**-solution was evaporated. The residue, purified by passage of its methanol solution through a column of Sephadex LH-20 gelified with methanol, and recrystallizations from the same solvent, afforded apuleisin (Va, 530 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{3}}\) was recrystallized from benzene-**AcOEt** yielding oxyayanin-A (VIIIa, 160 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{4}}\) was recrystallized from benzene yielding 5*0-demethylapulein (Ib, 180 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{5}}\) was recrystallized from acetone yielding apulein (Ia, 900 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{6}}\) was recrystallized from acetone yielding **5**-O**-methylboxyazinin-A (VIIIIb, 140 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{7}}\) was recrystallized from acetone, purified by chromatography on silica, elution with benzene-AcOEt(1!1), and recrystallization from methanol, yielding ayanin (X, 9 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{8}}\) was recrystallized from ethanol yielding apuleisin (Va, 40 mg). \(\mathbf{H_{9}}\) was evaporated. The ethanol soluble part of the residue was chromatographed on a polyamide column. Benzene-**MeOH12**:**1 eluted a product in which the presence of oxyayanin-B (IX) was detected by TLC (silica **CHCl3**).

\(\mathbf{H_{10}}\) was partially evaporated. An oil precipitated and was separated. Treatment of this oil with **MeOH** produced a crystalline mass which was shown by TLC to be composed of 5*0-demethylapulein (Ib), apuleisin (Va) and oxyayanin-A (VIIIIa). The filtered **MeOH** solution was concentrated to a small volume and chromatographed through a column of Sephadex LH-20 gelified with **MeOH**. In order of elution were collected _b_-**sitosterol** (30 mg), a fraction which after recrystallization from AcOEt-light petroleum yielded apuleitrin (**VIa**, 30 mg), and a fraction which after recrystallization from **MeOH** yielded ayanin (X, 25 mg).

Further evaporation of benzene from the original \(\mathbf{H_{10}}\)-solution afforded a second crop of oily precipitate which was again treated with **MeOH**. The crystals were collected and again shown by TLC to be composed of 5*0-demethylapulein (Ib), apuleisin (Va), and oxyayanin-A (VIIIIa). The filtered **MeOH** solution was evaporated and the residue dissolved in **CHCl3**. This solution was extracted several times with **conc**, aqueous borax. The aqueous layers were united, washed with with **CHCl3**, acidified with HCl and extracted with **CHCl3**. The **CHCl3**-solution was washed with water, dried, evaporated and the residue (1.9 g) chromatographed on silica (60 g). In order of elution with benzene-AcOEt were collected a fraction which 

## Page 15

after recrystallization from **CCL4** yielded apuleidin (**VIIa**, 129 mg), a fraction which after recrystallization from acetone-light petroleum yielded apuleidin (**VIa**, 109 mg), and a fraction which after recrystallization from **benzene-MeOH** yielded apuleirin (**Vle**, 22 mg). In the mother-liquor, which remained after the filtration of apuleirin, the presence of oxyganium-B (IX) was demonstrated by TLC.

_Ethanol extraction of the heartwood of_ A. leiocarpa. _Isolation of (+)-pinitol._ The ground wood, after extraction with hot benzene, see above, was continuously extracted with **EtOH**. Partial evaporation of the solvent produced a crystalline deposit which through recrystallization from **EtOH** yielded (+)-pinitol (72mg).

_Benzene extraction of the sapwood of_ A. leiocarpa. The powdered sapwood (10-0 kg) was continuously extracted with hot benzene. Upon removal of the solvent a residue (100 **g**) remained. Column or TLC revealed the presence of **apulein (Ia)**, **5**-O-demethylaquelin(Ib)**, oxyayanin-A(VIIIa), **5**-O-methyloxyayanin-A (VIIIb), apuleitian (Va), apuleirin (**Vla**), apanin (X) and **b**-sitosterol.

_Benzene extraction of the bark of_ A. leiocarpa. _Isolation of b-sitosterol and leiocarpin_ (XVI). The powdered bark (1.2 kg) was continuously extracted with hot benzene.' Evaporation of the solvent yielded a residue (16 g), part of which (3 g) was chromatographed on silica (90 g). Elution with benzene-**CHCl3(9:1)** afforded **b**-sitosterol (70 mg) and a fraction which after recrystallization from **EtOH** yielded leiocarpin (XVI, 130 mg).

_Apulein and Derivatives_

Apulein (**Ia**), Pale yellow rectangular plates, m.p. 211-213". \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf MeOH}}\) 250, 315, 335 infl. (**e** 21,450, 12,400, 1l,100), \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf MeOH}+\text{\bf NaOH}}\) 244, 287, \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf MeOH}+\text{\bf NaOH}+\text{\bf HCl}}\) 238, 290, unchanged on addition of NaOAc, \(\text{\bf H}_{3}\text{\bf BO}_{3}+\text{\bf NaOH}\) or **AlCl3**; Gibbs test, \(\lambda_{\max}\) 450, 690 nm. \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{\bf KBr}}\) (cm-'): **3330, 1620, 1605, 1558, 1510.

**5**-O-Demethylaquelin** (Ib). Orange needles, m.p. 228-230deg.\({}^{\text{\bf EtOH}}\) 260, 305, 350 (**e** 40,100, 15,950, 20,650), \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf EtOH}+\text{\bf NaOH}}\) 270, 360, \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf EtOH}+\text{\bf NaOH}+\text{\bf HCl}}\) 255,298, \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf EtOH}+\text{\bf AICl}}\) 267, 314, 357, unchanged in presence of NaOAc, \(\text{\bf H}_{3}\text{\bf BO}_{3}+\text{\bf NaOH}\) (cm-'): 3458, 1658, 1631, 1600,1563, 1508, 1493.

_Apulein diacetate (Zc)._ White needles from hexane-benzene, m.p. 158-160". \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{\bf EtOH}}\) 230, 254, 308 nm (**e** 24,650, 19,050, 21,450). \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{\bf KBr}}\) (cm-'): 1768, 1640, 1613, 1565, 1517. M.S.: \(\text{M}^{+}\)488 (**75**%); _m/e (%)_ 474 (**17**) 473 (**58**), 446 (**23**), 445 (**25**), 431 (**50**), 430 (**23**), 429 (**94**), 416 (**13**), 415 (**69**), 404 (**33**), 403 (**100**), 389 (8). 388 (**30**), 387 (**31**), 386 (**8**), 385 (**38**), 383 (**12**), 375 (**6**),

## Page 16

2',3',6-_Tri-O-methylapuleisin_(_Ve_). By treatment of apuleisin with CH2N2 white crystals from benzene-hexane, m.p.136-138deg.\(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}}\)234,261,310(_e_22,300,20,050,14,750),\(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}+\mathbf{NaOH}}\)276,370,\(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}+\mathbf{NaOH}+\mathbf{HCl}}\)234,261,312, MeOH+AICl3 272,295,338, \(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}+\mathbf{AICl3}+\mathbf{HCl}}\)272,295 infl.,330 nm (_e_17,650,11,500,13,100), \(\nu_{\max}^{\mathbf{KBr}}\)(cm-'): 3300,2500 broad,1648,1600,1570,1490.
5-_O-Acetyl-2',3',6-_tri-O-methylapuleisin_(_Vf_). White crystals from hexane-benzene, m.p. 204-206deg (open capilary).\(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{EiOH}}\)233,250 infl.,306 (_e_18,550,13,400,13,600).\(\nu_{\max}^{\mathbf{KBr}}\)(cm-r): 1750,1635,1620,1570,1495.

_Apuleisin_ tetraethyl ether (_Vg_). White crystals from light petroleum-benzene, m.p.110-1 12".\(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{EiOH}}\)235,252,306 nm (_e_20,050,15,300,13,400).\(\nu_{\max}^{\mathbf{KBr}}\)(cm-'): 1639,1605,1493.

Apuleitrin, Apuleirin and Derivatives

Apuleitrin (_Vla_). Yellow rectangular plates, m.p. 175-177".\(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}}\)238,282,340(_e_13,600,16,050,19,050), \(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}+\mathbf{NaOH}}\)240,300,365, \(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}+\mathbf{NaOH}+\mathbf{HCl}}\)235,275,314, \(\lambda_{\max}^{\mathbf{MeOH}+\mathbf{NaOAc}+\mathbf{H}_{3}\mathbf{BO}}\)240,288,335,

## Page 17

_Other_ Apuleia _Constituents_

_Ayanin_ **(X)**. White needles, m.p. **172-174deg**, (lit.20 172-174deg). \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EOH}}\) 255, 265, 295, 353 (a 8500, 7000, 3650, 7550), \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EOH}+\mathbf{NaOH}}\) 270, 290, 380, \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EOH}+\mathbf{HCI}}\) 255, 265, 295, 353, \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EOH}+\mathbf{AIC}_{3}}\) 265, 275, 295, 353, 393 nm, no alteration with NaOAc, \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EBr}}\) (cm-'): 3623, 3077, 1667, 1613, 1531, 1506.

_Leiocarpin (XVI)_. White rectangular plates, **m.p.** 98-100deg. \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EOH}}\) 230, 290, 308 nm (e 14,000, 4200, 4400); no alteration with \(\mathbf{NaOH}.\nu_{\max }^{\mathbf{KBr}}\) (cm-'): 1639, 1613, 1587, 1504. NMR spectrum (CCL, \(\tau\)): 2.76 (d,J 8 0 Hz, H-l), 3.31 (s, H-7), 3.34 (d, \(J\) 9.4 Hz, H-4'), 3.48 (d, \(J\) 8 0 Hz, H-2), 3.58 (s, H-10), 402 (s, OCH2O), 4.48 (d, \(J\) 9 4 Hz, H-3'), **4.58** (d, \(J\) 6 0 Hz, H-l la), **5.63-5.93** (m, H-Geq.), **6.18-6.73** (m, H-Gea., H-Gea.), **8.50** (s, **2CH3)**. Mass spectra: **M + 350 (80 %)**, m/e (%) 336 (23), 335 (100), 321 (5), 317 (5), 185 (12), 173 (19), 168 (7), 167-5 (24), 167 (6). ORD in **EtOH** (c 0-196, 440-240 nm): \(\phi_{\max }\)** **6.326** - 11,200, \(\phi_{\min }\)** **6.310** **0**, \(\phi_{\min }\)** **6.300**, \(\phi_{\min }\)** **6.300**, \(\phi_{\min }\)** **6.300**, \(\phi_{\min }\)** **6.300** + 31,400.

_b-Sitosterol_. White crystals, m.p. 134-136deg,[a]20deg -37deg.

_(+)-Pinitol_. White crystals, m.p. 185-187deg (lit.40 185-186deg),[a]20deg + 60deg (c 0.89, MeOH) (lit.40 + 65").

_Selective Demethylation of_ Apuleia _Constituents_

_Formation of 5-O-demethylaulein_ (Ib)**. A mixture of apulein (100 mg) and 20% aq. **HCl (70 ml)**, was heated on a steam with occasional agitation for 30 min, cooled to room temp., diluted with water and extracted with **CHCl3**. The **CHCl3** solution was washed with water, dried and evaporated. The residue was separated by thick layer chromatography (silica, benzene-EtOAc 1:1) into apuiein and **5-O-demethylaulein**.

_Formation of oxyayanin-A (VIIIa)_. 5-0-Methyloxyayanin-A (20 mg) was treated with **HCl** by the procedure described above (1 hr heating on the steam bath), yielding, besides starting material, oxyayanin-A.

_Oxidative Demethylation of Apulein_

_Formation of the Quinone IV_. A mixture of apulein (344 mg) and \(\mathbf{HNO}_{3}\) (d 1-40, 8-6 ml) was shaken, with occasional warming on the steam bath, for 30 min, left for an additional 30 min in an ice bath, poured into water, and extracted with **CHCl3**. The **CHCl3** solution was dried and evaporated, yielding a deep orange solid (210 mg) **m.p.** 120-1 30deg. \(\nu_{\max }^{\mathbf{KBr}}\) (cm-'): 1696, 1660, 1654, 1605, 1542, 1508.

_Formation of_ 2',5',6-_**_tetralydracy-3**,_4'-_**trimethoxyflavone (Ih)**. A mixture of the quinone IV (200 mg), **Na2SO3** (1 g)**, and anhydrous **AcOH** (4 ml) was heated on the steam bath for 3 min, cooled to room temp., diluted with water and extracted with **CHCl3**. The **CHCl3** solution was dried and evaporated, yielding a yellowish solid, **m.p.** 250-260deg. \(\nu_{\max }^{\mathbf{KBr}}\) (cm-'): 3369-3138, 1639, 1590, 1563.

_Formation of_ 2',5',6-_**_tetracetocy-3**,_4',_7-trimethoxyflavone (Ie)_. The quinol Ih was **acetylated** without purification, the crude product being purified by passage through a silica column **(eluant** : benzene-AcOEt **1:1)** when it crystallized from benzene as white needles (41 mg), m.p. 213-215deg. \(\lambda_{\max }^{\mathbf{EOH}}\) 230, 250, 306 nm (e 15,650, **10,900**, **13,050**, \(\nu_{\max }^{\mathbf{KBr}}\) (cm-'): 1778, **1640,1633, 1615, 1582, 1515, 1492. Mass spectrum: **M +** 544 (8\%)**; _m/e (%)_ 502 (8), 461 (25), 460 (100), 459 (8), 418 (17), 417 (8), 401 (7), 388 (5), 387 (21), 377 (5), 376 (26), 375 (25), 359 (10), 345 (17), 231 (5), 230 (10), 195 (5), 194 (8), 179 (11), 167 (6), 153 (8), 1

## Page 18



**Formation of 4-methoxy-2,5-diethoxybenzoic acid and of 6'-hydroxy-2,2',3',4'-tetramethoxyacetophenone**. A mixture of apulein diethyl ether (Ig, 40 mg) and 10% KOH in EtOH (10 ml) was heated (N2 atm) on a steam bath for 10 hr. Treatment as described above, afforded an acidic and a phenolic fraction. The acidic fraction yielded, upon sublimation, 4-methoxy-2,5-diethoxybenzoic acid (2 mg), m.p. and mixed m.p, with an authentic sample 152-154deg, (lit.15 155-156"); \(\begin{equation*}{\mathrm{k}}{\mathrm{m}}^{{\mathrm{k}}{\mathrm{Br}}}\end{equation*}\) (cm-'): 2500 broad, 1677, 1651, 1610, 1600, 151

