# 10.1016@0031-9422(95)00093-3.pdf

## Page 1



# Rearranged Limonoids from _Khaya Sengealensis_

Lis R. V. Olmo, M. Fatima Das G. F. Da Silva, Edsson Rodrigues Fo, Paulo C. Vieira, Joao B. Fernandes, Anita J. Marsaoli,1 Antonio L. Pimbero, Ewaldo F. Vilela

# Abstract

The stems of _Khaya sengealensis_ yielded three limonoids which appear to be novel. These compounds were identified on the basis of spectroscopic analysis as methyl 1\(a\),6,8a,14\(b\),30_b_-pentahydroxy-3-oxo-[3.3.110.2.11.4-]-tricyclomeliae-7-oate; methyl 1\(a\),2,8a,6,8a,14_b_-hexahydroxy-[4.2.110.30.11.4-]-tricyclomeliae-7-oate and methyl 1_a_-acetoxy-2\(b\),3a,6,8a,14_b_-pentahydroxy-[4.2.110.30.11.4-]-tricyclomeliae-7-oate. The two latter ones represent a novel group of methyl tricyclomeliae-7-oates. Scopoletin, scoparo, sitosterol, stigmasterol, Campesterol and 3_b_-O_-b_-glucopyranosylstosterol were also isolated.

## Introduction

The genus _Khaya_ A. Juss. is the main source of African mahogany, and is closely related to the South American genus _Swietenia_, the original source of mahogany. _Khaya sengealensis_ (Desr.) A. Juss occurs in the sub-Saharan savannah area from Senegal to Uganda [1]. However, this was introduced in Brazil and showed excellent growth. As part of a continuing study of the chemosystematic of the Meliaceae we have now undertaken a further investigation of stems of exotic _K. sengealensis_. Here, we reported the isolation of three new limonoids, two of which represent a novel group of methyl tricyclomeliae-7-oates.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A dichloromethane-soluble fraction of the methanol extract of the stems of _K. sengealensis_ was purified by repeated column chromatography on silica gel and preparative TLC to give 3_b_-O_-b_-glucopyranosylstosterol and three new limonoids **1**, **2** and **3**.

The major compound was identified as **1** on the basis of the following data. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) indicated the presence of three tertiary methyl groups (_b_ 0.99, 1.11 and 1.33), one methoxyl singlet (_b_ 3.66), three downfield shifted signals attributable to a _b_-substituted furan ring (_b_ 7.59, 7.56 and 6.47), three signals characteristic of protons attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (_b_ 5.40 \(s\); 4.37 \(d\), \(J\) = 10.3 Hz; 4.22 _dd_, \(J\) = 8.0 and 5.0 Hz) and two isolated AB-type methylenes, suggesting the presence of a methyl 1,29-cyclomeliaceae skeleton [2-4]. From the 1H-3C long-range correlation spectrum (Table 2) the observed correlations between the methyl proton at \(b\) 0.99 and the 13C signals at \(b\) 205.5 (3_J_) and 49.3 (3_J_) led to their assignments as C-28, C-3 and C-4, respectively. The methyl proton at \(b\) 1.33 showed long-range correlation with the 13C signal at \(b\) 83.6 (3_J_). The oxymethine proton at \(b\) 4.37 was coupled to the 1H signal at \(b\) 2.88 and both signals also showed cross peaks with the 13C signal at \(b\) 83.6 (3\(J\) and 2\(J\), respectively), so placing the secondary hydroxyl substituent at C-30 and a tertiary hydroxyl substituent at C-1. The signals at \(b\) 1.33 and 2.88 were then assigned to C-19 and H-2, respectively. The oxymethine proton at \(b\) 4.22 showed one-bond correlation with the 13C signal at \(b\) 70.0 and was coupled to the 1H signal at \(b\) 3.25, which showed long-range correlation with the C-4 signal (_b_ 49.3) and the 13C signal at \(b\) 70.0, thus indicating the hydroxyl group to be located at C-6 and permitting the assignment of the signal at \(b\) 3.25 to H-5. A hydroxyl group must also be connected at C-8 due to the observed correlation between the H-2 signal (_b_ 2.88) and the 13C signal at \(b\) 86.8. These correlations resulted in the construction of a 1,6,8,30-tetrahydroxy-3-oxo-tricyclo-[3.3.110.2.11.4]-dccane system.

The large gemini coupling constant of the C-15 methylene protons was consistent with their situation \(a\) to a carbonyl group with C-14 fully substituted. This was supported by the long-range 1H-13C COSY, which

## Page 2

showed the relationship of the 2H-15 signals at \(d\) 2.69 and 3.10 to the C-16 signal at \(d\) 169.9 (_J_) as well as of the C-18 signal at \(d\) 1.11 to the oxygen-bearing C-14 signal at \(d\) 83.0. Moreover, the existence of correlation between the 1H signal at \(d\) 5.40, assigned to H-17, and the 13C signal at \(d\) 141.5 (C-21) determined the position of the furan ring at C-17. The 1H-1H and one-bond 1H-13C COSY experiments suggested the presence of an isolated structural unit, -CH-CH2-CH2- in ring C (H-9, \(d\) 2.28; 2H-11, \(d\) 1.90 and 1.77-1.83; 2H-12, \(d\) 1.77-1.83 and 0.85), since it was the only location left in the nucleus.

The stereochemistry suggested for **1** was based on the biosynthesis of limonoids [5]. However, for C-30 the stereochemistry has been assigned by chemical conversions from known limonoids [2, 6]. In a comparable compound, xylocarpin (**4**), the stereochemistry of the oxide was assigned by a study of the alkaline hydrolysis and subsequent methylation [2]. Two products were obtained, one of which was **5**, in which \(J\)2,30 was 10 Hz (_d_ 4.43 \(d\), H- 30). Inspection of a model for product **5** showed that after opening of the lactone ring, it is possible for the alkoxyl ion produced at C-17 to open an 8a,30a-oxide ring by attack at C-30, forming a six-membered ether ring and an 8a-hydroxyl-group. A similar attack is stereochemically impossible in a _b_-oxide. Thus, these observations allowed Okorie _et al._ to suggest that, in xylocarpin, H-30 is \(b\) and the oxide ring \(a\), in which \(J\)2,30 is 3 Hz [2].

Based on the above evidence, in compound **1** the coupling constant between H-30 and H-2 (_d_ 4.37 \(d\), \(J\) = 10.3 Hz) is characteristic of 30_b_-oxygenated methyl meliacate derivatives, as in **5**. A model shows that, in **1** and **5**, ring B is nearer to a boat than to a 

## Page 3

chair conformation, in which H-2 and H-30\(a\) are eclipsed. For **1** this was supported by NOESY experiments (Table 3), which showed correlations of the signal of H-30\(a\) (_d_ 4.37) with the signals of H-2 (_d_ 2.88) and H-15\(b\) (_d_2.69). In addition, the signal of H-15\(a\) (_d_ 3.10) showed cross peaks with the signal of H3-18 (_d_ 1.11), suggesting a spatial proximity of H-15\(a\) or H3-18, which requires the hydroxyl group at C-14 to be _anti_ (_b_) to H3-18 (_a_). The correlations from H-17 (_d_ 5.40), H-5 (_d_ 3.25), H3-18 (_d_ 1.11) and H-9 (_d_ 2.28) to the signals at \(d\) 1.77-1.83 permitted the assignments of H-12\(b\) (H-17\(b\) and H-5\(b\) - H-12_b_) and H-11\(a\) (H-9\(a\) and Mea-18 - H-11_a_) at \(d\) 1.77-1.83. Moreover, the existence of a correlation from H3-19 (_d_ 1.33) to the signal at \(d\) 1.90, showed that this signal can be attributed to H-11\(b\) and thus the signal at \(d\) 0.85 corresponds to H-12\(a\). All these correlations require rings C and D nearer to chair conformations. These conclusions were supported by several NOEDIF experiments (Table 4). Moreover, the nOes of the hydroxyl proton at \(d\) 5.19, coming from H3-18 and H-15\(a\), allowed the assignment of this signal to 8-OH, also showing that the hydroxyl group is thus in the _a_-configuration. In the same way, the nOes of the hydroxyl proton at \(d\) 4.89, coming from H3-19 and H-29b, show that this signal can be attributed to the 1_a_-OH.

The assignment of the stereochemistry of C-30 received further support from acetylation of **1**, which yielded **1a**. The 1H NMR spectrum of **1a** (Table 1) showed the downfield shift of the signal for H-6 (_d_ 5.13), while the signal for H-30 was still visible as a

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c}  & & C \\ H & **1** & **1a** & **2** \\
2 & 1, 8 & 1, 2, 3, 8, 10 \\
5 & 4, 6 & 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 19 \\
6 & & 4, 5, 7, 10, Ac \\
9 & & 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 19 \\
11\(b\) & & 10 \\
12\(b\) & & 18 \\
15_α_ & 16 & 14, 15, 16 & 16 \\
15

## Page 4

doublet at \(d\) 4.42, indicating that it was resistant to acetic anhydride-pyridine-4-dimethylaminopyridine, for steric reasons, on the _b_-side of the molecule. However, the 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 5) indicated the presence of two acetoxyl (d_c 169.4, 169.3 and d_h 2.10, 2.17). HMBC experiments with **1a** (Table 2) clearly showed correlations from H2-15 and H3-18 to the C-14 signal at \(d\) 83.5, from H-9 and H-2 to the C-8 signal at \(d\) 87.6 and from H-2, 2H-29, H-30 and H3-19 to the 13C signal at \(d\) 91.2, thus indicating the second acetoxyl group to be located at C-1. This is consistent with the stereochemistry for C-1, the least hindered tertiary hydroxyl group of the molecule.



## Page 5

were coupled to each other and only one (d 4.28) to a methine proton (d 2.48). These observations could not be explained by the presence of hydroxyl groups at C-3 and C-30, indicating that we were not dealing with a normal 1,3,30-trihydroxy-1,29-cyclomelaicate skeleton, tricyclo-[3.3.110,2,1,1,4]-decane system. A pinacol pinacolone rearrangement of a 2,30-dihydroxy-3-oxo-1,29-cyclomelaicate precursor and subsequent reduction may have occurred, resulting in a tricyclo-[4.2.110,30,1,1,4]-decane as in 2, whose spectroscopic properties accord with the above data. The signals at d 4.28, 3.21 and 2.48 were then assigned to H-2, H-3 and H-30, respectively. The NOESY experiments (Table 3) showed correlations between H-30 and 2H-15 (d 2.86, H-15a, a weak, but definite correlation; 2.63, H-15b). This implies that the bridge-head proton and 2H-15 are close to each other in space and demonstrate that the tricyclo is [4.2.110,30,1,1,4]-decane and not [3.3.110,2,1,1,4]-decane, since in 1 these protons are not close.

The NOESY experiments also showed correlations of H-5 with H-3 and of H-30 with H-2, which require a _trans_-relationship for H-3 and H-2, with H-3 on the _b_-side and H-2 on the _a_-side of the molecule. This is consistent with the coupling constants between H-3 and H-2 (_J_ = 7.2), and between H-2 and H-30 (_J_ = 9.2), in which the rearranged six-ring is nearer to a boat conformation where H-2 and H-30 must be eclipsed. Moreover, the observed correlations of H-21 and H-17 and H3-18, and H-23 with H-22, were very similar to those of 1 and 1a, except that H-23 (d 7.62) is more deshielded than H-21 (d 7.58). In the same way, HMQC experiments showed that C-21 (d 143.2) is more deshielded that C-23 (d 141.2). The structure of the new natural product was thus established as methyl 1a,2b,3a,6,8a,14b-hexahydroxy-[4.2.110,30,1,4]-tricyclomela-7-oate (2). The third compound exhibited similar NMR spectra to 2 (Tables 1 and 5) except for the presence of a tertiary acetyl (d_c 170.4, 22.0 and d_b_t 1.97). Significant upfield shifts for C-29 and C-30 in the 13C NMR spectrum, when compared with 2 and 1a, determined the position of the acetoxyl at C-1. Thus, the structure of the new limonoid was characterized as methyl 1a-acetoxy 2b,3a,6,8a,14b-pentahydroxy-[4.2.110,30,1,1,4]-tricyclomelaic-7-oate (3).

The dichloromethane extract from the stem of _K. sensegalensis_ gave a mixture of sterols and two coumarins, which were identified by comparison with published data as scopoletin and scoparon [8]. The mixture of sterols was acetylated and analysed by GC-mass spectrometry, which established that the sterols were sitosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol.

As reported in previous papers [5, 9] species of _Khaya_ explore limonoid chemistry along only one route, which leads to the mexicanolide group, bicyclo-[3.3.110,2]-nonane system. This appears to be the first record of limonoids with a tricyclo-[3.3.110,2,1,4]-decane system from _Khaya_, while 2 and 3 represent further enlargement of the biosynthetic mexicanolide-pathways.

## EXPERIMENTAL

NMR: on a Bruker ARX 400, on a Bruker ACF 200 and on a Varian Gemini 300, with TMS as int. standard; GC-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument; MS: 70 eV, direct probe insert and elevated temp.

_Plant material. Khaya senegalensis_ was collected in Vicosa, MG, Brazil, and a voucher is deposited in the Herbarium of the Departamento de Engenharia Flores-al, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, MG.

_Isolation of compounds_. Ground stems (600 g) was extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH. The conc. CH2Cl2 extract was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient. Frs 1-3 gave a mixt. of sterols, fr. 5 gave scopaton (17 mg) and fr. 6 gave scopoletin (20 mg). The coumarins were purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, EtOAc-hexane, 3:2). The mixt. of sterols was acetylated with Ac2O-pyridine prior to analysis by low resolution GC-MS, which established that the sterols were sitosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol. The conc. MeOH extract was partitioned into CH2Cl2-, EtOAc- and _n_-BuOH-soluble frs. The conc. CH2Cl2 extract was subjected to CC over silica gel. Elution with a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient afforded a mixt. of limonoids and 3b-O-b-glucopyranosylsitosterol (40 mg). The mixt. of limonoids was repeatedly chromatographed on silica gel (hexane-EtOAc-MeOH gradient; hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 2:18:1) yielding, after final purification by TLC (hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 4:16:1), compounds 1 (70 mg), 2 (17 mg) and 3 (5 mg).

_Methyl_ 1a,6a,8a,14b,30b-_pentahydroxy-3-oxo-[3.3110,2,1,4]-_tricyclomelaic -7-oate_ (1). Amorphous solid, mp 302-305, [_t_] +-220 (DMSO; \(c\) 0.064), IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}^{\text{kkg}}\) cm-1; 3467, 2954, 1724, 1456, 1281, 1239, 1164, 1087, 1036, 875. 1H NMR (200 MHz, Me2CO-

## Page 6

\(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm Film}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3400, 2926, 1723, 1450, 1247, 1033. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{b}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{b}\)): see Table 5; HMBC (400/100 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{b}\)): see Table 2; NOSSY-TPPI (400 MHz, DMSO-\(d_{b}\)): see Table 3. MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 518 \([{\rm M-H_{2}O}]^{+}\) (73); 380 (100); 95 (80).

_Methyl \(1\alpha\)-acety-2b,3a,c,6,8a,14b-pentahydroxy[4.2.1]\({}^{16,30}\).\({}^{1,4}\)H-riicyclomeliac-7-oate_ (3). Amorphous solid. IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm Film}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3417, 2927, 1727, 1584, 1459, 1252, 1035. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)/trace of DMSO-\(d_{b}\)): see Table 5.



## Page 7

AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Technologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support. We also thank the Instituto de Quimica, UNESP, Araraquara, SP, Brazil for NMR spectra (200 and 50.32 MHz) and Instituto de Quimica, UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Brazil, for NOEDIF experiments (300 MHz).

## References

* (1) Adesida, G. A., Adesogan, E. K., Okorie, D. A., Taylor, D. A. H. and Styles, B. T. (1971) _Phytochemistry_**10**, 1845.
* (2) Okorie, D. A. and Taylor, D. A. H. (1970) _J. Chem. Soc. (C)_ 211.
* (3) Taylor, D. A. H. (1983) _Phytochemistry_**22**, 1297.
* (4) Taylor, D. A. H. (1974) _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin I_ 437.
* (5) Silva, M. F. das G. F. da and Gottlieb, O. R. (1987) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**15**, 85.
* (6) Adesogan, E. K., MacLachlan, L. K. and Taylor, D. A. H. (1987) _S. Afr. J. Chem._**40**, 25.
* (7) Banerji, B. and Nigam, S. K. (1984) _Fitoterapia_**15**, 3.
* (8) Chatterjee, A., Banerji, B., Ganguly, S. N. and Sircar, S. M. (1974) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 2012.
* (9) Agostinho, S. M. M., Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Pinheiro, A. L. and Vilela, E. F. (1994) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**22**, 323.



