# 10.1021@np500453x.pdf

## Page 1



# Structures and Bioactivities of Dihydrochalcones from _Metrodorea stipularis_

Marcela C. de Melo Burger, Joao Batista Fernandes, Maria F. das Gracas Fernandes da Silva, Aster Escalante, Jacques Prudhomme, Karine G. Le Roch, Mario A. Izidoro, Paulo C. Vieira

# Abstract

_Metrodorea stipularis_ stem extracts were studied in the search for possible antichagastic, antimalarial, and antitumoral compounds using cruzain from _Tympanosoma cruzi, Plasmodium falciparum_, and cathepsin B and L, as molecular targets, respectively. Dihydrochalcones 1, 2, 3, and 4 showed significant inhibitory activity against all the targets. Compounds 1-4 displayed IC50 values ranging from 7.7 to 21.6 \(\mu\)M against cruzain; dihydrochalcones 2 and 4 inhibited the growth of three different strains of _P. falciparum_ in low micromolar concentrations; and against cathepsin B and L these compounds presented good inhibitory activity with IC50 values ranging from 1.0 to 14.9 \(\mu\)M. The dihydrochalcones showed good selectivity in their inhibitory activities against the cysteine proteases.

## 1 Introduction

The study of the role of the various species of dihydrochalcones is a key step in the development of the biological process of cancer. The study of the role of the various species of dihydrochalcones is a key step in the development of the biological process of cancer. The study of the role of the various species of dihydrochalcones is a key step in the development of the biological process of cancer. The study of the role of the various species of dihydrochalcones is a key step in the development of the biological process of cancer. The study of the role of dihydrochalcones is a key step in the development of

## Page 2

liquid partitioning of the crude ethanol extract from the stems of _M. stipularis_ showed the most promising results, with inhibition of 80% against crazin at a concentration of 100 _m_g/mL. Phytochemical study of this fraction led to the active dihydrochalcones: 1-[3-(3,7-dimethylocta-2,6-dien-1-yl)-2,4,6-trihydroyphenyl]-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)propan-1-one (1),4 1-(5,7-dihydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)propan-1-one (2), 1-(5,7-dihydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-(3-methylbut-2,en-1-yl)phenyl)propan-1-one (3), and 1-(5,7-dihydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(1,1,4a-trimethyl-2,3,4,4a,9a-hexahydro-1H-xanthen-7-yl)propan-1-one (4). This class of compounds was previously isolated from this genus.2

Compounds **2** and **3** were obtained as amorphous powders. The ESTTOFMS data for both showed the molecular ion at _m_/_z_ 410.2066 and 410.2040 (calculated 410.2094) for **2** and **3**, respectively. The mass and 13C NMR data (Table 1) provided the same molecular formula of C23H30O3 for both compounds. The 1H NMR spectra for **2** and **3** showed one singlet at \(d\) 5.92 attributed to H-8', the only proton in ring A revealing the substitution observed for 1. However, for both **2** and **3** the presence of a 2,2-dimethyldihydropyran ring was characterized by signals at \(d\) 1.76 (H-3') and 2.53 (H-4') and the methyl groups at \(d\) 1.33 (H-9' and H-10'). Further analysis revealed the presence of an ABX coupling pattern with signals at \(d\) 6.91 (H-5' and H-7') and 6.56 (H-8') for **2** and signals at \(d\) 6.87 (H-2'), 6.83 (H-6'), and 6.64 (H-5') for **3** assigned to the protons in the B ring. Compound **2** showed the presence of one 2,2-dimethyldihydropyran ring that was characterized by signals at \(d\) 1.73 (H-3') and 2.69 (H-4') and the signals of the methyl groups at \(d\) 1.22 (H-8' and H-9'). Compound **3** displayed one premyl group that was suggested from the characteristic signals of the two methyl groups at \(d\) 1.68 and 1.69 (H-4'' and H-5''), one olefinic hydrogen at \(d\) 5.28 (H-2''), and the methylene signal at \(d\) 3.25 (H-1''). 13C NMR data were obtained from projections of the HSQC and HMBC spectra as in **1** and confirmed the structures of **2** and **3**.

Compound **4** was obtained as an amorphous powder. The ESTTOFMS data showed the molecular ion at _m_/_z_ 478.2714 (calculated _m_/_z_ 478.2720). The mass and 13C NMR data (Table 2) provided its molecular formula as C30H38O3. As mentioned for compounds **2** and **3**, the 1H NMR spectrum showed the same substitution pattern for both A and B rings. The presence of a cyclized geranyl moiety yielding a hydroxanthene-type skeleton was suggested from the characteristic signals of the three methyl groups at \(d\) 1.18, 0.93, and 1.01 and the methylene signals at \(d\) 1.65, 2.16, 1.48, 1.63, 1.58, and 1.90. 13C NMR values were obtained from projections of the HSQC and HMBC data and confirmed the structure of **4**.

The dihydrochalcones **1**-**4** showed inhibition activities against crazin, with IC50 values ranging from 7.7 to 21.6 _m_M (Table 3). Although the dihydrochalcones have not been isolated from all the subfractions from the dichloromethane fraction, their presence was observed by 1H NMR spectra in practically all of the active subfractions. Thus, the observed enzyme inhibition is most likely due to the presence of this class of compounds. This is the first report of crazin inhibitory activity for this class of compounds, as well as related to Chagas disease studies.

Dihydrochalcones showed inhibitory activity and selectivity for cathepsins B and L with IC50 values ranging from 1.0 to 14.9 _m_M (Table 4). The dihydrochalcones **2** and **4** displayed selectivity and inhibition of cathepsin B, while dihydrochalcones **1** and **3** showed inhibition of cathepsin L. This result is interesting and encourages more studies using these compounds, which may be implicated as prototypes for more effective treatments in cancer chemotherapy. Other dihydrochalcones have already been described as inhibitors of other cathepsin s such as cathepsin K.12

The dihydrochalcones were also tested against _Plasmodium falciparum_ growth using the 3D7 (wild type), Dd2, and W2 strains (both chloroquine resistant). Against _P. falciparum_ the dihydrochalcones **2** and **4** showed significant growth inhibition of the parasite, and the EC50 values are collated in Table 4. The inhibitory activity was similar for the three strains, and the assays were run in quadruplicate. The positive control used was bromophycolide A, which presents a consistent EC50 value around 0.5 _m_M for all the strains.13 There is no previous report of activity against _P. falciparum_ growth for this class of compounds.

Four compounds were tested against the cysteine proteases crazin and cathepsins B and L and also against three strains of _Plasmodium falciparum_. The results described in this paper are significant, since this is the first report of dihydrochalcones with antiplasmodial activity and as inhibitors of these enzymes implied in Chagas disease and cancer. The compounds showed good activity against crazin, and it is interesting that compounds **2** and **4** are active against cathepsin B, while compounds **1** and **3** are active against cathepsin L. Given the importance of finding new drug candidates against Chagas disease, malaria, and cancer, the dihydrochalcones represent a new class of compounds to be investigated in this context.

## EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

### General Experimental Procedures.

All commercially available reagents were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co, and the solvents used for extract preparation and chromatographic fractionation were obtained from Vetec. The NMR spectra were recorded in acetone-_4\(6\) and methanol-_4\(p\) using TMS as the internal reference, on a Bruker Avance III 9.4 T spectrometer (1H: 400 MHz; 13C: 100 MHz) equipped with manual change of sample and probe of 5 mm BFO (smart probe AITA). MS data were collected on a Bruker Dalonics micrOTOF-Q. II-ESITOF mass spectrometer. Analytical TLC was performed on precoated aluminum silica 60 F254 (Merck) and used to monitor isolation. Compounds were visualized by exposure under UV254/366 light and by spraying with H5SO/vanillin solution. Chromatographic separations were performed on silica gel 60 (Merck, 230-700 mesh), Sephadex LH-20 (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech AB), and C18 (Luna).

### Plant Materials.

The stems of _Metrodarea stipularis_ were collected in July 2010 at the Agornomic Institute in Campinas, SP1; the authentication was made by Luiz Carlos Bernacci. A voucher specimen (44005) was deposited at the same Institute.



## Page 3



**Extraction and Isolation.** The stems were dried and macerated with EtOH for 3 days. The solvent was removed using reduced pressure at 40 degC, affording 30 g of a species. This extract was subjected to liquid-liquid partitioning to yield hexanes (2 g), CH2Cl2 (4 g), EtOAc (11 g), and hydroalcoholic (13 g) fractions. All were submitted to enzymatic assay against crucain, and the CH2Cl2 fraction showed significant inhibition of the enzyme; thus it was chromatographed over silica gel 60 (_ph_ = 5.0 cm x h = 22.0 cm) eluting with CH2Cl2/EtOAc (10.0, 15.5, 5.5, 0.10) to yield 24 fractions (MSD1-MSD24).

Fraction MSD15 (170 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 eluting with MeOH to give 10 subfractions (MSD15.1-MSD15_10). Subfraction MSD15_7 (10 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (_ph_ = 2.0 cm x \(h\) = 30.0 cm) eluting with MeOH to obtain 1 (2 mg).

Fraction MSD21 (400 mg) was chromatographed over silica gel 60 (_ph_ = 3.0 cm x \(h\) = 23.0 cm) eluting with CH2Cl2/EtOAc (9:1) to give eight subfractions (MSD211_1-MSD21_8). Subfraction MSD21_8 (50 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 eluting with MeOH to give 20 subfractions (MSD211_8-MSD21\(8\)20). Subfraction MSD21_8 12 (20 mg) was chromatographed over silica gel 60 (_ph_ = 2.0 cm x \(h\) = 25.0 cm) eluting with CH2Cl2 to obtain 2 (2 mg) and 3 (8 mg). Subfraction MSD21\(8\)19 (9 mg) was purified by reversed-phase preparative HPLC (C18 Luna, _ph_ = 1.0 cm x \(h\) = 25.0 cm) using MeOH/cAMP/H2O (4:15) as mobile phase and a flow of 3.5 mL/min to afford 4 (2.5 mg).

_1-(5,7-Dhydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)/propan-1-one (2):_ amorphous powder; NMR (400 MHz, acetone-4_d_) see Table 1; ESTOFMS _m_/_z_ 410.2066 (caled for C3H2H2O3 _m_/_z_ 410.2094).

_1-(5,7-Dhydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-(3-methylbutyric acid-2-1-methylphenylpropan-1-one (3):_ amorphous powder; NMR (400 MHz, acetone-4_d_) see Table 1; ESTOFMS _m_/_z_ 410.2040).

_1-(5,7-Dhydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(14-hydroxy-3-(3-methylbutyric acid-2-1-methylphenylpropan-1-one (3):_ amorphous powder; NMR (400 MHz, acetone-4_d_) see Table 1; ESTOFMS _m_/_z_ 410.2040).

_1-(5,7-Dhydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-6-yl)-3-(1,1,4-trimethyl-2,3,44,96-hydroxy-10-Mantham-7-ylpropan-1-one (4):_ amorphous powder; NMR (400 MHz, acetone-4_d_) see Table 2; ESTOFMS _m_/_z_ 478.2714 (caled for C9H2O3 _m_/_z_ 478.2720).

**Enzyme Inhibition Assays.**_Gruzin._ All commercially available chemicals and reagents were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. and Sigma, and kinetic measurements were carried out in a Hitachi F2500 spectrofluorimeter. Inhibitory activity was measured by hydrolysis of the synthetic substrate Z-Phe-Arg-AMC (benzyloxycarbonylphenylanalytarginine-4-methyl-7-coumarylamide). The enzyme activity was tracked for 5 min, with stirring, in phosphate buffer (pH 6.3) with 5 mL of DTT at 37 degC after addition of 2 mL of the substrate. The experiments were carried out in triplicate in quartz cuvettes, and the final volume of the reaction mixture was 1 mL (excitation 380 nm and emission 460 nm). Control assays were performed without inhibitor (negative control) and in the presence of the irreversible inhibitor for cysteine peptidase, E-64 (positive control). IC50 values were determined by rate measurements with five inhibitor concentrations. All kinetic parameters were determined by nonlinear regression employing the program GraFit S.

_Cothepins._ All commercially available chemicals and reagents were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. and Sigma, and kinetic measurements were carried out in a Molecular Devices Spectra

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c}  & compound 2 & compound 3 & \\ position & _δ_0°_a_ & _δ_0°_ & _δ_0°_ & _δ_0°_ & _δ_0°_ & _δ_0°_ \\
1 & 204.7, qC & & 204.0, qC & & \\
2 & 45.5, CH2 & 3.30, t (7.2) & 6°, 1, 3 & 45.5, CH2 & 3.25, t & 1, 2° \\
3′ & 29.7, CH2 & 2.83 & 5′, 7′, 1, 2 & 30.2, CH2 & 2.82, t (8.4) & 1′

## Page 4

MAX M3 fluorimeter. Inhibitory activity was measured using the synthetic fluorometric substrate Z-Phe-Arg-AMC and a concentration of 185 _m_M for catB and 10 _m_M for catL. The enzyme was activated for 5 min with DTT and acetate buffer (pH 5.5) at 37 degC, and the reaction mixture was incubated for 5 min with the sample. The experiments were carried out in triplicate (in 96-well black plates), and the final volume of the reaction mixture was 200 _m_L, kept under stirring (excitation 355 nm and emission 460 nm). Control assays were performed without inhibitor (negative control) and in the presence of the irreversible inhibitor for cysteine peptides, E-64 (positive control). IC50 values were determined by rate measurements with at least seven inhibitor concentrations. All kinetic parameters were determined by nonlinear regression employing the SigmaPlot 12.0.

_Bioasory of Inhibition of Plasmodium falciparum growth._ The strains 3D7, W2, and Dd2 of _P. falciparum_ malaria parasites (BEI Resources, MR4/ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were cultured in human type O+ erythrocytes in complete medium (RPMI 1640 (Celgrg), 0.043 mg/mL gentamicin (Gibco), 0.014 mg/mL hypoxanthine (Acros), 38.5 mm HEPES (Sigma), 0.18% NaHCO3 (Celgrg), 0.20% Glucose (MP Biomedical), 0.003 mM NaOH (Sigma), 0.2% Albumax (Gibco), 5% human serum) as previously described.1 Briefly, cultures were maintained in 25 cm2 flasks (Corning) at a volume of 10 mL and were glassed for 30 s with an environment of 3% CO2, 1% O2, and 96% N2, then incubated at 37 degC.

The antimalarial activity was determined with a SYBR Green based parasite proliferation assay, adapted from Smilkstein15 and Bennett.16 Using this technique, the increase of parasite DNA contained in human red blood cells was measured after 72 h of incubation in the presence of serial dilutions of compounds.17 Relative fluorescence values were measured with a Molecular Devices SpectraMAX Gemini EM fluorimeter (excitation 495 nm and emission 525 nm). Data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel and plotted with SigmaPlot 10 (Systat).

\({}^{a13}\)C NMR values obtained from projections of the HSQC and HMBC data (100 MHz, methanol-

## Page 5

* (11) Vasiljeva, T.; Reinheckel, C.; Peters, D.; Turk, V.; Turk, B. _Curr. Pharm. Des._**2007**, _13_, 387-403.
* (12) Patil, A. D.; Freyer, A. J.; Killarner, L.; Offen, P.; Taylor, P. B.; Votta, B. J.; Johnson, R. K. J. Nat. Prod. **2002**, _65_, 624-627.
* (13) Stout, R. P.; Cervantes, S.; Pradhomme, J.; France, S.; La Clair, J. J.; Le Roch, K.; Kubanek, J. _Chem. Med. Chem._**2011**, \(6\), 1572-1577.
* (14) Le Roch, K. G.; Zhou, Y.; Blair, P. L.; Grainger, M.; Moch, J. K.; Haynes, J. D.; De La Vega, P.; Holder, A. A.; Batalov, S.; Carucci, D. J. _Science_**2003**, _301_, 1503-1508.
* (15) Smilstein, M.; Sirovishiazonen, N.; Kelly, J. X.; Wilairat, P.; Riscoe, M. _Antimicrob. Agents Chemother._**2004**, _48_, 1803-1806.
* (16) Bennett, T. N.; Payrio, M.; Gligorjevic, B.; Seucieu, C.; Kosar, A. D.; Davison, E.; Roepe, P. D. _Antimicrob. Agents Chemother._**2004**, _48_, 1807-1810.
* (17) Prudhomme, J.; McDaniel, E.; Ponts, N.; Bertani, S.; Fenical, W.; Jensen, P.; Le Roch, K. _PLoS One_**2008**, \(3\) (6), e2335.



