# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)00225-9.pdf

## Page 1

_nor_-Lignans from the leaves of _Styrax ferrugineus_ (Styracaceae) with antibacterial and antifungal activity

Patricia Mendonca Pauletti

bolzaniv@iq.unesp.br

Angela Regina Araujo

Maria Claudia Marx Young

Astrea M. Giesbrecht

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 359, 14800-900 Aaraquara, SP, Brazil Departamento de Farmacologia, Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Av. Prof. Lincu Prestes, 1524, 05508-900, Sao Paulo, Brazil Scerco de Fisiologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, CP 4009.01061-970, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Received 28 December 1999; received in revised form 12 April 2000

###### Abstract

Chemical examination of the leaves of _Styrax ferrugineus_ yielded 5-[3\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-(b-d-glucopyranosyloxy)propyl]-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-dimethoxyphenyl) benzofuran, along with the known _nor_-lignans 5-(3\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-methylenedioxyphenyl) benzofuran, 5-(3\({}^{\prime}\)-(b-d-glucopyranosyloxy)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-methylenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran and the lignan, dihydrodehydrodiconiferyl alcohol. All arylpropanoids isolated showed antibacterial and antifungal and antifungal activities. The structures of the isolates were established by spectroscopic analysis. (c) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Keywords: Styrax ferrugineus_; Styracaceae; _nor_-Lignans; Antifungal activity; Antibacterial activity +
Footnote †: journal: Phytochemistry

## 1 Introduction

Styracaceae is a family constituted of small trees and shrubs, mostly native to tropical and subtropical regions (Pio Correa, 1931). The genus _Styrax_ is different from other genera of this family due to the production of resinous material, usually secreted when the barks and trunks are injured by sharp objects (Pio Correa, 1931). This resin, in the past considered a miraculous remedy in several parts of Asia and America, has been used in traditional medicine to treat inflammatory diseases (Costa, 1968). Chemical studies on several Styracaceae plant species have revealed them to be a rich source of arylpropanoids and triterpenoids (Giesbrecht et al., 1985; Takanashi and Takizawa, 1988; Anil, 1980; Segal et al., 1967, 1964; Ulubelen et al., 1978; Kawai and Sugimoto, 1940; Kitagawa et al., 1974; Ulubelen, 1976; Nakano et al., 1967).

From the leaves of _Styrax ferrugineus_ Ness et Mart., an endemic species of the Cerrado region, a new 5-[3\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-(b-d-glucopyranosyloxy)propyl]-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-dimethoxyphenyl)benzofuran (**4**) and the known _nor_-lignans 5-(3\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-methylenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (**1**), 5-(3\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-dimethoxyphenyl)benzofuran (**2**), 5-(3\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-(b-d-glucopyranosyloxy)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-methylenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (**3**) and the lignan dihydrodehydrodiconiferyl alcohol (**5**), together with ursoclinic and oleanolic acids, sitosterol and stigmasterol, have been isolated. Compounds **1-2** showed inhibitory properties against the microorganisms, _Candida albicans, Cladosporium cladesoporiades_ and _Staphylococcus aureus_, whereas compounds **3-5** inhibited only _S. aureus_ and _C. albicans_. The structures of these arylpropanoids were elucidated by various NMR experiments including COSY, DEPT, HMQC, and HMBC (see Section 3 and Tables 1 and 2).

## 2 Results and discussion

The dried and powdered leaves of _Styrax ferrugineus_ were extracted with a mixture of CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)--CH\({}_{3}\)OH (2:1 v/v). Evaporation gave an extract, which showed

## Page 2

antimicrobial activity, detected by inhibition of _C. sphaerospermum, C. albicans_ and _S. aureus_ (Table 3). The bioactive extract was suspended in H2O and then partitioned with _n_-hexane, CHCl3 and EtOHAc (4x300 ml each). Silica gel chromatography of the CHCl3 solubles (2.27 g) followed by purification on preparative HPLC afforded the new compound homoegonol glucoside (**4**) and the known _nor_-lignans (**1**) (Takanashi et al., 1974), (**2**) (Giesbrecht et al., 1985) and (**3**) (Takanashi and Takizawa, 1988), and the lignan (**5**) (Miyase et al., 1989). The compounds were identified by chromatographic and spectral comparison with those of authentic samples. In addition were also isolated ursolic and oleanolic acids (Mahato and Kundu, 1994) as a mixture, sitosterol and stigmasterol (Kojima et al., 1990). The triterpenes and sterols were identified by comparison with authentic samples and spectroscopic data. A literature search revealed the absence of 13C NMR spectral data for 5-(3''-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-methylene-dioxyphenyl)benzofuran (**1**) and 5-(3''-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethoxyphenyl)benzofuran (**2**). Therefore, complete assignment of the 13C NMR spectra for these compounds was undertaken and achieved with the aid of DQF-COSY, DEPT, HMQC and HMBC experiments. The 13C NMR spectral data for **1** and **2** are given in Table 2 and some important HMBC correlations are presented in Fig. 1.

Compound **2** was obtained earlier from the seeds of _S. officinalis_ (Segal et al., 1967) after acid hydrolysis and subsequent purification of a glucosidic fraction from bark trunk wood of _S. camporum_ (Giesbrecht et al., 1985). In this paper we describe the structural elucidation of compound (**4**) as well as the antimicrobial activities of all lignoids isolated.

Compound **4** was obtained as a white amorphous powder. The molecular formula C26H32O10 was deduced from ES-MS _m_/_z_ [M + Na]+ 527, 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopic data. Its IR spectrum recorded hydroxyl (3550-3200 cm 1), unsaturated (1650 cm 1) and aromatic (1550, 870 cm 1) absorptions, and its UV absorbance

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline Carbon & **1a** & **2b** & **4c** \\ \hline
2 & 156.06 \(s\) & 156.35 \(s\) & 156.12 \(s\) \\
3 & 100.32 \(d\) & 100.27 \(d\) & 101.12 \(d\) \\
4 & 112.28 \(d\) & 112.28 \(d\) & 112.12 \(d\) \\
5 & 137.50 \(s\) & 137.49 \(s\) & 137.85 \(s\) \\
6 & 1

## Page 3

(MeOH) was at 312.0 and 216.5 nm. The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectroscopic signals (Tables 1 and 2) were assigned by interpretation of the COSY, DEPT 135, HMQC and HMBC spectra. Comparison of the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra of **4** with those described for **2** indicated that **4** is a glucoside derivative of compound **2**. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **4** displayed four doublets at \(\delta\) 6.77 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.9 Hz), 7.11 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.9 Hz), 7.05 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) and 7.41 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.9 Hz), and a double doublet at \(\delta\) 7.44 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 1.9; 8.0 Hz) attributable to aromatic protons. In addition were observed a singlet at \(\delta\) 7.17 (1H, _s_) corresponding to H-3, three singlets due to methoxyl groups at \(\delta\) 3.99, 3.88 and 3.83 (3H each, _s_), two triplets due to methylene protons at \(\delta\) 2.75 (2H, \(t\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz) and 3.66 (2H, \(t\), \(J\) = 7.8 Hz) and a double triplet due to a methylene group at \(\delta\) 1.86 (2H, _dt_, \(J\) = 7.8 Hz). This \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectroscopic pattern accommodated the same characteristics as that of compound **2**. Further analysis of the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectroscopic data showed a two-proton spin-system consisting of a doublet at \(\delta\) 4.11 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) and several signals at \(\delta\) 4.33-3.45 m, indicative of a glucosyl moiety in compound **4**. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **4** (Table 2) suggested the presence of a _nor_-ligman with similar skeleton to **2**. The main difference observed in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **4** was due to the presence of the signals at \(\delta\) 103.01 (CH), 76.82 (CH), 76.86 (CH), 73.54 (CH), 70.10 (CH) and 61.08 (CH\({}_{2}\)) which confirmed a glucosyl moiety. The \({}^{1}\)H--\({}^{1}\)H COSY relationship permitted assignment of aromatic proton chemical shifts and also supported the substitution pattern. \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{13}\)C-one bond (HMQC) data were used to assign carbon resonances (Table 2) to their attached protons. \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{13}\)C-three-bond (HMBC) correlations from the H-\({}^{1\prime\prime}\) protons resonances at \(\delta\) 2.69 to the aromatic carbons resonance at \(\delta\) 107.64 and 112.12 identified the later as C-4. The \({}^{3}\)_J_ HMBC couplings of the C-2, C-3\({}^{\prime}\) and C-4\({}^{\prime}\) quaternary carbons with H-2\({}^{\prime}\) and H-6\({}^{\prime}\) proton signals further supported the 1,3,4-tri-substituted pattern for the aromatic moiety linked to the benzofuran moiety of compound **4**. Other significant correlations for confirmation of **4** are depicted in Fig. 1.

The extract and compounds isolated from _S. ferrugineus_ were evaluated for antifungal and antibacterial activities. The crude extract showed antifungal and antibacterial activities against _C. sphaerospermum, C. albicans_ and _S. aureus_, respectively. Compounds **1-2** exhibited antifungal and antibacterial activities against _C. sphaerospermum, C. albicans_ and _S. aureus_, whereas compounds **3-5** inhibited only _S. aureus_ and _C. albicans_. The MIC values for these strains, together with those typically used for comparison, are shown in Table 3. The activity against the pathogenic fungus _C. sphaerospermum_ could be predictive for the activity against _C. albicans_. In conclusion, the activities of compounds **1-5** may (partly) explain known properties of this plant species, which is popularly used to treat wound infections in several Brazilian regions.

## 3 Experimental

### Instrumentation and chromatography materials

Optical activities were measured on a Polamat A (Carl Zeiss) polarimeter, whereas IR spectra were recorded on Perkin-Elmer 1710 spectrometer. NMR spectra were recorded in CDCl3 or DMSO-\(d_{6}\) on a Bruker AC 200 at 200 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H and 50 MHz for \({}^{13}\)C or Varian Unity 400 NMR instrument at 400 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H and 100 MHz for \({}^{13}\)C, using TMS as internal standard. The DEPT experiments were performed using polarization transfer pulses of 90\({}^{\circ}\) and 135\({}^{\circ}\), respectively. The ES-MS spectra were obtained at 70 eV on a VG Platform II and EIMS spectra on a VG 70 E-HF instrument. For column chromatography, silica gel 60, 70-230 and 230-400 mesh, were used as needed. TLC analysis was carried out on precoated silica gel 60 F\({}_{254}\) plates, with spots visualized by anisaldehyde 2% in H\({}_{2}\)SO\({}_{4}\) after heating.

### Plant material

_Styrax ferrugineus_ Ness et Mart. Leaves were collected at Campininha Farm, Mogi-Guacu, SP, Brazil, by

Figure 1: HMBC correlations observed for **4**.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c} \hline Compounds & _S. aureus_a  & _C. albicans_a  & _C. sphaerospermum_b  \\ \hline Crude extract & 200 & 800 & 750 \\
**1** & 10 & 10 & 5 \\
**2** & 10 & 12 & 10 \\
**3** & 15 & 15 & NA\({}^{\circ}\) \\
**4** & 20 & 20 & NA \\
**5** & 20 & 15 & NA \\ Chloramphenicol & 5 & 5 & – \\ Nystatin & – & – & 1 \\ Mycostatin & 5 & 5 & – \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Antimicrobial activity of _nor_-lignods **1–4** and lignan **5**

## Page 4

M.C.M. Young in November 1995. A voucher specimen has been deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### Bioassay

The crude extract and purified lignoids were assayed for antimicrobial activity against the bacterium _S. aureus_ ATCC 12228, the fungus _C. sphaerospermum_ (Penzig) SPC 491 and the yeast _C. albicans_ ICB 12. Stock solutions of crude extracts were dissolved at a concentration of 2 mg/ml in the solvent of extraction. Pure compounds were freshly prepared at 1 mg/ml in an appropriate solvent and were diluted to 100, 50, 30, 10, 5, 1.0 mg/ml. 10 ml of these solutions were applied on pre-coated TLC plates by means of graduated capillaries. Antibiotic samples mycostatin and chloramphenicol, 30 mg/ml) and the solvent used were also tested as positive and negative controls, respectively. For the antifungal bioautography assay, TLC plates were developed in an appropriate solvent system and thoroughly dried for complete removal of solvents (Homans and Fuchs, 1970). The chromatograms were sprayed with the spore suspension of _C. sphaerospermum_ in a nutritive medium and incubated for 72 h in darkness in a moistened chamber at 27degC. Clear inhibition zones appeared against a dark background. Agar dilution assays with _C. albicans_ and _S. aureus_ were carried out Sabouraud agar medium (Rahalison et al., 1991). The media were plated in Petri dishes and cell suspensions of _C. albicans_ and _S. aureus_ in distilled water were spread over agar. Incubation was at 30degC for 24 h.

### Extraction

Dried and pulverized leaves (3.5 kg) of _Styrax ferrugneus_ Ness et Mart. were exhaustively extracted with a mixture of CH2Cl2-CH3OH (2:1, v/v) at room temperature. After removal of the solvent in vacuo, a crude extract (23 g) was obtained. The concentrate was then diluted with CH3OH-H2O (8:2) and successively extracted with hexane, CHCl3 and EtOHAc. After removal of the solvent, each extract yielded 2.01, 2.27 and 1.57 g, respectively. The CHCl3 extract (2.27 g) was fractionated by column chromatography on a silica gel flash (77.9 g, 230-400 mesh, Merck) using a CH2Cl2-CH3OH gradient to yield 93 fractions. Fr. 26 (29 mg) yielded pure 5-(3''-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran **(1)**, and Fr. 34 (137 mg) yielded 5-(3''-hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethoxyphenyl)benzofuran **(2)**. Fr. 40-41 (39.4 mg) was fractionated by micron silica gel flash CC (Merck) using CH2Cl2-CH3OH (95:5) as eluent to afford 11 Frs. Frs. 5-9 gave a mixture of unsolic and oleanolic acids (21 mg). Frs. 52-55 (50 mg) were submitted to medium pressure silica flash CC (11.6 g, 230-400 mesh, Merck) using Hex-EtoAc-CH3OH (6:2:2) as eluent to afford 20 Frs. Frs 6-12 furnished dihydrohedjcolorifyl alcohol **(5)** (14 mg). Fr. 65 (43.6 mg) after silica gel 60 G (15.0 g, Merck) CC, using a CH2Cl2-CH3OH gradient yielded 22 Frs. Fr. 20 (13.8 mg) gave a mixture of **3** + **4**, which was further purified by reversed-phase HPLC (RP-18 column) using a mixture of CH3OH-H2O (4:6) as eluent to afford compounds **3** (4.0 mg) and **4** (5.8 mg).

#### 3.4.1 5-(3''-Hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-methyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White amorphous powder; IR _v_max (KBr) 3432, 2926, 1606, 1476, 1232, 1148, 1037, 931 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 349, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 365. Identical to literature; (Takanashi et al., 1974). For 13C NMR (CDCl3) spectral analysis, see Table 2.

#### 3.4.2 5-(3''-Hydroxypropyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-oxyphenyl)benzofuran (2)

White powder; IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2929, 1603, 1513, 1478, 1346, 1222, 1142 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 365, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 381; Identical to literature; (Giesbrecht et al., 1985) for 13C NMR (CDCl3) spectral analysis see Table 2.

3.4.3 5-(3''-(b-d-Glucopyranosyloxy)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethylenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (3)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3580, 2940, 1600, 1480, 920 cm 1, ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 511; ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 527; Identical to literature (Takanashi and Takizawa, 1988).

#### 3.4.4 5-(3''-(b-d-Glucopyranosyloxy)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethylbenzyl)benzofuran (4)

White powder, [a2]25 (22.23deg (c 0.8, CH3OH); IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 543; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.4 5-(3''-(b-d-Glucopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethylbenzyl)benzofuran (4)

White powder, [a2]25 (22.23deg (c 0.8, CH3OH); IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 543; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.1 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 542; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.4 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (3)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 542; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.1 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 543; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.2 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 542; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.2 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 543; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.3 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2929, 1609, 1480, 920 cm 1, ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 542; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

.4.4 5-(3''-(b-d-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 910 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 527, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 543; for 1H NMR and 13C NMR (DMSO-d6) spectral analysis, see Tables 1 and 2.

#### 3.4.4 5-(3''-(b-d-Glcopyranoside)propyl)-7-methoxy-2-(3',4'-dimethyl-lenedioxyphenyl)benzofuran (1)

White powder, IR _v_max (KBr) 3484, 2928, 1609, 1477, 1480, 1478, 1346, 1222, 1142 cm 1; ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 365, ES-MS [M + Na]+ _m_/_z_ 365, ES-MS [M + K]+ _m_/_z_ 511;

## Page 5



#### 3.4.5 Dihydrodehydrodiconiferyl alcohol (5)

Colorless oil; [a\({}_{\rm 1S}^{\rm 5}\) 15.0\({}^{\circ}\), (_c_ 0.78, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); lit (Miyase et al., 1989) [a\({}_{\rm 1S}^{\rm 2S}\) 17.7\({}^{\circ}\), (_c_ 0.48, acetone). \({}^{13}\)C NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)) 87.9 (C-2), 53.8 (C-3), 116.0 (C-4), 127,8 (C-5), 112.5 (C-6), 135.4 (C-7), 144.2 (C-8), 133.1(C-9), 135.4 (C

