# 10.1021@np800612x.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

imine feature of galegine (**5**). However, the occurrence of the new guanidine-type alkaloid **1** can be explained by taking into account the imine tautomerism (Figure 1).

Nitensidine E (**2**) was isolated as a colorless oil. The molecular formula was determined to be C1H1H3N by HRESIMS (_m/z_ 194.2900 [M + H]+, calcd for C1H20N3, 194.2888), suggesting four degrees of unsaturation, with one additional unsaturation when compared with nitensidine D. The 1H and 13C NMR spectra of compound **2** (Table 1) indicated structural characteristics somewhat different from those of **1** and the other guanidines isolated previously from _P. nitens_.4 Considering that **2** possesses four unsaturations and showed positive Dragonoff's and Sakaguchi's tests, an alkaloid structure was deduced for this compound. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) exhibited the presence of a set of typical resonances at \(d\) 5.52 (d, \(J\) = 15.0 Hz), 5.81 (d, \(J\) = 10.5 Hz), and 6.20 (dd, \(J\) = 15.0, 10.5 Hz), characteristic of a sp2-conjugated system, which could be attributed to an _E_-diene unit based on the coupling constants shown for these hydrogens. The 13C NMR data (Table 1) showed resonances for three methine sp2 carbons at \(d\) 135.4, 125.2, and 123.9 and for one quaternary sp2 carbon at \(d\) 135.0. Additionally, both the 1H and 13C NMR spectra showed the presence of two vinyl methyl groups (_b_ 1.69 (18.0), 1.73 (25.5)] and a tertiary methyl group at \(d\) 1.26 (27.6). These data revealed the presence of a C10 alkyl chain, which could be attributed to a monoterpene-type unit. The structural evidence from the spectroscopic data obtained allowed us to elucidate compound **2** with a guanidine alkaloid structure. Additionally, the mutually coupled methylenes [_d_ 1.61 (1H, m), 1.79 (1H, ddd, \(J\) = 13.5, 4.0, 3.5 Hz), and 2.92 (1H, ddd, \(J\) = 12.0, 14.0, 4 Hz), and \(d\) 3.15 (1H, ddd, \(J\) = 12.0, 4.0, 3.5 Hz)] would be compatible with a cyclic guanidine structure for **2**. Indeed, this proposal was confirmed from the gHMBC spectrum. The location of the methyl group C-10 was assigned at C-3 due to the observed gHMBC correlations between the methyl protons at H-10 and C-2, C-3, and C-4. Further, gHMBC cross-peaks between H-4 and C-2, C-10, C-6; H-1 and C-2, C-3; H-2 and C-10, C-4; and H-6 and C-8, C-9 completed the assignment of a cyclic guanidine-type alkaloid and its substituents. Also, a C10 alkyl chain composed of an _E_-diene unit was confirmed through NOESY correlations observed for H-4 and H-6. The conformation adopted by this molecule was evaluated in a preliminary manner employing semiempirical calculations (Hamiltonian as AM1 and PM3 and ab initio HF/6-31G**), and a plausible conformation obtained for compound **2** with the methyl group at C-3 in the _b_-position is shown in Figure S1, Supporting Information. In Figure S2 (Supporting Information) we show a biogenetic proposal for the formation of the new guanidine derivatives **1** and **2**.

In addition to **1** and **2**, three known compounds were isolated and identified as pterogyrine10 (**3**), pterogyridine4 (**4**), and gaseleine11 (**5**). Compound **5** was first isolated from _Verbesina enclooides_ (Asteraceae) and later identified as a toxic and antidiabetic component from _Galega officials_ (Goat's Rue).12 Galegine was a template for the design of metformin and other biquanide-type hypoglycemic drugs.13 The identification of compounds **3-5** was based on 1H and 13C NMR and MS data analysis and by comparison with authentic material available in our laboratory.4,10,11

Although a broad spectrum of biological activities has been described for guanidine alkaloids belonging to marine sources, few studies were reported from higher plants and of the potential anticancer activity of this class of natural products.14-16 All isolates were evaluated for their cytotoxic activity, using a MTT assay, evidencing a key role of the prenyi substitution pattern in the level of activity. The cytotoxic activity of compounds **1-5** was evaluated _in vitro_ against HL-60 (human myeloblastic leukemia), HCT-8 (human colon carcinoma), MDA-MB-435 (human melanoma), and SF-295 (human glioblastoma). Mean concentration inhibitory (IC50) values were determined using the National Cancer Institute (NCI) protocol, with slight modifications, and the results are shown in Table 2. In human cells, nitensidine E (**2**) was the most active compound, showing activity for the different cell lines (Table 2). Therefore, guanidine alkaloids **2** may be useful as a prototype compound for the development of new antineoplastic drugs. Further work to evaluate the mechanism of action of the guanidine alkaloids characterized in this study is currently in progress.

The structural features of nitensidines D (**1**) and E (**2**) appear less common than the guanidine alkaloids already reported from other higher plants. It is noteworthy that the majority of these alkaloids contain isoperly groups. Only one alkaloid having a similar geranyl side chain has been previously isolated from _Fontainea pancheri_ (Euphorbiaceae).17 In some cases, the isopentenyl groups have undergone cyclization to produce hexahydroimidazolo-pyrimidines, typical of _Alchomea_ species (Euphorbiaceae).18,19 The structure of nitensidine E (**2**) constitutes the first report of the

Figure 1: Ininic tautomeric forms of guanidine-type alkaloids **1** and **1a**.



## Page 3

natural occurrence of a cyclic monoterpene derivative on a guanidine moiety.

To date, the isolation and characterization of preynlated guanidine alkaloids has been reported only within a limited number of plant genera.[20, 21, 22] Furthermore, terpenoid-like alkaloids may have some taxonomic significance for Fabaceae and Euphorbiaceae, since their occurrence is most common among these taxa.

### Experimental Section

**General Experimental Procedures.** 1D (\({}^{\rm{i}}\)H, \({}^{\rm{i}}\)C, DEPT 90\(\times\) and DEPT 135\(\times\)) and 2D (\({}^{\rm{i}}\)H\(-\)H gCOSY, gHMQC, and gHMBC) NMR experiments were recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer (11.7 T) at 500 MHz (H) and 125 MHz (\({}^{\rm{i}}\)C), using DMSO-\(d_{\theta}\) as an internal standard. Positive-ion high-resolution mass spectra were recorded on an HRMS ultroTOTO-gSL-TCOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics). IR spectra were measured on a Perkin-Elmer 1600 FT-IR spectrometer using KBr disks. Optical rotations were measured on a Polarant A Carl Zeiss jena polarimeter. Analytical HPLC was performed on a Varian Pro Star 230 using a Phenomenex C18 column (250 mm x 4.6 mm). Column chromatography was performed over reversed-phase silica gel 230-400 mesh (Merck). TLC was performed using Merck silica gel 60 (\(>\) 230 mesh) and precoated silica gel 60 PF254 plates. Spots on TLC plates were visualized under UV light and by spraying with anisaldehyde-H2SO4 reagent followed by heating at 120 Tc, as well as by using Dragendorff's and Sakaguchi's reagents. Preparative HPLC was performed on a Varian Prep-Star 400 system using a Phenomenex C-18 (250 mm x 21.2 mm) preparative column. Sephadex LH-20 was purchased from Pharmacia Biotech, Sweden.

**Plant Material.**_Prerogen nitenes_ leaves were collected at the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo State, Brazil, in May 2003. A voucher specimen (SP204319) has been deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Institute (Sko Paulo State, Brazil).

**Extraction and Isolation.** The shade-dried leaves (2.8 kg) of _P. nitenes_ were ground and defatted with hexane (2.0 L x 5, at room temperature, for five weeks) and exhaustively extracted by macroactin with ethanol (4.0 L x 5) at room temperature. The ethanol extract was concentrated under reduced pressure (\(<\)40 IC) to yield 12.7 g of a syrup. The concentrate was then diluted with CHOH-H2O (4.1) (3.5 L) and partitioned successively with EOAc (5.0 L x 3) and _n_-butanol (5.0 L x 3). After removal of the solvent 3.7 and 5.9 g of extract were afforded, respectively. The _n_-butanol residue was subjected to gel permeation chromatography on a column of Sephadex LH-20 (2.5 g) in methanol to afford nine fractions, which were combined on the basis of their TLC visualized with Sakaguchi's[24] and Dragendorff's reagents, to yield an alkaloidal fraction (587 mg). Separation of this fraction on reversed-phase silica gel column chromatography (RP-18) by elution with increasing amounts of McN in H2O afforded eight fractions (ALK-1\(-\)ALK-8) and guanidine **5** (18 mg). Fraction ALK-3 (121 mg) was subjected to repeated column chromatography on silica gel (230-400 mesh), eluted with CHCl3-MeOH mixtures (ranging from 0 to 35% MeOH), to furnish the isoperylated alkaloids **3** (27 mg) and **4** (12 mg). Fraction ALK-7 (62 mg) was further purified by RP-HPLC [MeCN-H2O-AcOH (16:84:0.01), UV detection at 235 nm; flow rate 13 mL/min], affording the new separated alkaloids **1** (22 mg) and **2** (11 mg).

**Nitensidine **D (1)**: colorless oil; IR (KBr) _r_max 1652, 1618, 1012, 845 cm-1; H and 3C NMR data, see Table 1; HRESIMs _m/z_ 196.3052 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (caled for C1H2N19, 196.3063).

**Nitensidine E (2)**: colorless oil; [a]\({}^{\rm{i}}\)25\({}_{\rm{i}}\) +140.0 (_c_ 0.01, MeOH); IR (KBr) _r_max 1649, 1618, 1093, 839 cm-1; 1H and 1C NMR data, see Table 1; HRESIMs _m/z_ 194.2900 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (caled for C1H2N19, 194.2888).

**Cytotoxicity Assay.** The cytotoxicity of the guanidine alkaloids **1\(-\)5** was tested against four tumor cell lines: HL-60 (human leukemia), HCT-8 (human colon carcinoma), MDA/MB-435 (human melanoma), and SF-295 (human glioblastoma) (National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD). Cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium, supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 mg/mL streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin at 37 IC with 5% CO2. For experiments, cells were seeded in 96-well plates (10\({}^{\rm{i}}\) cells/well for adherent cells or 0.3 x 10\({}^{\rm{6}}\) cells/well for suspended cells in 100 _m_L of medium). After 24 h, the compounds (0.39\(-\)25 mg/mL) dissolved in DMSO (5%) were added to each well and incubated for three days. Control groups received the same amount of DMSO. Doxorubicin (0.01\(-\)0.58 _m_g/mL) was used as positive control. Growth of tumor cells was quantified by the ability of living cells to reduce the yellow dye 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2,4-diazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) to a blue formazan product. At the end of 72 h incubation, the medium in each well was replaced by fresh medium (200 _m_L) containing 0.5 mg/mL MTT. Three hours later, the formazan product of MTT reduction was dissolved in DMSO, and absorbance was measured using a multiplate reader (Spectra Count, Packard, Ontario, Canada). Drug effect was quantified as the percentage of control absorbance of reduced dye at 590 nm. The IC\({}_{\rm{i}}\)0 values were obtained by nonlinear regression using the GRAPHAPD program (Institutive Software for Science, San Diego).[25]

**Acknowledgment.** This work was funded by grants of the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) as part of Biota-FAPESP, The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br), grant no. 03/02176-7, awarded to V.S.B. L.O.R. acknowledges FAPESP and Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) for research and Ph.D. scholarships.

**Supporting Information Available:** Figures showing the possible conformation of **2**, other semiempirical conformation analysis, and biogenetic pathway for guanidine alkaloids. This information is available free of charge via the Internet at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org).

## References

* [1] Lorenzli, H. _Arrores Brasileiras: Manual de Identificacao e Cultivo de Plantas Arbei d'Educiras do Brasil_; Plantarum: Nova Odessa, 1998; p 151.
* [2] Bukart, A. _Las Leguminossa Argentinas_; Aeme Agency: Buenos Aires, 1952; p 156.
* [3] Crivos, M.; Martinez, M. R.; Pochetting, M. L.; Remporini, C.; Sy, A.; Teves, L. _J. Erinobiol. Ethmomed._**2007**, \(2\), 1-8.
* [4] Bolzani, V. S.; Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Kingston, D. G. I. _J. Nat. Prod._**1995**, \(8\), 1683-1688.
* [5] Regasini, L. O.; Vellosa, J. C. R.; Silva, D. H. S.; Furlan, M.; Oliveira, O. M.; Khalil, N. M.; Brunetti, L.; Young, M. C. M.; Barreiro, E. J.; Bolzani, V. S. _Phyrochemistry_**2008**, \(6\), 1793-1744.
* [6] Regasini, L. O.; Fernandes, D. C.; Castro-Gambo, I.; Silva, D. H. S.; Furlan, M.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J.; Bolzani, V. S.; Cardoso-Lopes, E. W.; Young, M. C. M.; Torres, B. L.; Vellosa, J. C. R.; Oliveira, O. M. M. _Quim. Nova_**2008**, _31_, 802-806.
* [7] Fernandes, D. C.; Regasini, L. O.; Vellosa, J. C. R.; Paulett, P. M.; Castro-Gambo, I. Bolzani, V. S.; Oliveira, O. M. M.; Silva, D. H. S. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**2008**, _56_, 723-726.
* [8] Teles, L. H.; Silva, G. H.; Castro-Gambo, I.; Bolzani, V. D.; Pereira, J. O.; Costa-Neto, C. M.; Haddad, R.; Eberlin, M. N.; Young, M. C. M.; Araujo, A. R. _Pytrochemistry_**2005**, _66_, 2363-2367.
* [9] Teles, L. H.; Hemerly, J. P.; Paulett, P. M.; Pandolfi, J. R. C.; Araujo, A. R.; Valentijn, S. R.; Young, M. C. M.; Bolzani, V. S.; Silva, D. H. S. _Nat. Prod. Res._**2005**, _19_, 319-323.
* [10] Corral, R. A.; Orazi, O. O.; Petruccelli, M. F. _Experientia_**1969**, _25_, 1020-1025.
* [11] Eichholzer, J. V.; Lewis, I. A. S.; Macleod, J. K.; Oelrichs, P. B.; Vallely, P. J. _Phyrochemistry_**1982**, _21_, 97-99.
* [12] Reuter, G. _Arch. Pharm._**1963**, 296, 516-522.
* [13] Bailey, C. J.; Day, C. _Pract. Diab. Int._**2004**, _21_, 115-117.
* [14] Berlrich, R. G. _Nat. Prod. Rep._**1996**, _13_, 337-409.
* [15] Berlrichc, R. G. _Nat. Prod. Rep._**1999**, _16_, 339-395.
* [16] Berlrichc, R. G. _Nat. Prod. Rep._**2002**, _19_, 617-649.
* [17] Dontsi, D.; Martin, M. T.; Liatudon, M.; Sevent, T.; Pais, M. _J. Nat. Prod._**1998**, \(6\), 93-954.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c} \hline  & & & & cell line & \\ \cline{2-5}  & HL-60 & HCT-8 & MDA-MB-435 & SF-295 \\ compound & (leukemia) & (colon) & (melanoma) & (glioblastoma) \\ \hline
**2** & 3.6 & \(>\)5 & \(>\)5 & 4.9 \\ doxorubicin & 0.02 & 0.04 & 0.47 & 0.25 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Cytotoxic Activity of Compounds **1\(-\)5** Isolated from _Pterogne nitenes_ against Human Tumor Cell Lines\({}^{a,b}\)

## Page 4

* Hart et al. (1969) Hart, N. K.; Johns, S. R.; Lamberton, J. A. _J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun._**1969**, _28_, 1484.
* Khuong-Huu et al. (1972) Khuong-Huu, F.; Le Forestier, J. P.; Goutarel, R. _Tetrahedron_**1972**, \(8\), 5207-5220.
* Fabricant et al. (2003) Fabricant, D. S.; Nikolic, D.; Lankin, D. C.; Chen, S.-N.; Jaki, B. U.; Krunic, A.; Breenem, R. B.; Fong, H. H. S.; Farnsworth, N. R.; Pauli, G. F. _J. Nat. Prod._**2003**, _68_, 1266-1270.
* Botta et al. (2003) Botta, B.; Camringani, M.; Volpe, A. R.; Botta, M.; Corelli, F.; Delle Monache, G. _Curr. Med. Chem._**2003**, _10_, 1845-1862.
* Witherup et al. (1995) Witherup, K. M.; Ramsom, R. W.; Graham, A. C.; Bernard, A. M.; Salvatore, M. J.; Lumma, W. C.; Anderson, P. S.; Potzenberger, S. M.; Varga, S. L. _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**1995**, _117_, 6682-6685.
* Kobayashi et al. (2001) Kobayashi, J.; Suzuki, H.; Shimbo, K.; Takeya, K.; Morita, H. _J. Org. Chem._**2001**, _66_, 6626-6633.
* Weber (1930) Weber, C. J. _J. Biol. Chem._**1930**, _86_, 217-222.
* Mosmann (1983) Mosmann, T. _J. Immunol. Methods_**1983**, _16_, 55-63.



