# 10.1055@s-0028-1088323.pdf

## Page 1



# Trypanocidal Activity of Limonoids and Triterpenes from _Cedrela fissilis_

Ana Cristina Leite, Alessandra Regina Pepe Ambrozin, Joao Batista Fernandes, Paulo Cezar Vieira, Maria Fattima

# Abstract



## Page 2



### Plant material

Fruits, branches, stems, roots and leaves from _Cedrela fissilis_ Vell were collected in Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil, on 01/06/01 and identified by Dr. Maria Ines Salgueiro Lima from the Department of Botany, UFSCar, SP where a voucher specimen (6701) was deposited at that department.

### Extraction and isolation

The powdered air-dried parts of _C. fissilis_ were extracted three times (72 h) by maceration with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH at room temperature. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure by rotary evaporation.

The hexane extract from the roots of _C. fissilis_ (RH, 3.5 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh, 6x18 cm) using 1.5 L of the solvents hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOHac, and MeOH. The dichromethene fraction (RHD, 384.1 mg) was chromatographed on silica gel (70-230 mesh, 4x45 cm), eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (8:15:0.5) to give 9 fractions. Fraction 2 (RHD-2, 290.5 mg) was fractionated twice on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 3x40 cm), using hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (8:15:0.5) to yield compound **19** (28.0 mg). Several column chromatographs on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 4x40 cm), eluent hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone, 6:3:1) and Sephaker LH-20 (3x50 cm, eluent MeOH) of the acetate ethyl fraction (RHA, 704.8 mg) allowed the isolation of the triterpene **18** (11.5 mg).

The dichromethene extract from roots (RD, 10.9 g) was fractionated through column chromatography on silica gel (70-230 mesh, 4x45 cm), eluting with hexane to MeOH, to afford nine fractions. Limonoid **1** (12.1 mg) was obtained from fraction 5 (RD-5, 143.0 mg) through three successive chromatography columns on silica gel (70-230 and 230-400 mesh, 3x40 cm) and gradient elution (hexane to MeOH and hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone, 6:3:1). Fraction 6 (RD-6, 192.0 mg) was fractionated twice on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 3x50 cm) using hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (6:3:1) to yield compounds **3** (1.3 mg) and **10** (1.1 mg). The dichromethene extract from leaves (LD, 20.9 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh, 6x18 cm) using 2 L of the solvents hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc, and MeOH. The dichromethene fraction (LD-D, 6.0 g) was chromatographed on silica gel (230-400 mesh) and florisil (1:1, 4.5x50 cm) using a gradient elution (hexane to MeOH) to afford 12 fractions. From fraction 4 (LD-D, 4.12 g), after two column chromatographs on silica (70-230 mesh, 4x45 cm, eluent hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 6:3:5:0.5) and HPLC on silica Hyper-sil 5 mm column (1*29 cm), with hexane-2-propanol (8:5.15) isocratic elution and UV detection at 240 nm, limonoid **2** (5.1 mg) was isolated. Fraction 7 (LD-D', 800.3 mg) was chromatographed twice on silica gel (70-230 mesh, 3x45 cm) using hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (6:3.5:0.5) to yield compound **5** (3.5 mg). The chromatographic separation of fraction 9 (LD-D-9, 1.0 g) by column chromatography (silica gel 70-230 mesh, 3x35 cm, eluent hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone, 7:2:1) and normal HPLC (Hypersil 5 mm column, 1x29 cm, hexane-2-propanol 9:1, UV detection at 220 nm) afforded limonoids **4** (9.3 mg) and **6** (4.5 mg). The methanol extract from stems (SM, 40.0 g) was submitted to liquid-liquid partition chromatography with hexane-MeOH2O, CH2Cl2-MeOH-H2O, EOAc-MeOH-H2O, and _n_-butanol-MeOH-H2O. The hexane and dichromethene fractions (SM-HD, 11.8 g) were chromatographed on Sephaker LH-20 (4x50 cm) using CH2Cl2-MeOH (1:1) as eluent to give 10 fractions. Several chromatographic procedures on silica (230-400 mesh, 4x40 cm) and cromatotron of fraction 2 (SM-2, 2.3 g), using both isocratic (hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 6:3.5:0.5) and gradient elution (CH2Cl2-until MeOH), allowed the isolation of **7** (35.6 mg), **8** (40.2 mg), and **14** (32.7 mg). Fraction 4 (SM-4, 3.5 g) was submitted to two column chromatographies on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 4x45 cm, eluent CH2Cl2-MeOH, 9:5:0.5) and cromatotron, with a hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (6:3:1). elution, to afford 11 (33.5 mg) and **12** (23.1 mg). Compounds **9** (10.1 mg) and **13** (13.2 mg) were obtained from fraction 7 (SM-7, 2.1 g) through column chromatography on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 4x40 cm, eluent CH2Cl2-MeOH, 9:5:0.5) and cromatotron (eluent hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 6:3:1).

The dichromethene extract from fruits (FD, 5.0 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 6x18 cm) using 1.5 L of CH2Cl2, EtOHac, and MeOH. The ethyl acetate fraction (FDA, 3.0 g) was submitted to column chromatography on silica gel (70-230 mesh, 4x45 cm) using a gradient elution (hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone, 6:3:1) to yield 7 fractions. Fraction 2 (FDA-2, 715.0 mg) was twice chromatographed on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 3x40 cm) using hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (6:3:1) to afford compounds **16** (36.5 mg) and **17** (25.9 mg). The triterpene **15** (4.3 mg) was obtained through column chromatography on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 15x20 cm, eluent hexane-EtOAc, 7:3) and Sephadex LH-20 (1.5x30 cm, eluent CH2Cl2-MeOH, 1:1) from fraction 3 (FDA-3, 633.2 mg). Finally, the flavonoid **20** (48.9 mg) was isolated from the methanol extract from fruits (FM) through several column chromatographies on silica gel (230-400 mesh, 3x35 cm, eluent hexane until MeOH) and Sephadex LH-20 (1.5x30 cm, eluent MeOH).

### Bioassay

The procedure for _in vitro_ assays on blood trypanasigote forms of _T. cruzi_ was previously described by Ambrozin et al. [10]. Diethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was used to prepare standard solutions of the crude extracts and compounds, which were added to the infected mouse blood to provide concentrations of 4 mg/ml and 50, 100, and 250 mg/ml, respectively. The final concentration of DMSO was 1% (v/v). The bioassays were performed in triplicate on titration microplates (96 wells) that were incubated at 4 degC for 24 h. The activity is expressed as percent reduction of the parasite number (lysis) and IC50 (mmol/L) for pure compounds were calculated using the program GraphPad Prims v.3.0.

## Results and Discussion

In the present work, we assessed the trypanacid activity of 15 extracts from fruits, branches, stems, roots and leaves of _C. fissilis_. The results, which are summarized in **Table 1**, showed that 11 extracts (73%) were significantly active (lysis% >= 50) at 4 mg/mL against the trypanosigote forms of _T. cruzi_. Moreover, nine of them presented lysis in the 60-80% range; the dichromethene extract of roots (RD) was the most active, reducing the number of parasites in the infected blood by 97.4%. Such results suggest that _C. fissilis_ is really a promising source of trypanoidal compounds, as we expected from the previous works that had reported the antiprotozoan action of Melicace plants [10], [14], [16], [17], [18]. Thus, we carried out the chemical investigation of _C. fissilis_ with the aim to isolate the compounds from some active extracts (RD, LD, FD, and SM), and one inactive extract (RH). This work allowed the isolation of the limonoids (**Fig. 1**):

## Page 3

\(3\beta\)-acetoxycarapin (1) [19], 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (2) [20], gedunin (3) [20], photogedunin (4), methyl anglonsate (5), and 20,21,22,23-tetrahydro-23-oxoazadirone (6) [20]; the triterpenes: bisploid A (7), piscidnl A (8), pentad (9), nilocetin (10), odoratol (11), iso-odoratol (12), odoratocon (13), 225,3a-dihydrotriuxi-24-dien-23-one (14), 311-dioxoolean-12-en-28-onic acid (15), oleanic acid (16) [19], oleanic acid (17) [19], and 24-methylene-26-hydroxycycloartan-3-one (18); the sequierreten cripricotrimol (19); the flavonoid _ent_-catechin (20); in addition to the steroids _b_-sitosterol, stigmatero1, campestered, sitostenone, and 3_b_-O-b-glucopyranosidestosterol.



## Page 4

a dihydroxytetrahydrofuran seem to enhance the trypanocalid activity of trivellanene triterpenes. So, odoratol (**11**) and iso-odoratol (**12**) showed higher activity than hisipid A (**7**) and odoratone (**13**). On the other hand, odoratone (**13**) was more active than bisicidol A (**8**).

In general, oleanane-type triterpenes (**15-17**) were more active than limonoids (**1-4**), but less active than trivellanene triterpenes (**7-13**). They were isolated from the active dichloromethane extract from fruits of _C. fissilis_ (FD, 75.4%) together with photogorbunin (**4**). Among them, oleanolic acid (**17**) showed the highest activity displaying an IC50 value of 80.4 \(\mu\)M, which is near to the one observed for gentian violet [21]. It seems that for this class of compounds the trypanocalid activity is related to the presence of a hydroxy group at C-3. This observation corroborates the statement by Cunha et al [21], [22] that the free hydroxy at C-3 and the polarity of C-28 are the most influential structural features for the in vitro trypanocalid activity of oleanane triterpenes. Besides anti-inflammatory, immunomodulator-ry, cytotoxic, antitumor, antimutagenic, antiheterotoxic, anti-diabetic, hemolytic, antiviral and antibacterial activity [23], the tryppancidal action of oleanane triterpenes has already been described previously [21], [22], [24], [25], [26]. Actually, oleanolic acid (**17**) showed trypanocalid activity on both trypomastigote [21], [25] and epimastigote forms [24], [26] of _T. cruzi_.

Mexicanolide and geduin-type limonoids (**1-4**) showed low trypanocalid activity. In a previous work, mexicanolide limonoids displayed only weak activity on trypomastigote forms of _T. cruzi_[14].

These results suggest that trivellanane-type triterpenes are a promising class of new trypanocal compounds. The high trypanocal activity of odoratol (**11**) (100% at 100 \(\mu\)m/mL) indicates that it has potential as an alternative for the chemoprophylactic gentian violet, which has many side effects [2]. However, toxicity assays have not been performed for **11** yet.

In conclusion, the present study showed that _C. fissilis_, a plant from the Melicaceae family, is a promising source of active compounds for control of Chagas' disease. Specifically, we demonstrate the potential activity of trivellanane and oleanane-type triterpenes. The high activity of odoratol (**11**) is promising although it asks for further optimization and for assessment of toxicity.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Fessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support.

## References

* [1] World Health Organization (WHO). Available at [http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics](http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics). Accessed in May 04, 2008
* [2]_2 Dias JCP_. Transistornal Chagas disease in Brazil. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1993; 88: 63-5
* [3] World Health Organization (WHO) Division of Control of Tropical Diseases. Available at [http://www.who.int/tdr/diseases/](http://www.who.int/tdr/diseases/) Chagas. Accessed in May 04, 2008
* [4]_4_ _Philipson DJ, Wright CW._ Medicinal plants in tropical medicine: medicinal plants against protozal diseases. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1991; 85: 155-65
* [5] Phillipson DJ, Wright CW. Antiprotozocal agents from plant sources. Planta Med 1991; 57: 553-9
* [6]_5 Serrano SM, Nugali DJ, Dizat RAM, Escario JA, Fernandez ARM, Barrio AG._ In vitro screening of American plant extracts on Trypanosoma cruzi and Trichomonas vaginalis. I Ethnobranchol 2000; 71: 101-7
* [7]_50ura JR_, de Castro SL. A critical review on Chagas disease chemotherapy. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2002; 97: 3-24
* [8]_6_ _Fournet A, Munoz V._ Natural products as trypanocalid, anti-insibranil, and antimalarial drugs. Curr Top Med Chem 2002; 2: 1215-37
* [9]_5_ _Sepulveda-Boza S, Casseis BK._ Plant metabolites active against Trypanosora_, Curr. Planta Med 1996; 62: 98-105
* [10]_40_ _Ambrian Arp, Vierra RC, Fernandes JR, da Silva MVGF, de Albuquerque S._ Trypanocalid activity of Melicaceae and Rataceae plant extracts. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2004; 9: 227-3
* [11]_41_ _Ambrian Arp, Magezil Vierra C, Fernandes JR, da Silva MVGF, Ellena JA et al._ New pyrone and quinoline alkaloid from Almeida rubra and their trypanocalid activity. J Jraz Chem Soc 2005; 16: 434-9
* [12]_68_ _Roc de Albuquerque S, Silva MA._ Evaluation of the trypanocalid activity of lignans isolated for the leaves of Zanthovytum naranjillo._ Planta Med 1999; 65: 541-4
* [13]_ _Fournet A, Barrio SA, Munoz V, Racquemuller R, Roblot F, Cave A et al._ Antiprotozocal activity of quinoline alkaloids isolated from Galipea longiflora._ Abolivan plant used as a treatment for cutaneous leishmaniasis. Phytochr Res 1994; 8: 174-8
* [14]_14_ _Lette AC_. Estudo quinico e artividades biológicas de Cederle fissilis e Cipades _fruticosa_ (Melicaceae) [dissertation]. Sao Carlos: Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos; 2005

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l c c c c c c} Compound & Isolated from & \multicolumn{4}{c}{**Concentration (\(\mu\)g/mt) x lysis \% + SEM**} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{**IC50 (\(\mu\)g/mt)**} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{**IC50 (\(\mu\)mol/L)**} \\  & & **50** & **100** & **250** & **500** & & \\
**1** & RD & 1.26 ± 0.5 & 14.5 ± 1.9 & 24.7 ± 8.2 & - & DNP & DNP \\
**2** & LD & 29.1 ± 0.0 & 40.5 ± 2.5 & 41.8 ± 2.5 & - & DNP & DNP \\
**3** & LD, RH, RD & 4.4 ± 0.7 & 11.4 ± 2.5 & 56.3 ± 2.0 & - & 218.2 & 468.3 \\
**4** & FD, LD & 3.7 ± 0.8 & 3.7 ± 1.4 & 35.2 ± 0.6 & - & 315.5 & 636.1 \\
**7** & SM & 13.0 ± 0.5 & 61.1 ± 4.3 & 90.8 ± 3.8 & - & 94.9 & 199.3 \\
**8** & SM & 4.9 ± 1

## Page 5





