# 10.1016@S0031-9422(99)00105-3.pdf

## Page 1



# Iridoid and _seco_-iridoid glucosides from _Chioccoca alba_ (Rubiaceae)1

Carlos Alberto Carbonezi

blozniy@helio.iq.unesp.br

Dirceu Martins

Maria Claudia M. Young

Marcia N. Lopes

Maysa Furlan

Edson Rodrigues Filho

Vanderlan da S. Bolzani

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14800-900 Aravapura, SP, Brazil Sceao de Fisiologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Quimica CP 4005, 01051 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Phytochemical investigation of _Chioccoca alba_ afforded three new iridoids, alboside I, alboside II and alboside III, and a new _seco_-iridoid alboside V. Alboside IV showed moderate activity towards the DNA repair-deficient mutant RS321 of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_. The structural elucidation of the new compounds was performed by ES-MS and by 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopic methods. (c) 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Chioccoca alba_; Rubiaceae; Iridoid glucosides; _Seco_-iridoid glucoside

+
Footnote †: footnoteinfo]Corresponding author. Tel.: +55-16-232-2022; fax: +55-16-222-7932.

+
Footnote †: footnoteinfo]Based on the M.Sc. thesis submitted by CAC to Universidade Estadual Paulista (1998). Sponsored by FAPESP.

+
Footnote †: footnoteinfo]Corresponding author. Tel.: +55-16-232-2022; fax: +55-16-222-7932.

+
Footnote †: footnoteinfo]Corresponding author. Tel.: +55-16-232-2022; fax: +55-16-222-7932.

## 1 Introduction

_Chioccoca alba_ Hitch. (Rubiaceae) is a shrub endemico to America and is reported to be used in folk medicine as a tonic for ganglion inflammation, as well as being used as a diuretic. It is also used as an antiviral, antieodema and snakebite treatment and has aphrodisiac properties also (Costa, 1978; Dorvault, 1978). The pharmacological actions of the roots of _C. alba_ have been described in the Pharmacopoeias of several European nations since the last century (Lewis & Elvin-Lewis, 1989; Mabberley, 1989) and in Brazil it is commercialized in the free markets as an adulterant of the Brazilian 'Ipecac' (Costa, 1978). Previous works on _C. alba_ described the occurrence of lignans, counarins (El-Hafiz, Weniger, Quirion, & Anton, 1991), triterpenes (Bhattacharyya & Cunha, 1992) and ketoalcohols (El-Hafiz et al., 1991; Ballini, Bosica, & Rafaini, 1995).

As part of our continuing interest in Brazilian medicinal plants, we now wish to report the occurrence of iridoids and a _seco_-iridoid, including the isolation and biological evaluation of the new compounds (**1**-**4**). The structures and relative stereochemistries were determined by application of 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopic techniques. The seco-iridoid **4** showed moderate activity against the mutant RS321 of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_.

## 2 Results and discussion

The CHCl\({}_{3}\)-soluble part of a CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)/MeOH (2:1 v/v) extract, prepared from the roots of _C. alba_, was fractionated by CC on silica gel and Sephadex LH-20 to afford compounds **1**-**4**. Compounds **1**-**3** showed

## Page 2

NMR signals typical of an iridoid skeleton (Garcia & Chulia, 1986; Mpondo, Garcia, & Lestani, 1989).

The molecular weight of alboside I (**1**) was indicated by the peak at _m/z_ [M + Na]+ 575 in the electrospray spectra ES-MS. Besides the molecular ion peak, the main information obtained from the ES-MS of **1** was given by the strong fragment at _m/z_ 362 [C16H19O8 + Na]+ corresponding to the loss of a feruyl glucose moiety, which also was observed for the (_E_)-2'-feruloyl-loganin (Garcia & Chulia, 1986). The IR spectrum of **1** showed an hydroxyl absorption at 3500-3300 cm-1, two-carbonyl absorptions at 1690, 1668 cm-1, an aromatic ring at 1650, 1540 and 870 cm-1 and a UV \(l\) max. 325, 235, 208 (MeOH). Three sets of signals were observed in the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1): hydrogens linked to the sp2 carbons at \(d\) 7.55 d (_J_ = 16.0 Hz), 7.35 d (_J_ = 1.5 Hz), 7.12 d (_J_ = 1.5 Hz), 6.95 d (_J_ = 8.0 Hz) 6.34 d (_J_ = 16.0 Hz) and 6.29 dd (_J_ = 8.0; 1.5 Hz); several signals from \(d\) 5.14 to 3.18, a typical region for hydrogens in carbons linked to the hydroxyl functions; finally, signals at \(d\) 1.74-2.99 m and 1.00 d (_J_ = 7.0 Hz). The 13C NMR spectrum of **1** (Table 2) confirmed the presence of 26 carbons. According to the analysis of the DEPT spectrum these signals were attributed to two methyl, two methylene and 16 methine groups. These spectral features were very close to those observed for (_E_)-2'-feruloyl-loganin, an iridoid isolated from _Gentiana pedicellata_ (Garcia & Chulia, 1986). Furthermore, the 1H and 13C NMR spectra of compound **1** did not show the presence of the carbomethoxy function (_d_ >= 3.57 s; 1.3 s) as in (_E_)-2'-feruloyl-loganin, a common feature in many iridoid metabolites. This fact, led us to suggest that compound **1** is an acid derivative, which already had been suspected by analysis of its IR spectra at 1680 cm-1. The 1H-1H DQFCOSY relationships permitted the assignment of the feruloyl proton chemical shifts and also supported the substitution pattern. The location of the feruloyl unit at C-2' was evidenced by this experiment, which indicated that the signal at \(d\) 4.50 (d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) attributed to H-1' gave a cross peak with the H-2' signal at \(d\) 5.01 (t, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz). In addition, the loganic acid unit was confirmed by 1H-1H DQFCOSY data in which the proton coupling correlations from H-1 - _n_-9; H-5 - (H-9, H-6a, H-6b, H-3); H-6a, H6b - (H-5, H-7); H-8 - (H-7, H-9, H-10) and H-9 - (H-1, H-5, H-8) were observed. The 1H-13C one-bond correlation (HMQC) data were used to assign carbon resonances Table 2 to their attached protons, whereas the 1H-13C three-bond (HMBC) correlation were used to determine some connectivities in **1**. Especially important were the correlations from H-3 and H-5 proton resonances at \(d\) 7.35 and 2.99 to the carbonyl resonance at \(d\) 168.6 (C-11) and the correlation of the H-7' and H-2' at \(d\) 7.55 and 5.01, respectively, to the resonance at \(d\) 166.3 (feruloyl unity). The geometry of the unsaturated (C-7", C-8") in the feruloyl residue was established as (_E_) by judgement of the coupling constant between H-7" and H-8" (_J_ = 16.0 Hz) (Table 1).

The molecular formula of iridoid **2** was established as C27H34O13 by ES-MS (_m/z_ 589 for [M + Na]+), 13C and 1H NMR data. A further fragment at _m/z_ 376 [C17H2O8 + Na]+, attributable to feruloyl glucose, corroborated that feruloyl is linked to a glucose moiety. The IR and UV spectra of **2** were very similar to those of compound **1**. The 1H NMR spectrum Table 1 of **2** possessed the same signals as **1** for the loganic acid residue. The 1H NMR signals at \(d\) 3.79 (3H, s) and 3.78 (3H, s), combined with DQFCOSY data, revealed that the difference between iridoid **2** and iridoid **1** is related to the aromatic residue, which was located at C-2' in the glucose molecule. The HMQC spectrum correlated each carbon with its associated protons; expansions provide the following correlations

## Page 3

in iridoid **2**. The doublet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 5.15 (H-1) correlated to the carbon peak at \(\delta\) 98.8, the doublet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 4.49 (H-1') correlated to the carbon peak at \(\delta\) 95.9, the multiplet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.68 (H-7) correlated to the carbon at \(\delta\) 76.4 and the triplet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 5.08 (H-2') correlated to the carbon at \(\delta\) 73.2. In addition, the presence of two methoxy groups at \(\delta\) 55.3 and 55.6 also were confirmed, which showed correlations to the protons resonating at \(\delta\) 3.78 and 3.79, respectively. The HMBC spectrum of **2** provided long-range interactions supporting these assignments. Of particular interest were the correlations between H-2' (glucosyl unity) at \(\delta\) 5.08 and C-9'' (carbonyl of the dimethoxyscaffoyl) at \(\delta\) 166.3. The methoxy protons at \(\delta\) 3.78 and 3.79, correlated to the corresponding ring carbons to which they were attached, C-3" at \(\delta\) 151.01 and C-4" at \(\delta\) 149.0, respectively. Additionally, the sp\({}^{2}\) methine proton at \(\delta\) 7.20 correlated to the carboxylic function at C-11 \(\delta\) 168.2, C-4 at \(\delta\) 111.9, C-5 at \(\delta\) 31.5 and C-1 at \(\delta\) 98.8, while the C-10 methyl protons at \(\delta\) 1.00 correlated to C-7 at \(\delta\) 76.4, C-8 at \(\delta\) 39.5 and C-9 at \(\delta\) 45.3

The minor compound isolated, iridoid **3**, also had the same structural characteristics as evidenced by similar spectral features. Detailed analysis of all \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data, including 1D and 2D (Tables 1 and 2) demonstrated that the main difference observed for **3** is due to the aromatic residue, that in this iridoid, the glucose of the loganic acid structure is substituted in the C-2' position by a _p_-methoxycounmaoyl moiety. The molecular formula of alboside III

## Page 4

(**3**) C26H32O12 was indicated by the peak at _m_/_z_ 559 [M + Na]+ in the ES-MS together with 13C and 1H NMR spectral data. Analysis of the fragments in the ES-MS spectrum of **3** showed a diagnostic peak at _m_/_z_ 346 [C16H19O7+Na]+, which confirmed the placement of the _p_-methoxyecumanoyl group at the glucose moiety. The IR spectrum showed a hydroxyl absorption at 3465 cm-1 and strong aromatic C-H stretching bands at 3055 and 3020 cm-1. The UV data are also in agreement with the structure proposed. The difference in the aromatic residue present in this molecule compared with **1** and **2** was clearly evidenced by 1H NMR (2H, \(d\) 7.46 dd, \(J\) = 8.0, 2.0 Hz; 1H, 7.50 d, \(J\) = 16.0 Hz; 2H, 6.81 dd, \(J\) = 8.0, 2.0 Hz; 1H, 6.50 d, \(J\) = 16.0 Hz and 3H, s, 3.78), which was confirmed by 13C NMR data Table 2 as the _p_-methoxyecumanoyl. The HMBC spectrum of **3** showed a correlation between H-2' and C-9'' (_d_ 166.2, carbonyl of _p_-methoxyecumanoyl) corroborating the position of the aromatic residue in C-2' of the loganic acid derivative **3**, which to our knowledge is new.

_Seco_-irridoid **4** was obtained as a gum with the molecular formula C25H30O13 (ES-MS _m_/_z_ 561 [M + Na]+). Its UV spectrum suggested the presence of an aromatic acyl moiety. The 1H NMR Table 1 and 13C NMR Table 2 spectral data were assigned by interpretation of 1H-1H DQFCOSY, DEPT 135, HMQC and HMBC spectra. The 1H NMR spectrum of **4**, analyzed with the aid of DQFCOSY, showed resonances for aromatic protons at \(d\) 7.43 (1H, d, \(J\) = 15.8 Hz), 7.05 (1H, d, \(J\) = 1.5 Hz), 6.95 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 1.5; 8.0), 6.75 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz) and 6.19 (1H, d, \(J\) = 15.8 Hz). These chemical shift values and the absence of methoxy protons were indicative of a caffeoyl unit in molecule **4**. In fact, the 13C NMR spectral data Table 2 were consistent with the caffeoyl residue. The site of esterification was determined to be the 2'-position of the glucopyranosyl moiety in **4**. The 1H and 13C NMR spectral data for the _seco_-irridoid skeleton were very close to those related to secologanol (Mbondo et al., 1989); the main difference observed in **4** was the absence of a methoxy function at _d_H 3.68 and _d_C 51.7, attributed to carbomethoxy at C-11, in the structure of secologanoal. The presence of a carbonyl function at \(d\) 166.5 led us to attribute to compound **4** a carboxyl group rather than a carbomethoxyl function. The other spectral characteristics were in agreement with the structure proposed. In the 1H-1H DQFCOSY MNR spectrum, the H-7 (_d_ 3.70) was coupled with the H-6 resonances (_d_ 1.22 and 1.66), which in turn were coupled with the H-5 signal (_d_ 2.90). HMQC data supported the above observation with a correlation displayed between H-7 (_d_ 3.70) and C-5 (_d_ 30.3). In addition, the following selected 13C-1H long range correlation corroborated the structure proposed: the H-3 signal (_d_ 7.30) with the C-1 (_d_ 98.7), C-5 (_d_ 30.3) and C-11 (_d_ 166.5); the H-1 signal (_d_ 5.50) with the C-3 (_d_ 149.7), C-8 (_d_ 135.1) and C-1' (_d_ 95.4) and the H-2' signal (_d_ 4.99) with the C-1' (_d_ 95.4), C-3' (_d_ 76.8) and C-9' (_d_ 166.5). These data are in agreement with those reported for secologanoal (Mbondo et al., 1989).

The biological activity of the compounds isolated, **1**-**4**, were tested using the bioassay with genetically engineered strains of the yeast _S. cerevisiae_ for mechanism-based anticancer activity (Johnson et al., 1986; Gunatilaka, Samaranayake, Kingston, Hofmann, & Johnson, 1992; Gunatilaka, Kingston, & Johnson, 1994). The new iridoids **1**-**3** were inactive and the _seco_-irridoid **4** showed moderate activity only in the mutant strain RS321, with an IC12 value of 120 mg/ml.

## Experimental

### Instrumentation and chromatography materials

Silica gel (Merck, 230-400 and 70-230 Mesh) were used for all column chromatography unless otherwise stated and solvents were distilled prior to use. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Unity spectrometer at 400 and 100.57 MHz, respectively with TMS as a internal standard. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer. ES-MS: at 70 EV VG Platform II. Optical activities were measured on a Polamat A, Carl Zeiss Jena.

### Plant material

_C. alba_ root was collected at Mogi Guacu, Sao Paulo and classified by Dr. Lucia Rossi. The voucher specimen is deposited in the Herbarium of the Botanical Garden "Maria Eneida P.K. Fidalgo".

### Biological testing

The experimental methods utilized in the screening procedure have been described elsewhere (Johnson et al., 1986; Gunatilaka et al., 1992; Gunatilaka et al., 1994).

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

Dried and powdered roots of _C. alba_ (261.6 g) were extracted with CH2Cl2/MeOH (2:1). The resulting CH2Cl2/MeOH (2:1) extract was filtered and concel in vacuum to afford a brown gum (24.5 g). The CHCl2 soluble part (9.75 g) of the CH2Cl2/MeOH extract was applied to a flash Si gel column (100 g) and eluted with CHCl3 containing increasing amounts of MeOH to give 14 fractions. The fraction 8 (1.44 g) was applied to a Si gel column (50 g) 230-400 mesh and eluted with CHCl3/MeOH/H2O (65:30:5 to 50:50:10)

## Page 5

and MeOH to give 31 fractions. Fractions 6 (356.0 mg), 11 (48.0 mg) and 16 (94.0 mg) were applied to a Sephadex LH-20 CC, eluted with MeOH to give **1** (12.0 mg), **2** (6.0 mg), **3** (5.0 mg) and **4** (10 mg), respectively.

### 3.5. Alboside I (1)

Amorphous solid. [a]D -46.7deg (H2O; \(c\) = 2.4); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MeOH}}\) nm: 325, 235, 208; IR\({}_{\max}^{\text{film}}\) KBr cm\({}^{-1}\): 3453, 1695, 1630, 1520, 1077, 520. ES-MS _m_/_z_: 575 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\), 557, 362, 221, 200, 202; \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2, respectively).

### 3.6. Alboside II (2)

Amorphous solid. [a]D -30.7deg (MeOH; \(c\) = 0.9); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MeOH}}\) nm: 330, 238, 208; IR\({}_{\max}^{\text{film}}\) KBr cm\({}^{-1}\): 3465, 1693, 1630, 1515, 1455, 1262, 1169, 1068, 1020. ES-MS _m_/_z_: 589 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\), 571, 376, 214, 202; \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2, respectively).

### 3.7. Alboside III (3)

Amorphous solid. [a]D -30.7deg (MeOH; \(c\) = 0.9); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MeOH}}\) nm: 338, 235, 208; IR\({}_{\max}^{\text{film}}\) KBr cm\({}^{-1}\): 3465, 1693, 1630, 1515, 1455, 1262, 1169, 1068, 1020. ES-MS _m_/_z_: 559 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\), 541, 346, 202, 184; \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2, respectively)

### 3.8. Alboside IV (4)

Gum. [a]D -51.5deg (H2O; \(c\) = 0.5); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MeOH}}\) nm: 325, 238, 210; IR\({}_{\max}^{\text{film}}\) KBr cm\({}^{-1}\): 3464, 1693, 1626, 1519, 1387, 1276, 1187, 1072, 1030. ES-MS _m_/_z_: 561 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\), 543, 347, 186; \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2, respectively).

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by a grant from the Fundacao de Amparo a pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) awarded to Dr. V. da S.B., principal investigator. CAC is also grateful to FAPESP for M.Sc. Fellowship funding. VdSB, MF and MCMY wish to thank the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) for research fellowships. We thank Dr. David G.I. Kingston (Department of Chemistry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA) for the yeast strains of _S. Cerevisiae_ and Dr. L. Rossi (Sao Paulo Botanical Garden, Brazil) for authentication of the plant material.

## References

* [1] Ballini, R., Bosica, G., & Rafaini, G. (1995). _Helvetica Chimica Acta_, _78_, 879.
* [2] Bhattacharyya, J., & Cunha, E. V. L. (1992). _Phytochemistry_, _31_, 2546.
* [3] Costa, O. A. (1978). _Revista Brasileira de Farmacia_, \(8\), 124.
* [4] Dorvault, F. (1978). _Lofficine (_ (20th ed.))_._ Vigot.
* [5] El-Hafiz, M. A. Abd, Weniger, B., Quirion, J. C., & Anton, R. (1991). _Phytochemistry_, _30_, 2029.
* [6] Garcia, J., & Chulia, A. J. (1986). _Planta Medica_, _52_, 327.
* [7] Gunatilaka, A. L., Kingston, D. G. I., & Johnson, R. K. (1994). _Pure and Applied Chemistry_, _66_, 2219.
* [8] Gunatilaka, A. L., Samaranayake, G., Kingston, D. G. I., Hofmann, G. A., & Johnson, R. K. (1992). _Journal of Natural Products_, _35_, 1648.
* [9] Johnson, R. K., Bartus, H. F., Hofmann, G. A., Bartus, J. O., Mong, S. M., Fauecette, F. F. L., McCabe, F. L., Chan, J. A., & Mirabelli, C. K. (1986). In L. J. Hanka, T. Kondo, & R. J. White, _In vitro and in vivo models for detection of new antitumor drugs. Ed. by_ (p. 15)_._ Kyoto: Organizing Committee of the 14th International Congress of Chemotherapy.
* [10] Lewis, W. H., & Elvin-Lewis, M. (1989). In _Medical botany, plants affecting man's health_ (p. 347). New York: John Wiley.
* [11] Mabberley, D. J. (1989). In _The plant book: a portable dictionary of high plants_ (p. 121). Great Britain: Cambrige University Press.
* [12] Mpondo, E., Garcia, J., & Lestani, J. (1989). _J. Nat. Prod._, _52_, 1146.



