# 10.1093@mutage@gep034.pdf

## Page 1

Ethanolic extract of _Casearia sylvestris_ and its clerodane diterpene (caseargrewin F) protect against DNA damage at low concentrations and cause DNA damage at high concentrations in mice's blood cells

Aline M. de Oliveira, Andre G. dos Santos, Raquel A. dos Santos, Angelica R. Cispak, Camila Olivato, Isabel C. da Silva, Maura B. de Freitas, Carmen L. Bassi, Alberto J. Cavalheiro, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Dulce H. S. Silva, Elza T. Sakamoto-Hojo, Catarina S. Takahashi

# Abstract

Department of Clinical Analysis, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sao Paulo State University, Arnaquara, Rua Expedicionizos do Brasil, 1621, Brazil

Department of Principles Atvons Natureus i Torosicologia, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sao Paulo State University, Arnaquara, Rodovia Arnaquara-Jau, km 1, Brazil

Department of Biology, Faculty of Philosophy Sciences and Letters of Ribeirao Pietro, University of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandierantes, 3900, Brazil

Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Federal University of Mato Grosso, Avenida Fernandez Correa, s/n, Brazil and Nucleo de Bioenasios, Biossitn es Econfigisologia de Produtos Naturais, Chemistry Institute, Sao Paulo State University, Arnaquara, Rua Professor Francisco Degni s/n, Brazil



## Page 2



### _High performance liquid chromatography-diode array detector analysis_

A 9.90 mg of dried extract was submitted to solid phase extraction (SPE) (C-18 Merck(r); 2 x 1 cm x 40-63 mm) and eluted with methanol: water (98x02, v/v, 5.0 ml). The sample was dried in a desiccator over silica gel under reduced pressure, dissolved in 4.0 ml of methanol and filtered through 0.22 mm membrane filter (PVDF Millipore(r)) into a _high performance liquid chromatography_ (HPLC). Val. The reference standard used in this work-casegrewin F and caseinum(r)--was purified and identified in the laboratories of Nucleo de Bioensaios, Biossinstee e Ecofisologia de Produtos Naturais, Chemistry Institute, Sao Paulo State University, Aaraquara, Brazil; for details see Santos _et al._ (10). The standard solutions were prepared by weighing an appropriate amount of caseinregwein F into a volumetric flask. After diluting with methanol, the standard solutions (0.0079, 0.0159, 0.0635, 0.2540 e 0.5080 mg/ml) were filtered through 0.22 mm membrane filter (PVDF Millipore(r)) into a HPLC vial before injections. Analytical reversed-phase HPLC was performed using a Variany Proxst system (comprising a model 240 pump, a 140 autosampler and a 330 photodiode array detector), with control and data handling managed by Star50 Chromatography software. Analysis was conducted using a Phenomerex(r) Gemini C-18 column (250 x 4.6 mm, 5 um) eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile: methanol water (from 44:23:4 to 47:53:00, v/v, in 42 min) and acetonitrile: methanol (53:47), v/v, in 5 min); flow rate 0.8 ml/min; detection range 210-400 nm; injection volume 20 ml. Analysis was realized in triplicate.

### Gas chromatography and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis

A 5.0 mg of dried extract was submitted to SPE (2 x 1 cm) from silica gel (60-200 mm; Merck(r):) activated charcoal (Synthe(r)) (1:1, w/v) eluted with hexane: ethyl acetate (95:05, v/v, 5.0 ml). The sample was dried and diluted in hexane to afford 1.0 mg/ml solution. Gas chromatography (GC) analysis was performed on a Shimadzu QP2010 gas chromatograph with flame ionization detector using a DB-5 column (30 mx 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm). The carrier gas was He at a flow rate of 1.33 ml/min, split mode with ratio of 1:20 and injection volume of 1 ml. Injector and detector temperatures were 240 and 250degC, respectively. The oven temperature was programmed from 60degC, with an increase of 3degC/min, to 240degC. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis was conducted using the same system and conditions interfaced to a mass spectrometer instrument equipped with an ion trap detector operating in electron impact mode at 70 eV. The compounds were identified by their retention indexes, calculated by linear interpolation relative to retention times of a series of n-alkanes (11) and by comparison of their mass spectra with those of Wiley 7.0 library and of the literature (11). Compound concentrations were calculated from the GC peak areas.

### \({}^{1}\)H nuclear magnetic resonance analysis

Dried extract was diluted in CDCl3 (50.0 mg/ml) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were obtained using a Varian INOVA(r) 500 11.4 T instrument with CHCl3 as internal standard.

### Ethanolic extract emulsions

The ethanolic extract of _C.slyestris_ was dissolved in Tween 20 (20%). Ball-C male mice were treated with 3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 75 mg/kg. The concentrations of the test were chosen based on the high solubility of the ethanolic extract in the Tween 20 (20%).

### Purification and structure determination of casegrewin F

Dried and powdered leaves of _C.slyestris_ were extracted by stepping in ethanol. The dried extract obtained was separated by SPE on silica gel: activated charcoal and fraction SPE was separated further by normal-phase low-pressure column chromatography (CC) on silica gel. Fractions CC15-19 were purified by preparative reversed-phase (Cl3) HPLC to yield casegrewin F (850.0 mg). The structure of the compound was determined from spectrometric data (nuclear magnetic resonance, ultraviolet, infrared and mass spectrometry) and by comparison with spectral information available in the literature. For details see Santos _et al._ (10). The Microfluidic purify of the caasgrewin F in the assays used was 98.6% (HPLC-UV detected at 235 nm).

### Caseagrewin F emulsions

Caseagrewin F (Figure 1) was emulsified in 6% Tween 80 for both assays in mice. The Ball-C male mice were treated with 0.16, 0.32, 0.63, 1.3, 2.5 and 3.8 mg of casegrewin F per kg body weight (D-w.). These concentrations were based on ethanolic extract from _C.slyestris_ in which doses of 3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 75 mg/kg b.w. were used; since casegrewin F represents 4% of the ethanolic extract, we selected doses that are ~4% of the ethanolic extract doses.

### Animals

Six-week-old Ball-C male mice were maintained under controlled conditions of temperature (22 +- 2degC) and humidity (55 +- 10% room humidity), in a 12-h light/dark cycle. Before the experiments, the animals were acclimatized for 1 week, during which they had free access to a commercial diet (Purina(r)) and water. The study was conducted with approval of Brazilian Ethics Committee to Experimentation Animals (process CEP/FCF/CAr ndeg 01/2006).

### Mutagenic chemical-Positive control

Cyclophosphamide (CP, Sigma-Aldrich Co., St Louis, MO, Lot. No. 036K1225, purity 99%) was used as mutagenic agent in experiments. CP was diluted in 0.95x NaCl just before use and the animals were exposed to the chemical by intra-peritoneal (i.p.) injection of 50 mg/kg b.w. in 0.3 ml.

### Mutagenicity--MN test

### Experimental design

The assays were performed using eight animals/group. Group 1 (negative control) mice received only drinking water (0.6 ml per day by gavage) for 2 weeks before treatment with 0.9% NaCl by i.p. injection of 0.3 ml. Group 2 (positive control) also received drinking water for 2 weeks and was treated on day 15 with CP (50 mg/kg b.w., i.p.). Group 3 was treated with Tween 20 (20%) or Tween 80 (6%). 0.6 ml by gavage, for 2 weeks and on day 15 the mice were injected i.p. with 0.3 ml 0.9% NaCl. Groups 4-9 were treated for 2 weeks by gavage (0.6 ml per day per animal) with various concentrations of ethanolic extract (3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 75 mg/kg b.w.) or casegrewin F (0.16, 0.32, 0.63, 1.3, 2.5 and 3.8 mg/kg b.w.). These groups also received treatment with 0.3 ml 0.9% NaCl by ip on day 15. Bone marrow from each animal was collected 24 h after the last administration (12).

The bone marrow MN test was carried out as described by Schmid (13). All slides were stained with May-Grunwald Giemsa and coded to avoid observer bias. For each experiment point, 1000 polychromatic erythrocytes (PCEs) were scored to determine the percentages of micronucleated PCE. The ratio of PCEs to monochromatic erythrocytes (NCEs) (PCEs/NCEs) was determined in 200 cells.

### Genotoxicity--comet assay

For the comet assay, the experimental design was the same as for the MN test in mice. Peripheral blood was collected in heparinized capillary vials and kept on ice until use. The alkaline version of the comet assay (single cell gel electrophoresis) was performed as described by Singh (14). Briefly, 20 ml of blood was taken, homogenized with low-melting point agarose, spread on microscope slide pre-coated with normal melting point agarose and covered with a coverslip. After 5 min at 4degC, the coverslip was removed from slides and they were immersed in cold lysing solution (2.4 M NaCl: 100 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). 10 mM Tris, 10% dimethylsulfoxide and 1% Triton-X, pH 10) for 24 h. After lysis, the slides were placed in an electrophoresis chamber, covered with electrophoresis buffer (300 mM NaOH plus 1 mM EDTA, pH 7-13) and left for 20 min for the DNA to unwind. The electrophoresis was run for 20 min (25 V and 300 mA), after which the slides were submerged for 15 min in neutralization buffer (0.4 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) and fixed in 96% ethanol for 5 min. Slides were prepared in duplicate with ethidium bromide and 50 cells were screened per sample in a fluorescent microscope (ZEISS(r), Germany) equipped with an excitation filter of 515-560 nm, a barrier filter of 590 nm and a 40 objective. The level of

Fig. 1: Chemical structure of caseagrewin F.



## Page 3

DNA damage was assessed by an image analysis system (TriTek CometScore(tm) 1.5, 2006) and the percentage of DNA in tail was obtained.

#### Antimagenicity--MN test

_Experimental design_ In Group 1 (negative control), mice received only drinking water (0.6 ml per day by gavage) for 2 weeks before treatment with 0.9% NaCl by i.p. injection. Group 2 (positive control) also received drinking water for 2 weeks and were treated on day 15 with CP (50 mg/kg b.w., i.p.). Group 3 was treated with 0.6 ml Tween 20 (20%) or Tween 80 (6%) by gavage, for 2 weeks, and on day 15 received CP (50 mg/kg b.w., i.p.); the aim of this group is to ensure that Tween has no influence in possible DNA protective effect. Groups 4-9 were treated by gavage (0.6 ml per day per animal) with solutions of ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ (3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 75 mg/kg b.w.) and casegrewin F (0.16, 32.0, 6.3, 1.3, 2.5 and 3.8 mg/kg b.w.) for 2 weeks and, on day 15, CP (50 mg/kg b.w., i.p) was administered. Bone marrow was taken 24 h of CP after the injection (12). The MN test was performed as described previously for the mutagenicity assays.

#### Antigonotoxicity--comer assay

The experimental design for the Comet assay was the same as for antimutagenicity MN test and the comet assay for antimuotoxicity was carried out as described for the genotoxicity assay. Recently, Collins _et al_. (15) described that when comet assay is performed in _in vivo_ experiments low concentrations of genotoxic agents are unlikely to induce significant cytotoxicity, they also affirm that a low comet assay DNA damage would be a better indicator that cells are alive than common cytotoxicity tests. In this context, to the comet assay we did not performed cytotoxicity test once at low concentrations, the compounds were not genotoxic and consequently did not present cytotoxicity that could influence in antigenotoxicity assay.

#### Statistical analysis

For a statistical interpretation, results were analyzed with Sigma Stat 3.5, Systat, CA. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used to test data for normal distribution, in all assays performed in the study. Since the results did not a show normal distribution, non-parametric tests were applied. In mutagenicity/genotoxicity assays, the Mann-Whitney \(U\) test was used to compare DNA damage with the negative control. In the MN test, the PCE/NCE ratio was evaluated with the Kruskal-Wallis test. In antimutagenicity/antigenotoxicity assays, Mann-Whitney \(U\) test was used to compare all groups tested with the Tween 20 (20%) plus CP group, to assess the decrease in DNA damage. To test whether any groups demonstrated significant reduction in DNA damage to basal levels, those groups were also compared with negative control by the Mann-Whitney \(U\) test.

## Results

### Identification of compounds in the extract

The 1H NMR spectrum from extract showed signals with absorptions in d 1.98-2.09, 2.20-2.40, 3.43, 5.07-5.45, 6.25-6.75, similar to those described for casearins and other clerodane diterpenes isolated from _C.sylvestris_ (10,16-18). Both casearin U and caseargrewin F were identified in the extract. However, casearin U was not assayed in the present study. Quantitative High performance liquid chromatography-diode array detector analysis demonstrated that the content of caseargrewin F in the extract was 40.0 mg/g. Additionally, the chromatogram (Figure 2) presented 29 peaks with UV spectrum similar to observed for casearins and caseargrewin F (\(\lambda_{\max}=231\)-236 nm). The results of chemical analysis suggest the presence of these clerodane diterpenes in the extract.

#### Mutagenicity and genotoxicity--ethanolic extract of C.sylvestris

The results of the mutagenicity test in mouse bone marrow (MN test) and the genotoxicity test in mouse peripheral blood cells (comet assay) for ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ are shown in Table I. Mutagenicity and genotoxicity were observed at 50 and 75 mg/kg (both \(P\) < 0.01). The ratio between PCEs and NCEs did not show statistically significant variation, indicating that there was no cytotoxic effect on mouse bone marrow cells.

#### Antimutagenicity and antigenotoxicity of ethanolic extract of C.sylvestris

Table II shows the protective effect of the ethanolic extract from _C.sylvestris_ against inducible DNA damage in mouse blood cells through the MN test and comet assay. Since Tween 20 (20%) was used to dissolve the ethanolic extract, in the vehicle control this solution was administered before the CP to ensure that it has no influence on the antimutagenic effect of the test group. Consequently, there is no difference between Tween 20 (20%) plus CP and positive control. When the protective effect was evaluated by the MN test, an antimutagenic effect was observed in mice treated with 6.25 (_P_ < 0.01) and 12.5 mg/kg (_P_ < 0.05). However, the ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ did not reduce the DNA damage to the basal level. In the comet assay, the ethanolic extract from _C.sylvestris_ significantly reduced the % DNA in tail at concentrations of 3.13 (_P_ < 0.01), 6.25 (_P_ < 0.01), 12.5 (_P_ < 0.05) and 25 mg/kg (_P_ < 0.05).

#### Mutagenicity and genotoxicity--caseargrewin F

The results of the mutagenicity test in mouse bone marrow (MN test) and the genotoxicity test in mouse peripheral blood cells (comet assay) of ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ are shown in Table III. Clastogenicity and primary damage were observed at 3.8 mg/kg b.w. of caseargrewin F (both \(P\) < 0.05)

Fig. 2: Results from HPLC-DAD analysis. (**A**) Chromatogram of extract from the leaves of _Casearia syhestris_; asterisk (*) indicates peaks with UV spectrum similar to casearins and caseargrewin F. (**B**) Caseargrewin F UV spectrum.



## Page 4

in, respectively, the MN test and comet assay. The parameter used to assess genotoxicity by comet assay was % DNA in tail. The ratio between PCEs and NCEs did not show statistically significant variation, indicating that caseargrewin F was not cytotoxic to mouse bone marrow cells.

#### Antimutagenicity and antigenotoxicity of caseargrewin F

The antimutagenesis/antigenotoxicity assays were performed to determine if caseargrewin F protects DNA from inducible damage (CP, 50 mg/kg b.w.). Table IV shows the protective effect of caseargrewin F against inducible DNA damage in mouse blood cells through the MN test and comet assay. In the positive control, water was administered before CP, in order to maintain the same conditions as in the test groups (gavage intake) while determining the DNA damage induced by the CP without protection. To verify that Tween 80 has no influence on the antimutagenic effect in the test group, we administered the emulsifying solution before the CP. The negative control was used to check basal levels of DNA damage. The caseargrewin F did not show a statistically significant protective effect when assessed by the MN test. However, in the comet assay, it significantly reduced the % DNA in tail at concentrations of 0.63 (_P_ < 0.01), 1.3 (_P_ < 0.01) and 2.5 (_P_ < 0.01) mg/kg b.w.



## Page 5

genotoxic at the highest dose of 3.8 mg/kg b.w. A similar result was obtained in a recent study that describes mutagenic and genotoxic activity at high concentrations of another clerodane diterpene assessed by the MN test and comet assay (22). Considering that comet assay detects genomic lesions that are susceptible to DNA repair while MN test reveals more drastically lesions in chromosome level (23), it is important to realize that the two highest concentrations of ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ and at the high concentration case-argreiin F induced unrepairable DNA damage. A mutagenic effect of the ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ and caseargrewini F could represent a potential antimuour property, as previous works on _C.sylvestris_ demonstrated strong antimuour activity against Sarcoma 180 ascites in mice (17) and its casearins (clerodane diterpenes) exhibited a strong cytotoxic activity against V-79 tumour cells (18).

Interestingly, in the comet assay, the ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ was more efficient at preventing primary DNA damage at low concentrations (3.13 and 6.25 mg/kg b.w.). The molecules with non-mutagenic and/or antimutagenic properties could have antioxidant properties and, sometimes, may activate DNA repair pathways (24). They may act directly on the mutagenic process, by increasing the fidelity in DNA replication (desmutagens) or by stimulating DNA damage error-free repair (bio-antimutagenesis) (25). Additionally, ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ did not presented a dose-dependent response in both comet assay and MN test, and this result can be affected by various associated factors such as dependence of the effect of the substance on dose, the complexity of the test organism and the influence of simultaneous metabolic routes and enzymatic pathways (26). Caseargrewin F was not antimutagenic when assessed by the MN test, but showed an antigenotoxic dose-dependent response in the comet assay over the range of 0.63-2.5 mg/kg b.w. (Table IV).

In accordance with the present work, previous study has demonstrated that essential oil of _C.sylvestris_ has classetogenicity and anticlastogeneity in HTC cell line (27). Monoterpens and sesquiterpenes were identified in the essential oil (28) whereas in the present study, sesquiterpenes and clerodane diterpenes were identified in the ethanolic extract. Among 15 sesquiterpenes identified in the ethanolic extract, 13 were previous identified in essential oil (11,28). The mutagenic and genotoxic activity as well as the protective effect of the ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ could be related to the sesquiterpenes. Additionally, there are recent studies that describe sesquiterpenes as chemopreventive (27,29). However, we cannot exclude the potential biological effects of the clerodane diterpenes since caseargrewin F protected DNA from primary damage. Moreover, the use of mice instead of cell lines to assess protective effect of ethanolic extract could better verify absorption and metabolism of _C.sylvestris_ in a complex organism.

Recently, natural products have been described to protect DNA from damage and cause DNA damage (30,31) as observed in the ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ and caseargrewin F. Similar results were obtained in earlier studies and described these products as Janus compounds, referring to the mythological Roman god Janus, who had two faces in the same: one looking forward and the other backward (32). Comet assay also revealed that _C.sylvestris_ exhibited chemoprotective effects, but was not able to reduce the levels of DNA damage to negative controls values. Other studies suggested similar effects. Santos and Takahashi (33) demonstrated that selenomethionine, a selenium-derived antioxidant compound, was both genotoxic and antigenotoxic and reduced the levels of doxorubicin-induced DNA damage, but not to values as low as the negative control.

Cytotoxic events could lead to overestimation of the chemoprotective effects observed here. Thus, it is also important to consider that _C.sylvestris_ and caseargrewin F did not exhibit cytotoxic effects alone neither in combination with the CP as observed in the PCE/NCE values. Likewise, the chemoprotective effects can be considered only in the concentrations that did not exhibit genotoxic effects, a recommendation of the publication of Zeiger (34). Thus, our results demonstrate that the benefits of using ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ and caseargrewin F as DNA protective compounds could be respectively safe at doses <50 mg/kg b.w. and 3.8 mg/kg b.w.

We conclude that the ethanolic extract of _C.sylvestris_ and caseargrewin F protects DNA against damage in low concentrations, which was carefully estimated by using MN test and comet assay. Keeping in mind that the same ethanolic extract and caseargrewin F also can cause DNA damage in high concentrations.

## Funding

Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) (2005/58472-9) to A.M.d.O.; Biota-FAPESP (2003/02176-7) to V.S.B; Biopropsecta (2004/07932-7) to D.H.S.S.; Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento a Pesquisa (305615/2006-8) to C.P.S.

## Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Maximino Antonio Boschi, Marcos Aparecido Dangona and Maria Izabel Feliciano for the excellent technical assistance.

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

## References

- Gonzalez-Avila, M., Arriaga-Alba, M., de la Garza, M., del Carmen Hernandez Pretelin, M., Dominguez-Ortiz, M. A., Fattel-Fazenda, S. and Villa-Treviino, S. (2003) Antigenotoxic antimutagenic and ROS scavenging activities of a Rhooc discolor ethanolic crude extract. _Toxicol. In Vitro_, **17**, 77-83.

- Huang, Q., Lu, G., Shen, H. M., Chung, M. C. and Ong, C. N. (2007) Anticancer properties of anthraquinones from rhubard. _Med. Res. Rev._, **27**, 609-630.

- Chase, M. W., Zmartarty, S., Lledo, M. D., Wurdack, K. J., Swensen, S. M. and Fay, M. F. (2002) When in doubt put in El Concuriaceae: a molecular phylogenetic analysis based on plastid _r.cch._ DNA sequences. _Keu Bull._, **57**, 141-181.

- Basile, A. C., Sertie, J. A. A., Panizza, S., Oshiro, T. T. and Azzolini, C. A. (1990) Pharmacological assay of _C.sylvestris_. I: preventive antilexter activity and toxicity of the leaf crude extract. _J. Ethnopharmacol._, **30**, 185-197.

- Borges, M. H., Soares, A. M., Rodrigues, V. M. _et al._ (2000) Effects of aqueous extract of _C.sayeria sylvestris_ (Flacouritaaceae) on actions of snake and bee vromms and on activity of phospholipases A2. _Comp. Biochem. Physiol._, **127B**, 21-30.

- Gertie, J. A., Carvalho, J. C. T. and Panizza, S. (2000) Antilexter activity of the crude extract from leaves of _C.sayeria sylvestris_. _Pharm. Biol._, **38**, 112-119.

- Orbeiles, N. H., Burgess, J. P., Navarro, H. A. _et al._ (2002) Novel bioactive clerodane diterpenoids from the leaves and twigs of _C.sayeria sylvestris_. _J. Nat. Prod._, **65**, 95-99.



## Page 6

* [8] Esteves, I., Souza, I. R., Rodrigues, M. _et al._ (2005) Gastric antiulcer and anti-inflammatory activities of the essential oil from _Caseraia sylvestris_ Sw. _J. Ethnopharmacol._, **101**, 191-196.
* [9] Kanokendrehakul, S., Kanokendrehakul, K. and Buayairakas, M. (2007) Cytotoxic dicrdone diterponds from fruits of _Caseraia grewifolia. J. Nat. Prod._, **70**, 1122-1126.
* [10] Santos, A. G., Ferreira, P. M. P., Vieira Junior, G. M. _et al._ (2009) Cascaerin U is degradation product and other clerodane diterpens from leaves of _Casera sylvestris_: evaluation of cytotoxicity against normal and tumour human cells. _Chem. Biodivers._, in press.
* [11] Adams, R. P. (1995) _Identification of Essential Oil Components by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectroscopy_. Allured Publishing Corporation, Carol Stream, IL.
* [12] Azevedo, L., Gomes, J. C., Stringheta, P. C., Gontijo, A. M. M. C., Padovani, C. R., Ribeiro, L. R. and Salvadori, D. M. F. (2003) Black bean (_Phasesulis vulgaris_ L) as a protective agent against DNA damage in mice. _Food Chem. Toxicol._, **41**, 1671-1676.
* [13] Schmid, W. (1975) The micronucleus test. _Mutat. Res._, **31**, 9-15.
* [14] Singh, N. P., Mccoy, M. T., Tice, R. R. and Schneider, E. L. (1988) A simple technique for quantitation of low levels of DNA damage in individual cells. _Exp. Cell Res._, **178**, 14-191.
* [15] Collins, A. R., Osoza, A., E., Brundob, G., Gaixo, I., Giovannelli, L., Kruszewsky, M., Smith, C. C. and Steinta, R. (2008) The comet assay: topical issues. _Mutagenesis_, **23**, 143-151.
* [16] Engludola, L. S., Vasconcelos, J. J. R., De Mesquita, M. L., Marquie, P., De Paula, J. E., Mambu, L. and Santana, J. M. (2004) Trypanocal activity of a new diterpene from _Caseraia sylvestris_ var lingua. _Plana Med._, **70**, 1093-1095.
* [17] Ibokawa, H., Totsuka, N., Morita, H., Takeda, E., Iitaka, Y., Schenkel, E. P. and Modidone, M. (1988) Antitumor principles from _Caseraia sylvestris_ Sw (Flacutionaceae) structure elucidation of new clerodane diterpens by 2-D NMR spectroscopy. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **36**, 1585-1588.
* [18] Morita, H., Takeya, K., Schenkel, E. P., Motidome, M., Kojima, M., Nakayama, H. and Ibokawa, M. (1991) Structures and cytotoxic activity relationship of casearina new clerodane diterpens from _Casera sylvestris_ Sw. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **39**, 693-697.
* [19] Barcelos, G. R., Shimabukuro, F., Maciel, M. A. and Colus, I. M. (2007) Genotoxicity and antigenotoxicity of casehew (_Anacardam occidentale_ L) in V79 cells. _Toxicol. In Vitro_, **21**, 1468-1475.
* [20] Sannomiya, M., Cardoso, C. R., Figueiredo, M. E. _et al._ (2007) Mutagenic evaluation and chemical investigation of Dysnomima intermedia A Juss leaf extracts. _J. Ethnopharmacol._, **112**, 319-326.
* [21] Sowenimno, A. A., Fakoya, F. A., Avgopetti, I., Omobwaja, O. R. and Adesanya, S. A. (2007) Toxicity and mutagenic activity of some selected Nigerian plants. _J. Ethnopharmacol._, **113**, 427-432.
* [22] Cavalcanti, B.,, C., Costa-Loufo, L. V. _et al._ (2006) Genotoxicity evaluation of kaureneic acid, a bioactive diterpenoid present in Copaiba oil. _Food Chem. Toxicol._, **44**, 388-392.
* [23] Scolastici, C., Lima, R. O. A., Barbisan, L. F., Ferreira, A. L., Ribeiro, D. A. and Salvadori, D. M. (2008) Antigenotoxicity and antimutagenicity of lycopene in HepG2 cell line evaluated by the comet assay and micronucleus test. _Toxicol. In Vitro_, **22**, 510-514.
* [24] Feig, D. I., Sowers, L. C. and Loeb, L. A. (1994) Reverse chemical mutagenesis: identification of the mutagenic lesions resulting from reactive oxygen species-mediated damage to DNA. _Proc. Natl Acad Sci USA_, **91**, 6609-6613.
* [25] De Flora, S. (1998) Mechanisms of inhibitors of mutagenesis and carcinogenesis. _Mutat. Res._, **402**, 151-158.
* [26] Fahrig, R. (1996) Antimutagenic agents are also co-recombinogenic and can be converted to co-mutagens. _Mutat. Res._, **350**, 59-67.
* [27] Iranshahi, M., Salebkar, A., Konoshima, T. and Tokuda, H. (2009) Cancer chemopreventive activity of premyulated coumarin, umbelliprenin, _in vivo_. _Eur. J. Cancer Prev._, **14**, 215-216.
* [28] Sousa, F. G., Schneider, N. F. Z., Mendes, C. E., de Moura, N. F., Denardin, R. B. N., Matto, R. and Mantovani, M. S. (2007) Clastogenic and anticlastogenic effect of the essential oil from _Caseria sylvestris_ Swart. _J. Essent. Oil Res._, **19**, 376-378.
* [29] Ong, T. P., Heidor, R., de Conti, A., Dagli, M. L. and Moreno, F. S. (2006) Farmesol and geramid chemopreventive activities during the initial phases of hepatocarcinogenesis involve similar actions on cell proliferation and DNA damage, but distinct actions on apoptosis, plasma cholesterol and HMGBCa reductase. _Carcinogenesis_, **27**, 1194-1203.
* [30] Merck-Sundermann, V., Bahorun, T., Stahl, T. _et al._ (2006) Assessment of the DNA damaging potency and chemopreventive effects towards BaP-induced genotoxicity in human derived cells by _Monimistarum globosum_ an endemic Mauritian plant. _Toxicol. In Vitro_, **20**, 1427-1434.
* [31] Tavares, D. C., Mazzaron, B. G. R., Silva, L. F., Tonin, C. C. C. and Bastos, J. K. (2006) Propolis-induced genotoxicity and antigenotoxicity in Chinese hamster ovary cells. _Toxicol. In Vitro_, **20**, 1154-1158.
* [32] Zeiger, E. (2003) Ilusions of safety: antimutagens can be mutagens and anticarcinogens can be carcinogens. _Mutat. Res._, **543**, 191-194.
* [33] Santos, R. A. and Takahashi, C. S. (2008) Anticlastogenic and antic genotoxic effects of selenomethionine on doxorubicin-induced damage _in vitro_ in human lymphocytes. _Food Chem. Toxicol._, **46**, 671-677.
* [34] Zeiger, E. (2007) What is needed for an acceptable antimutagenicity manuscript? _Mutat. Res._, **626**, 1-3.

_Received on July 8, 2009; revised on August 14, 2009; accepted on August 17, 2009_

## Page 7

Copyright of Mutagenesis is the property of Oxford University Press / UK and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.



