# 10.1002@pca.1208.pdf

## Page 1

Chemical Characterization of _Azadirachta indica_ grafted on _Melia azedarach_ and Analyses of Azadirachtin by HPLC-MS-MS (SRM) and Meliatoxins by MALDI-MS

Moacir Rossi Forim, Vivian Estevam Cornelio, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Edson Rodrigues-Filho, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira, Sueli Souza Matinez, Michael P. Napolitano, Richard A. Yost

# Abstract

Introduction - _Melia azedarach_ adapted to cool climates was selected as rootstocks for vegetative propagation of _Azadirachta indica_. Cleft grafting of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarach_ rootstock showed excellent survival. Little is known about the chemistry of grafting.

Objective - The roots, stems, leaves and seeds of this graft were examined in order to verify if grafted _A. indica_ would produce limonoids different from those found in non-grafted plants. Intact matured fruits were also studied to verify if they were free or metiatoxins.

Methodology - After successive chromatographic separations the extracts afforded several limonolds. HPLC-MS/MS and MALDI-MS were used to develop sensitive methods for detecting aazadirachtin on all aerial parts of this graft and meliatoxins in fruits, respectively.

Results - The stem afforded the limonoid salannin, which was previously found in the oil seeds of _A. indica_. Salannin is also found in the root bark of _M. azedarach_. Thus, the finding of salannin in this study suggests that it could have been translocated from the _M. azedarach_ rootstock to the _A. indica_ graft. HPLC-MS/MS analyses showed that aazadirachtin was present in all parts of the fruits, stem, flowers and root, but absent in the leaves. The results of MALDI-MS analyses confirmed the absence of meliatoxins in graft fruits.

Conclusion - This study showed that _A. indica_ grafted onto _M. azedarach_ rootstock produces azadirachtin, and also that its fruits are free of meliatoxins from rootstocks, confirming that this graft forms an excellent basis for breeding vigorous Neem trees in cooler regions. Copyright (c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

## Introduction

In a review paper on the 40th anniversary of the first isolation of azadirachtin (1, Fig. 1) Morgan (2009) recorded that there is much still to be discovered about this natural pesticide. Azadirachtin is found in three species, the trees _Azadirachta indica_ A. Juss., _A. exceloa_ (Jack) Jacobs and _A. siamensis_ Val. (Melaceae) (Morgan, 2009). The seeds, fruit, flowers, leaves, twigs, bark and roots of the Indian neem tree, _A. indica_, have all been examined. Among the more polar limonoids, extracted with azadirachtin, salannin (2, Scheme 1) is the most abundant, followed by azadirachtin. Morgan (2009) also showed that there are other feeding deterrents present in the seeds in smaller quantities.

Unfortunately, Rembold (1989) introduced the names azadirachtin A, B, C and D, describing these as isomers. Azadirachtin A is identical to azadirachtin, therefore the original name stands. Since the structure of azadirachtin B was determined by Klenk _et al._ (1986) and named 3-tigloylazadirachtlol, that name stands. Azadirachtin C was never fully described, thus the name is unused. Azadirachtin D is correctly 1-tigloyl-3-acetyl-11-hydroxymeliancarpin. These three compounds belong to different compound groups and are not isomers (Morgan, 2009). Later, the authors isolated the limonoids from the meliacargin groups, naming them as azadirachtin E, F, G; however, the correct names

## Page 2

are 1-detigloylazadirachtin, 1-hydroxy-3-tigloyl-11,19-deoxo-11-hydroxymeliancaprin and 3-tigloyl-13,14-desepoxy-17-hydroxy-azadirachtol, respectively (kraus, 1995, 2002).

Azadirachtin is biologically interesting because it is a feeding deterrent for some insects and a growth disruptant for most insects, and many other arthropods and species in related phyla. Moreover, it is remarkably non-toxic to vertebrates (Morgan, 2009). In contrast, bark and seeds of the Chinaberry tree (in Portuguese, cinnamon and Santa-Barbara), _Mella aazedrach_ L, are reported to be poisonous to farm and domestic animals and humans. Oelrichs _et al._ (1983) showed that a series of limonoids, meliatoxins A1, A2, B1 and B2 are the poisonous principles.

The Neem tree is well adapted to hot, dry climates where shade temperatures often reach 50degCelsus and annual rainfall ranges from 400 to 1200 mm. It is native to the Indian sub-continent, but also grows well in other tropical and subtropical areas around the world (Verkerk and Wright, 1993). It was successfully introduced in northern, northeastern and western regions of Brazil (Martinez, 2002). Chinaberry tree is native to Asia and was extensively introduced in Brazil as an ornamental plant. These trees are potentially better suited to survive low temperatures than the Neem trees. The latter has been grafted to stems of _M. azedrach_ and the tree has adapted well to cool climates. These grafts growing in the southern regions of Brazil are part of a breeding and selection programme in the Agronomic Institute of Parana (Brazil) aimed at the development of vigorous Neem trees to be established in cooler regions.

This is the first time that the graft of _A. indica on M. azedrach_ L, rootstocks has been investigated. Thus, the roots, stems, leaves and seeds of this graft were examined in order to verify if grafted _A. indica_ would produce limonoids different from those found in non-grafted plants. Detection of azadirachtin from all parts of Neem trees have been described in the literature (Sundaram, 1996), but it has been frequently reported to be present at highest concentrations in mature seeds (Akhila and Rani, 1999). In order to verify if azadirachtin was still present in the graft, a sensitive method was developed for detecting it on all aerial parts of this graft.

Figure 1.: (A) Chromatogram of standard azadirachtin (1) (20 μg/mL; injected volume 20 μl; for optimal conditions see Experimental section); (B) second-generation ion product spectra of azadirachtin under collision-induced dissociation (20 eV). The marked ions represent the transitions chosen for selected reaction monitoring mode experiments; (M − HI → ○.



## Page 3


Plantations of Neem trees have been established in Brazil, specifically to provide the oil from fruits for the production of natural insecticides and cosmetic products. The main grafting problems of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarch_ are related to melaitoxins A, A2, B1 and B2, which once biosynthesized in the rootstock, could be translocated to seeds. These comments have encouraged the development of a rapid and sensitive method for determination of melaitoxins in seeds from _M. azedarch_ and _A. indica_, developed from the germination of seeds and from the graft. Thus, this study focused on selecting a proper matrix for melaitoxins, to study the ionization and fragmentation patterns of melaitoxins in a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI MS) system, and to develop a simple protocol for the use of MALDI-MS to analyse melaitoxins from seeds with minimal purification of the samples.

## Experimental

### Plant material

Leaves, stem, flowers and fruits from a graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarch_ were collected at the experimental campus of the Agronomic Institute of Parana, Xambr-PR, Brazil. The plant was identified by Dr. Suelle de Souza Matinae. A voucher specimen is deposited at the Herbarium of the State University of Maringa PR, Brazil, number 11709-HUM.

### Instrumentation

The high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system consisted of two Shimadzu LC-10AD pumps (Kyoto, Japan), a SUS (Stainless steel) mixer, an SIL-10AF (SL, automatic sample injector) autosample injector, an SP-10A (SPD, spectrophotometric detector) UV-vis detector and an SPD-10AWP photodiode array detector. A CBM-10A (CBM, communications bus module) interface was applied to both detectors. Data acquisition was performed using CLASS LC10 software. Solid-phase extraction (SPE) clean-up was performed on a vacuum manifold processor (Varian, Harbor City, CA, USA) using a vacuum bomb TE-058 (Tecnal, Piracchapa, SP, Brazil). One- and two-dimensional NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker Avance DRX-400 spectrometer (Karlsruhe, Germany; 14, 400 MHz; 12C, 100 MHz), 2695 HPLC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled with a Quattro IC mass spectrometer and a Thermofiningan (San Jose, CA) LTQ with vMADL source (LTQ is ThermoFinnigan's proprietary name for their linear 2D quadrupole ion trap).

### Isolation of compounds

Ground leaves (2.3 kg) and roots (1.2 kg) from a graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarch_ were extracted with hexane, then CHCl, and finally with MeOH, although the stem (1.3 kg) was only extracted with MeOH, all at room temperature and repeated three times. The concentrated MeOH extract (31 g) from the stem was partitioned into hexane, CHCl, EtOHAc and n-ButOH soluble fractions. The 1H NMR spectra of these partitions showed that most of the limonoids were in the CHCl fraction. Thus, the CHCl fraction was chromatographed over silica gel (230-400 mesh, CHCl,EtOAc-MeOH gradient) to afford four leafrons. Fraction 2 was rechromatographed as above (CHCl, _Et_-_CO_-_CO_-_H_-_OH_ gradient) yielding four new fractions. The 1H NMR spectrum of the new fraction 3 showed that it was rich in limonoids. This fraction was submitted to HPLC separation using a semimetrap HPLC column [Denomene Pheney Heny Heny, 250 x 6 mm column, 10 mm; H2O-acetonitrile (6.5-3.5), flow-rate 4 mL/min, UV = 217 and 254 nm] yielding 28-deoximimobile (3; 2 mg), salanin (2; 7 mg) and 6-0-acetylimhnadolid (4; 4.5 mg).

The concentrated hexane and CHCl,Et extracts from the leaves were combined (70 g) and chromatographed on silica gel and Florisil (1:1) eluting with hexane-EtOAc-MeOH gradient to remove chlorophyll. During concentration of the EtOHAc fraction, a crystalline material separated and was then collected and crystallized from EtOHAc to give limonoid immidolite (5; 11 mg). The 1H NMR (200 MHz) of all fractions showed signals that are characteristic of steroids and known limonoids: the fractions were not analysed any further. The concentrated MeOH extract 

## Page 4

(182 d) from the leaves showed signals from the aromatic protons at 1H NMR spectrum; this was then investigated. It was then partitioned into hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOH- and _n_-BuOH-soluble fractions. The CH2Cl2-soluble fraction was purified by repeated column chromatography as above to give two fractions (_A_ and _B_) containing limonoids. Fraction A was chromatographed on octadecylslica (ODS) column (fractions were eluted by gravity flow with H2O-MeOH 7:3, 1:1; MeOH; MeOH-acetonitrile 9:1, 7:3; acetonitrile) yielding 28-deconxinolidate (3; 16 mg). Fraction B was chromatographed three times over gel permeation Sephadex LH 20 (MeOH; MeOH; MeOH; MeOH; MeOH; MeOH; MeOH; 1:1) to give 6-deacetylinbinine (6; 1.4 mg) and 6-deacetylinbin (7; 7 mg). The EtOH-soluble fraction was chromatographed on micropairault cellulose (hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient) affording further fractions. Fraction 10 (and 11 were purified by gel permeation column chromatography (Sephadex LH 20, MeOH) affording quercetin (18 mg) and a new fraction C. This fraction C was submitted to preparable HPLC (Shooke Asaholid). CG-310 polymeric column (50.0 x 2.5 cm i.d.); MeOH, flow-rate 1 mL/min, UV = 217 mmol to yield quercitin (4.3 mg).

The 1H NMR spectra of the hexane, dichloromethane and methanol extracts from the roots showed that most of the limonoids were in the CH2Cl2 fraction. This was chromatographed over silica gel (230-400 mesh, hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient), yielding 21 fractions containing known limonoids. Only fractions 6 and 7 were submitted to HPLC separation using a semipermeurate HPLC column (Phenomenex Pheny) Hexyl, 250 x 6 mm column, 10 mm; H2O-acetonitrile (6:5:3.5), flow-rate 4 mL/min, UV = 217 and 254 nm) to yield nimbloin A (8; 6.1 mg).

### Extraction and isolation of standard azadirachtin

Matured fruits of _A. indica_ were collected at the experimental campus of _A_ironomic Institute of Parana, Xambre-PR, Brazil, in April, 2005. Fully matured fruits were manually depuited and the mescap adhering (seed coat) to the hard epicraw was removed, thereby obtaining the seed kernels. The air-dried powdered seed kernels (800 g) were extracted with hexane through percolation processing at room temperature four times, and for 1 h each, using mechan agitation and centrifugation. Oil supernatant was transferred into the ether vial, and then discarded. The precipitate was extracted with methanol through percolation processing at room temperature five times, and for 12 h each, using mechanical agitation and centrifugation. A crude methanolic extract (52 d) was obtained after filtration and evaporation of the organic solvent under vacuum at 40degC. A portion of the resultant methanolic extract (25 g) was chromatographed over silica gel (230-400 mesh, CH2Cl2-acetonitrile-MeOH gradient) yielding a fraction rich in azadirachtin. This fraction was chromatographed over gel permeation Sephadex LH 20 (MeOH) to give further fractions. The 'H NMR (200 MH) of the all fractions showed characteristics of azadirachtin in fraction 6, and then, it was submitted to semi preparative HPLC (Phenomenex-Luna Premier) Hexyl, 250 x 6 mm column, 10 mm; acetonitrile-MeOH-THF-H2O (34:4:1:1:61), flow-rate 1.8 mL/min, UV = 217 and 254 nm) to yield azadirachtin (1; 4 mg). The standard was prepared in triplicate at 10 mg/ml, and 20 mL was injected to the HPLC system to confirm its purity. The optimal condition consisted of an isocratic solvent system containing acetonitrile-MeOH-THF-H2O (34:4:1:61); THF: tetrahydrofuran), employing a reverse-phase analytical C4 column (Phenomenex-Luna1:150 x 4.6 mm i.d., 5 mm) equipped with a precoImmune phenomerex; 4 x 3 mm, 5 mm), at a flow-rate of 0.4 mL/min, UV = 217 nm and an injector fitted with a 20 mL loop.

### Sample preparation for azadirachtin detection

Immature, juvenile, matured and fully matured fruits were collected in April, 2005. Juvenile, matured and fully matured fruits (samples B-D, respectively) were manually depuited and the mescap adhering (seed coat) to the hard epicraw was removed, hence obtaining the seed kernels. The juvenile (B, 100 mg), matured (C, 100 mg) and fully matured (D, 100 mg) seed kernels frozen in liquid nitrogen were ground separately using a mortar and pestle. Intact immature fruits (sample A, 346.8 mg) were also ground as above. Some seeds were dried in an air-oven at 60degC for 24 h and then the seed coat (sample F; 304.7 mg) and kernels (sample E; 100 mg) were separated, and were separately ground. All samples (A-F) were mixed separately with 1 mL of methanol in centrifuge tubes by vortex agitation (Phoenix AP56, Aaraquara, SP Brazil) for 30 s at the maximum possible speed, and then centrifuged at 10000 rpm at 20degC for 20 min (Jonan B4/B4/B41, S1-Herbian, France). The supernatants were transferred into the sample vial. The precipitate was transferred into centrifuge tubes and was extracted two times as above and the supernatants transferred into the same sample vial. The samples were evaporated in a speed-vad affording the concentrated extracts A-F. The ground dry stem without bark (sample G, 184.2 mg), stem bark (sample H, 176.0 mg), leaves (sample I; 316.4 mg) and flowers (sample J; 185.0 mg) were extracted by the same procedure aforementioned.

To obtain initial information about the retention time of the analyte (azadirachtin) and the compounds in the crude methanol extracts, a screening analysis was performed with the extract E. Thus, 1.2 mg of crude extract E in 1 ml of MeOH and 80 mg/mL (MeOH) of azadirachtin were separately submitted to the HPLC analyses using a reverse-phase analytical C4 column (Phenomenex-Luna1: 150 x 4.6 mm i.d., 5 mm) equipped with a precoimmune (Phenomenex; 4 x 3 mm, 5 mm), using a gradient elution with acetonitrile with acetate (5-100% in 60 min) at a flow-rate of 2 mL/min and an injector fitted with a 20 mL loop. The cleanup monitored at 217 nm detection wavelength under ambient temperature. Based on the chromatogram results, clean-up procedures were carried out with all concentrated extracts. Therefore, all concentrate extracts were reconstituted at 400 mL of hexane to remove remaining oils and other no-polar material (A, 7.2 mg, 18.0 mg/mL; B, 7.9 mg, 19.75 mg/mL; C, 7.7 mg, 19.25 mg/mL; D, 9.1 mg, 18.20 mg/mL; F, 2.0 mg/mL; F, 2.0 mg/mL; F, 2.6 mg, 13.00 mg/mL; G, 9.0 mg, 18.00 mg/mL; H, 15.6 mg, 23.20 mg/mL; L, 12.0 mg, 20.0 mg/mL; and, small amount. The cleanup of each extract was performed by applying this solution onto a cyanopropyl SPE cartridge of 1 mL per 100 mg (Bakerbond) 5ge Cyano, J.T. Baker) previously conditioned with 5 ml of hexane, which was not dried. The residue of the concentrate extract was dissolved in a further 200 mL of hexane and also passed through the same cyanopropyl SPE cartridge and then washed with 4 mL of hexane. The solvent was removed from the cartridge on a vacuum manifold bomb and afterwards the tube was dried. The residue of the concentrate extract after hexane washing was twice reconstituted in 600 mL and then in 400 mL of MeOH; both fractions were passed through the same cyanopropyl SPE cartridge. The solvent was removed from the cartridge by vacuum. Eluent was evaporated to dryness in a gentle stream of nitrogen and re-suspended in 1.0 mL of MeOH.

The samples were prepared in triplicate. The method selectivity was determined by comparing the chromatograms of the extract and standard azadirachtin, and the identification was achieved by comparing the retention time of the peaks. The optimal conditions consisted of an isocitrate solvent system containing 40% acetonitrile in water, employing a reverse-phase analytical C4 column (Phenomenex-Luna1; 150 x 4.6 mm i.d., 5 mm) equipped with a precolumn (Phenomenex; 4 x 3 mm, 5 mm), at a flow-rate of 0.4 mL/min and an injector fitted with a 20 mL loop.

### Limit of detection

The limit of detection (LOD) was defined as the concentration in which the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) was equal to 3:1, which was obtained by injection/measurement of the 5/N ratio. The LOD was 25 ng/mL for azadirachtin.

### HPLC and MS parameters

All analyses were carried out using an Alliance 2795 HPLC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled with a Quattro Premier T-Wave mass spectrometer. A reverse-phase analytical C4 column (Phenomenex-Luna1; 150 x 

## Page 5

4.6 mm, 5 mm) equipped with a precolumn (Phenomenex; 4 x 3 mm, 5 mm) was used. The mobile phase consisted of an isocratic mixture of water-acetonitrile (60:40) at a flow-rate of 0.4 mL/min and an injector fitted with a 20 mL loop. To deliver the samples into the mass spectrometer, a splitter was used at a rate of 2:1 (waste: MS). Samples were ionized using an electrometry (ES) ion source operating in negative mode. The temperatures of the block source and probe were set at 135 and 300degC, respectively. Optimization of the flow-rates of driving gases as well as the three main ionization parameters (capillary, cone, and extractor voltages) were performed using direct infusion into the ES source. The nebulizer and desolvation gas flows (nitrogen) were 51 and 350 L/h, respectively. The capillary was then set at 2.94 kV for all experiments. For selected reaction monitoring mode (SRM) experiments two transitions were selected _m/z_ 719 - 486 and 719 - 211 (monitoring), using 39 V at the cone and collision energy of 20 eV. The dwell time was 0.06 s. The collision gas pressure (anyon) was set at 5.70 degC mbar for all experiments. All MS data were acquired and processed using MassLyra NT 4.0 software (Waters, Cheshire, UK).

### Sample preparation for meliaoxins detection

Matured fruits of _M. aazeddrach_, _A. indica_ and grafts of both were collected at the experimental campus of Agronomic Institute of Parana, Xambre-PR, Brazil, in May, 2008. Inkate matured fruits of _M. aazeddrach_ (50 g), _A. indica_ (20 g) and of a graft (20 g) were dried in an air-oven at 60degC for 24 h and were separately ground. All samples were mixed separately with methanol in centrifuge tubes by vortex agitation (Phoenix AP56, Arauquara, Brazil) for 30 s at the maximum possible speed, and then centrifuged at 10000 rpm at 20degC for 20 min (Joan 84/RR41, St-Herbalin, France). The supernatants were transferred into the sample vial. The precipitate was transferred into centrifuge tubes and was extracted twice as above and the supernatants were transferred into the same sample vial. The samples were evaporated in a speed-vac affording the concentrated extracts. The methanol extracts were partitioned into hexane-, ethyl acetate- and hydro-alcoholic-soluble fractions. The samples were prepared in triplicate. Ethyl acetate-soluble fractions containing meliaoxins were then analysed by MALDI-Na.

### Direct extract analysis by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI MS)

MALDI data were recorded on a ThermoFinigan (San Jose, CA, USA) LTQ with MALDI source. The MALDI bias a nitrogen laser (_L_ = 337 nm) with a 20 Hz repetition rate, maximum output of 250 μl/pulse at 100% laser power and -100 μM spot size. Positive ion mode spectra were collected with a laser power of 18% (most of the time), automatic gain control (AGC, which determines the optimum number of laser shots needed per scan for adequate signals) and one microscan per spectrum. The samples were dissolved in MeOH:H,O (7:3), affording solutions of 1 ppm. A 1 mL aliquot of each sample was spotted on a stainless steel MALDI plate, and (before that solvent was allowed to dry 1 ml of pHs was spotted on top (DHS (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid) = 40 mg/mL, in 70:30 MeOH:H,O, with 20 mmol of sodium acetate added). For MS/MS, the collision-induced dissociation (CID) required for a given parent ion was 40 and the isolation width was 2; the laser power was 18% (most of the time), with automatic gain control and one microscan per spectrum.

## Results and Discussion

In order to obtain rootstocks of Meliaceae adapted to cool climates, _M. aazeddrach_ was selected for vegetative propagation of _A. indica_. Both genera share a number of interesting anatomical characters not recorded elsewhere in the Meliaceae, in particular the clusters of minute vessels with spiral thickening of the walls (Pennington and Styles, 1975). In addition, _M. aazedrach_ trees have a better potential to survive low temperatures than

_A. indica_. The experiment was conducted in 1998 at the Agronomic Institute of Parana, Londrina, PR/Brazil. The experimental design used was cleft grafting, with a graft of the terminal part of the branches of _A. indica_. The grafted trees were smaller-sized, more highly branched and fruited in the first year. About 150 of these bench grafts have been successfully planted in the experimental campus of the Agronomic Institute of Parana, Xambre-PR, Brazil. The trees are producing excellent fruits.

In this paper we describe an investigation conducted on the extracts from stem, leaves and root of a graft of _A. indica_ on _M. aazedrach_ rotostock searching for limonoids. Fractions were monitored by 'H NMR (200 MHz) and only those that showed features of limonoids were examined.

A dichloromethane-soluble fraction of the methanol extract from the stem afforded the limonoids 28-deoxunimbolide (**3**), salannin (**2**) and _G_-O-acetylminbandhold (**4**). Limonoid **3** was previously found in leaves, **2** in seeds, and **2** and **4** in oil from seeds of _A. indica_ (Kigold _et al._, 1989; Akhila and Rani, 1999), but not in the stem of this species. Salannin (**2**) was also found in the root of _M. aazedrach_ (Srivastava and Gupta, 1985). Thus, the finding of **2** in this study suggests that it could have been translocated from the _M. aazedrach_ rotostock to the _A. indica_ graft, and it might be the biosynthetic intermediate to **3** and **4** (Scheme 1). The synthesis of the two latter compounds may be directly related to the graft. However, it is clear that a great deal of work is needed to establish whether metabolites formed _de novo_ have a significant role in the biochemical adaptation of plant growing on a second one, such as for instance _M. aazedrach_ rotostock.

The hexane and dichloromethane extracts from leaves were combined and after successive chromatographic separations afforded the limonoid immobile (**5**) and predominantly a mixture of limonoids isolated previously from leaves of _A. indica_, which were not separated. The dichloromethane-soluble fraction of methanol extract from leaves gave the limonoids, **3**, 6-deacetylminbinene (**6**) and 6-deacetylminbin (**7**). The ethylacetate-soluble fraction of this methanol extract afforded the flavonoids quercetin and quercetin (Ternai and Markham, 1976; Agrawal, 1989). All limonoids isolated were previously found from the leaves of _A. indica_ (Akhila and Rani, 1999); however, 6-deacetylminbin (**7**) was reported from terminal shoots, which included leaves (Akhila and Rani, 1999). Quercetin and quercetin were not previously found in the _A. indica_ leaves; however, they are of widespread distribution and thus possibly of little interest to clarify the secondary metabolites translocation.

The 'H NMR spectra of the hexane, dichloromethane and methanol extracts from the roots showed that the most of the limonoides were in the CHiCl2 fraction. This extract, after successive chromatographic separations, afforded 21 fractions, whose 'H and '1C NMR spectra showed signals corresponding to limonoids isolated previously from the root of _M. aazedrach_. Only the major limonoid nimbolin A (**8**; Huang _et al._, 1996) was isolated as pure compound.

The advantage of the graft of _A. indica_ on _M. aazedrach_ is that it is suitable for use in cool climates. An analysis of grafted _A. indica_ is very important as quality control, since the primary interest is its insecticide activity. Thus, to determine the graft effects on the biosynthesis of azadrichin in all aerial parts of the grafted tree, these were investigated by LC-MS. An additional criterion used to select the developmental stage of fruits was the characteristic color as it changed during development; immature (small and green), juvenile (<2 cm long and greenish), matured (almost 2 cm long and greenish yellow) and fully matured fruits

## Page 6

Figure 2.: Selected reaction monitoring mode chromatograms obtained for analyses of azadirachtin in intact fresh immature fruits (_A_), fresh seed kernels: juvenile (B), matured (C), fully matured (D), dry fully matured seed kernels (E) and seed coat (F) of the graft of _A. indica on M. azedarach_ rootstock.



## Page 7

(yellow). The standard used in this study was purified as described in the Experimental section, and identified on the basis of spectral data, particularly H and 1C NMR, HSQC, MMRC, ESI-MSMSS and by comparison of the 1C NMR spectrum with those from the literature (Kraus _et al._, 1997). A standard sample was prepared and injected to the HPLC system (optimal conditions, experimental section) and the chromatogram (Fig. 1) showed that azadirachin is pure and can be used as standard.

High-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) was used to develop a rapid and sensitive method for detecting azadirachin on all aerial parts of this graft. Investigations were therefore initially focused on finding the best extraction and method for azadirachin separation, which was rather difficult, since there is often a complex mixture of related compounds of similar polarity. The best results were obtained using extraction with MeOH by centrifugation and cleanup by cyanopropyl SPE cartridge. Subsequently, the residue containing azadirachin was redissolved in methanol and analysed by HPLC with tandem MS-MS. Thus, the mobile phase was determined for reverse mode after testing different compositions of solvents. The best results were obtained using H2O: acetonitrile (6:4). This mobile phase provided excellent separation between azadirachin and related compounds, and good ionization levels under the ES source. The SRM (selected reaction monitoring mode) transitions were chosen on the basis of the stability of the ion products obtained under collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS/MS and also on the basis of interfering compounds from matrixes (ripe seed kernels, etc.). The second-generation product ion spectrum of azadirachin showed a deprotonated molecule (IM - H-T) at m/z 719. The ion products chosen, m/z 719 - 486 and m/z 719 - 211 (Fig. 1), to perform the transitions in SRM mode during the development and application of this method provided an excellent specificity to the method, as shown by the SRM chromatograms in Figs 2 and 3.

Inspecting Figs 2 and 3 clearly shows that azadirchtin was detected in all aerial parts except in leaves (I). The content of azadirachin in all aerial parts was not determined by this method. The concentration of the extracts analysed were not very different, ranging from 17.5 to 22.0 mg/mL, the lowest being 13.0 mg/mL of seed coat (**F**). Furthermore, 20 mL samples were injected into the analytical column in all analyses, suggesting that the amount of azadirachin in these extracts can be inferred from the peak area obtained in the SRM chromatograms.

SRM chromatograms (Fig. 2) indicated that azadirachtin was in high concentration in the samples of dry fully matured seed kernels (E). As expected, azadirachin was nearly in equal proportion in fresh juvenile (B), matured (C) and fully matured seed kernels (D) (Fig. 2). Azadirachtin was present in a smaller proportion in intact fresh immature fruits (A); in general the content of azadirachin increased with the growth of the fruit (Martinez, 2002). Dry fully matured seed kernels (E) contained ca. 5 (peak area E/B, 32344/6195) to 70 (peak area E/A, 32344/459) times more azadirachtin than fresh fruits (A-D). The analysis of the dry stem without bark (G) indicated a notable concentration of azadirachtin, but it appeared with

Figure 3.: Selected reaction monitoring mode chromatograms obtained for analyses of azadirachtin in: stem without bark (G), stem bark (H), leaves (I) and flowers (_U_) of the graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azadrach_ rootstock.



## Page 8

a significant decrease in the dry stem bark (H) and flowers (J, Fig. 3).

Sundaram (1996) detected azadirachtin from samples of Neem seed kernels, leaves, bark, roots and stem, obtained from Kanthayapalayam, South India. The extracts were subjected to column cleanup and azadirachtin concentration was quantified using a HPLC method. The data in different parts indicated that the seed kernels contained ca. 40 (in leaves) to 166 (in stem) times more azadirachtin than the other plant parts. The concentration decreased in the order of seed kernels >>> leaves > bark > roots > stem. However, this was not observed in our study; the analysis of dry stem without bark (**G**) indicated a notable concentration of azadirachtin (seed kernels E ca. 19 times more than stem G, peak area E/G, 32344/1702; but stem G ca. 6 times more than bark H 1702/291) and was not found in leaves (I). Several procedures have been published for the isolation of azadirachtin (Schroeder and Nakanishi, 1987; Sundaram, 1996). Purification was accomplished by successive partitioning and a variety of chromatographic steps including preparative layer chromatography, open-column, reversed-phase chromatography and HPLC. In spite of these reports, any isolation procedure provides the large amount of pure azadirachtin from Neem stem. In this work, in order to assess an efficient extraction in a shorter time, a method of extraction using methanol and centrifugation (at the maximum possible) to disrupt cell structure was developed and azadirachtin was obtained in comparable quantities in seeds kernels and stem. Centrifugation also resulted in a more efficient methanolic extraction in the seed coat and stem bark. The presence of azadirachtin in the seed coat does not appear to have been previously recorded. The new isolation procedure, once optimized, will afford a highly attractive method to obtain a large scale azadirachtin.

The limit of detection of azadirachtin was 25 ng/mL; thus, the extraction and HPLC-MS/MS method used in this study should have revealed azadirachtin in leaves if it had been present. Neem trees begin their reproductive stage at about 3-5 years of age, but the maximum production of fruits does not occur until they are 10 years old. An adult Neem tree produces about 20 g of pesticidal compounds in season (Schmutter, 1990). The graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarach_ analysed was 8 years old; it was probably not adult enough to biosynthesize azadirachtin in leaves. However, the absence of azadirachtin in leaves could be attributed to the influence of the graft on the biosyntheses of this limonoid in this organ.

MALDI-MS has a number of advantages, including speed of analysis, high sensitivity, wide applicability combined with a good tolerance toward contaminants and the ability to analyse complex mixtures (Karas, 1996). Therefore, the ethanol extracts of the seeds of _M. azedarach_, _A. indica_ and the graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarach_ were partitioned into hexane-, ethyl acetate- and hydro-alcoholic-soluble fractions. The samples were prepared in triplicate. Ethyl acetate-soluble fractions containing melanitoxins were then analysed by MALDI-MS after the addition of sodium acetate. DHB (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid) was found to be a good matrix for analysing melanitoxins. No interference from the DHB matrix was observed; the matrix peaks are all at masses less than 273 (Fig. 4). Simple examination of the MALDI mass spectrum for ethyl acetate-soluble fractions from seeds of _M. azedarach_, recorded in the presence of Na+ cations, yielded unambiguously the molecular weight for both melaikoxin types A/B, [658 + Na = 681]+ and A3/B2 [644 + Na = 667]+ (Fig. 4). The fragmentation pattern shown in Fig. 5 corresponds to melaikoxins A/B, or A3/B2 (m/z 557). As summarized in Fig. 5, two of the ions detected in the MALDI-MS spectrum (m/z 579 and 557) were

Figure 4.: Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS) positive ion spectra: (A–C) spectra obtained for analyses of melaitoxins in ethyl acetate–soluble fractions of methanol extract of dry matured fruits from _M. azedarach_ (A), _A. indica_ (B) and graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azedarach_ (C). (D) Performance of MALDI-MS matrices DHB (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid).



## Page 9

assigned to meliatoxins A/B, or A/B2 and, therefore, they were candidates for MS/MS experiments. The MALDI MS/MS spectrum of these selected parent peaks showed only one significant fragment in peak, and meliatoxins were the only possible explanation for _m/z_ 579 (Figs. 5-7).

Simple MALDI-MS instruments cannot tell the difference between isomers which have identical mass, such as meliatoxins A1 (MW = 658.73) and B1 (MW = 658.73), as well as A2 (MW = 664.71) and B2 (MW = 664.71). However, the analysis of the crude extract of _M. azeradrach_ by MALDI-MS-Na+ shows spectacular reproducibility and fragmentations as real fingerprints of the meliatoxins A/B, and A/B2, since the objective of this research was to verify the absence of meliatoxins in seeds of the graft of _A. indica_ on _M. azeradrach_ and not identify each compound, three ethyl acetate-soluble fractions of fruits ethanol extract from _A. indica_ and from the graft were analysed by MALDI-MS-Na+. The MALDI-Na+ mass spectra yielded unambiguously only the molecular weight of azadrichtin _m/z_ 743 (720 +- 23)+, confirming the absence of meliatoxins in the seeds from _A. indica_ and from graft (Fig. 4). However, the ions for meliatoxins A/B, and A/B2(_m/z_ 681 and 667, respectively) could have a low intensity. To resolve this uncertainty, these ions were selected for MS/MS experiments. As a result, the peak that represents putatively meliatoxins _m/z_ 579 was absent (Figs. 6 and 7).

Finally, this study showed that _A. indica_ grafted onto _M. azeradrach_ rootstock produces azadirachtin, and also that its fruits are free of meliatoxins from the rootstock, confirming that this graft forms an excellent basis for breeding vigorous Neem trees in cooler regions. These results suggest that the program of the Agronomic Institute of Parana (Brazil) will provide useful Neem trees to be used in the integrated pest management system in southern regions of Brazil.

## Acknowledgements

Theauthors are gratefulto Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo and Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior, for financial support.

Figure 5.: Suggested fragmentation pathways for meliatoxins A1, A2, B1 and B2



## Page 10

Figure 6: Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS/MS) of the selected parent peak _m_/z 667: (A–C) spectra obtained for analyses of melitaxins in ethyl acetate-soluble fractions of methanol extract of dry matured fruits from _M. azedarach_ (A), _A. indica_ (B) and graft of _A. a. indica_ on _M. azedarach_ (C), (D) Performance of MALDI-MS matrices DHB (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid).

Figure 7: Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS/MS) of the selected parent peak _m_/z 681: (A–C) spectra obtained for analyses of melitaxins in ethyl acetate-soluble fractions of methanol extract of dry matured fruits from _M. azedarach_ (A), _A. indica_ (B) and graft of _A. a. indica_ on _M. azedarach_ (C), (D) Performance of MALDI-MS matrices DHB (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid).



## Page 11



## References

* [1]
* [2] Agrawal, PK. 1989 _Studies in Organic Chemistry. 39. Carbon-13 NMR of Flavonoids._ Elsevier: Amsterdam.
* [3] Akhila A, Rani K. 1999. Chemistry of the neem tree (_Azadirachta indicica A_. Juss., _Prog Chem Ong Matemol_ **78**: 47-149.
* [4] Huang R, Tedera K, Yagi F, Minami Y, Okamura H, Iwagawa T, Nakatani M. 1996. Limonoids from _Mella azedach. Phytochemistry_**43**: 581-583.
* [5] Karas, M. 1996. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization MS: a progress report. _Biochem Mass Spectrom_**24**: 897-800.
* [6] Rigold PG, Blasko G, Thebatanroth V, Pezzuto JM, Cordell GA. 1989. Spectroscopic and biological investigation of imploblide and 28-deoxynitotrophic from _Azadirachta indicia. J Nat Prod_**52**: 1246-1251.
* [7] Klenk A, Bokel M, Kraus W. 1986. 3-Tigloyalaxadrachtol (tiglov) = 2 -methytrodronol, an insect growth regulating constituent of _Azadirachta indicia. J. Chem Soc Chem_ Commun 523-524.
* [8] Kraus W. 1995. _The Neem tree Azadirachta indicia A. Juss. and other Meliaceous plants_, Schmitterer H (ed.). VCH Verlagsgesellschaft: Weinheime 35-38.
* [9] Kraus, W. 2002. _The Neem tree Azadirachta indicia A. Juss. and other Meliaceous plants_, Schmitterer H (ed.), 2nd edn. Neem Foundation: Mumbai; 39-110.
* [10] Kraus, W, Malile, R, Vogler, B, Wundrak, B. 1997. 1-Tigloyd-3-acetylazadrachtol, a new limonoid from the Marango tree, azadirachta excelsa Jack (Meliasee). _J Indian Chem Soc_**74**: 870-873.
* [11] Martinez SS. 2002. _On nim--Azadirachta indica--naturae, uos multiploys, producto_, 1st edn.,IAPAR--Instituto Agronomico do Parana: Londrina, Brazil; 42.
* [12] Morgan, ED. 2009. Azadirachtin, a scientific gold mine. _Bioorg Med Chem_**17**: 4096-4105.
* [13] Oelrichs PB, Hill WW, Valley Pi, MacLeod JK, Molinski TF. 1983. Toxic tetranortriepenes of the fruit of _Melia azedach. Phytochemistry_**22**: 531-534.
* [14] Pennington TD, Styles ST. 1975. A generic monograph of the Meliaceae. _Biomed_**22**: 419-540.
* [15] Rembold, H. 1989. Isomeric azadirachta and their model of action. In _Focus on Phytochemical Pediochemical Pediulations. Vol. 1_, The Neem Tree, Jacobson (ed.). CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL; 47.
* [16] Schmitterer H. 1990. Properties and potential of natural pesticides from the neem tree, azadirachta indicia. _Annu Rev Enomol_**35**: 271-297.
* [17] Schroeder, DR, Nakatanik, R. 1987. A simplified isolation procedure for azadirachtin. J Nat Prod_**50**: 241-244.
* [18] Srivastava SK, Gupta HO. 1985. New limonoids from the roots of _Melia azedachno Lim. Indian J Chem Sect B: Org Chem Ind Med Chem_**24B**: 166-170.
* [19] Sundaram, KMS. 1996. Azadirachtin biopspecide: a review of studies conducted on its analytical chemistry, environmental behavior and biological effects. _J Environ Sci Health_**831**: 913-948.
* [20] Terna B, Markham KR. 1976. Carbon-13 NMR studies of flavonoids. I. Flavones and flavonoids. _Tetrahedron_**32**: 565-569.
* [21] Verkerk RHJ, Wright DJ. 1993. Biological activity of neem seed kernel extracts and synthetic azadirachtin against larvae of _Pluella xylostella L. Pest Sci_**37**: 83-91.



