# 10.1016@0031-9422(81)84071-X.pdf

## Page 1



# Neoligans from _Licaria Rigida_+
Footnote †: Part LXIII in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Lauraceae”. For Part LXII—see ref. [1]. Based on part of the M.S. thesis submitted by M.G. de C. to Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro (1980).

Raimundo Braz Fo

Mario G. de Carvalho

Otto R. Guttlieb

J. Guilherme S. Maia

Miriam L. da Silva

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, 23460 Seropedica, RJ, Brazil; 1 Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05508 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil; $Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, 69000 Manaus, AM, Brazil

###### Abstract

Trunk wood of _Licaria rigida_ contains the neoligans eusidcrin, eusidcrin-B, cancellin-A and cancellin-C.

Trunk wood of _Licaria rigida_ Kosterm. (Lauraceae), collected at the Ducke Forest Reserve, near Manaus, Amazonas State, contains besides sitosterol, the neoligans (for nomenclature see [2]) eusidcrin (**1a**), eusidcrin-B (**1b**), cancellin-A (**2a**) and cancellin-C (**2b**). Eusidcrin-B has not yet been found in any other plant, while **1a** is known to occur in species of the genera _Aniba_, _Eusidercxylon_, _Licaria_ (Lauraceae) [2] and _Virola_ (Myristiaceae) [3]. The cancellins were isolated originally from another _Licaria_ species [4].

The structural relationship between 1a [C1_H1_O2_O2CH2_A] and 1b [C1_H2_S_O2_O2CH2_O2CH2_S_O2CH2_S_O2CH2_S_O2CH2_S_O2CH2_S_] was easily established by 1H and 1C NMR (Table 1) as well as mass spectral comparisons. A report on the sole question which is not trivial, namely the choice between the natural benzodixane types I and the unnatural analogue 3, has appeared previously [5].

## Experimental

_Isolation of constituents._ A specimen of _L. rigida_ from the Ducke Forest Reserve, near Manaus, AM, was identified by Prof. K. Kubitzki, Hamburg University. Voucher: Herbarium INPA, Manaus, 43576. A trunk wood sample, reduced to powder (8.5 kg), was percolated with C6H6 at room temp. A powder mixture of extract (100g) and Si gel (150g) was washed successively with C6H6 and CHCl2. Evaporation of the C6H6 soln gave a product (16 g) which was chromatographed on Si gel (500 g). Elution was performed initially with C6H6 and then with solvent mixtures of gradually increasing polarity. Evaporation of the cluates (150 ml each) gave 344 fractions. Fractions 1-12 were composed of aliphatic material. Fractions 13-33 were purified by re-chromatography and crystallization from petrol to give 1b (1.5 g). TLC (Si gel) of fractions 34-72 gave a mixture of 1b and siostered (0.1 g). Fractions 73-110 were purified by re-chromatography and crystallization from MeOH to yield sitosterol (2.5 g). TLC (Si gel) of fractions 111-192 gave 1a (0.4 g). No pure compounds were isolated from later fractions. Evaporation of the CHCl2 soln gave a product (34 g) which was chromatographed on Si gel (330 g). Elution, initially with CHCl2

## Page 2

and then with solvent mixtures of gradually increasing polarity, gave mixtures of **2a** and **2b** (1 g) from which small quantities of the pure compounds were separated by TLC.

_Identification_ of known compounds **1a** [8], **2a** and **2b** [4] were performed by direct comparison with authentic samples.

rel-(7S,8R)-_A__S_'-3,4-_Methylenedioxy-5'-methoxy_-7.O.3',8.O.4'-_neolignan_ (**1b**). Colourless crystals, mp 82-84deg (petrol) (Found : C, 70.81; H, 6.02. C20H20O5 requires: C, 70.60; H, 5.88%). \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{EROM}}\) nm: 240, 283 (_a_ 7250, 4300). \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{EROM}}\) cm-1: 1600, 1500, 1450, 1350, 1320, 1250, 1200, 1150, 1120, 950, 930, 740. MS _m_/zel. int.): 340 (28) M+, 298 (2), 205 (5), 191 (9), 178 (5), 162 (100), 150 (5), 135 (7), 121 (7).

###### Acknowledgements.

We wish to thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico for fellowships (to R.B. Fo. and M.G. de C) and for financial aid, and Dr. Paul M. Baker, NPPN, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, for spectra.

## References

- Alegrio, L. V., Braz Fo., R., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1981) _Phytochemistry_**20**, 1963.
- Gottlieb, O. R. (1978) _Progr. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod._**35**, 1.
- Fernandes, J. B., Ribeiro, M. N. de S., Gottlieb, O. R. and Gottlieb, H. E. (1980) _Phytochemistry_**19**, 1523.
- Giesbrecht, A. M., Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R. and Rocha, A. I. da (1974) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 2285.
- Braz Fo., Mouro, J. C., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1976) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 1157.
- Gottlieb, O. R., Maia, J. G. S. and Mourao, J. C. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1289.
- Wenkert, E., Gottlieb, H. E., Gottlieb, O. R., Pereira, M. O. da S. and Formiga, M. D. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1547.
- Hobbs, J. J. and King, F. E. (1960) _J. Chem. Soc._**4732.



