# 10.1016@j.tetlet.2008.06.124.pdf

## Page 1

New quinolizidine and diaxa-adamantane alkaloids from _Acosniium dasycarpump_ (Vog.) Yakovlev-Fabaceae

Tania Cecilia Trevisan, Eliane A. Silva, Evandro Luiz Dall'Oglio, Luiz Everson da Silva, Eudes da Silva Velozo, Paulo Cezar Vieira, Paulo Teixeira de Sousa Jr.

# Abstract

The phytochemical investigation of the methanol crude extract obtained from _Accosniium dasycarpump_ (Vog.) Yakovlev root bark led to the isolation of the quinolizidine alkaloids lupanine, acosmine, acosmine and lupanacosmine, as well as the diza-adamantane alkaloids panacosmine and dasycarpumine. Lupanacosmine (**4**) and dasycarpumine (**6**) have been described for the first time herein.

## Introduction

_Accosniium dasycarpump_ (Vog.) Yakovlev [1, 2, 3] occurs predominantly at the Brazilian savannahs (the 'Cerrados') [3, 4] being locally known as perobinha, chapada, pau partatudo, or unha d'anta [4, 5, 6]. The tea prepared from the root bark of this species has been described in the first edition of the Brazilian Pharmacopoeia as a sedative. In folk medicine, the stem and root era preparation have been used to treat inflammation, skin diseases, and disturbances from central nervous and cardio-vascular systems [7, 8, 9, 10]. Quinolizidine alkaloids (QAs) are secondary compounds found in seeds of many species of plants, possibly protecting them against pathogens and seed predators. Structural, spectroscopic and computational studies on both natural and synthetic quinolizidines are also reported regularly and have shown to be an important class of alkaloid with biological significance [11]. Studies on the biological activity of compounds containing azabicyclic building blocks (_e.g._, rigid bicyclic peptidomimetics) are gaining momentum because this class is attractive as nematicidal and has shown to be especially active at the muscarinic receptor, enhancing insulin secretion and also presenting diuretic properties [12]. On the other hand, daza-adamantane skeleton was firstly encountered in a natural product, isolated from the seeds of _Acosniium panamene_[1]. This class of compounds is uncommon, but due to the high pharmacological activities it has recently drawn great attention in folk medicine research [13].

Aiming the isolation and identification of bioactive substances, we have isolated several alkaloids during the conventional chromatographic fractioning of the methanol crude extract from the root bark of _A. dasycarpum_. The alkaloids lupanine **1**, acosmine **2**, acosmine **3**, and panacosmine **5** have been previously reported in _Accosniium_[1, 14]. However, the alkaloids lupanacosmine **4** and dasycarpumine **6** have been described for the first time herein. _Accosniium dasycarpum_ aerial roots were collected at Chapada dos Guimaraes, state of Mato Grosso, Brazil and identified by Dr. M. Macedo (Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso-UFMT). Voucher specimens numbered 24079 (01/02/2000) were deposited at UFMT Central Herbarium. The dried root barts (3.3 kg) were sequentially extracted with hexane (3 L) and methanol (5 L). A portion (55.0 $) of the crude methanol extract (EBMeOH) dissolved in methanol (200 mL) was acidified with 10% acetic acid (pH 2.5-3.0), extracted with CHCl3 (3 x 50 mL) and alkalinized with NH4OH (pH 8.9-9.0), affording the alkaloids fraction FA-I (5.5 g; 9.98%). FA-I was submitted to column chromatography, affording compound **6** (11.5 mg: 0.02%). Compound **1** (3.3 mg: 0.006%) was obtained after HPLC purification [15]. Another EBMeOH option (150.0 g) was acidified with 5% HCl (pH 2.5-3.0), extracted with ethyl ether (4 x 50 mL) and alkalinized with 28% NH4OH (pH 8.5-9.0), affording the alkaloids fraction FA-II (3.8 g; 2.53%). Preparative thin-layer chromatography carried out on FA-II led to the isolation of **2** (15.3 mg: 0.01%), **3** (21.2 mg: 0.14%), **4** (56.4 mg: 0.04%), **16** and **5** (8.1 mg: 0.01%). 17 Compound **1** has shown, in its IR spectrum, typical amide absorption at 1620 cm-1. This absorption is coherent with the 13C NMR signal at \(d\) 172.0. These and the other spectral 

## Page 2

data obtained for compound **1** were fully consistent with the literature description for the quinolizidine alkaloid lquanine.[12, 14, 18] Mass spectra for compound **2** has shown an odd molecular ion [M\({}^{+}\)] at 357, pointing out to the presence of an odd number of nitrogen atoms in its structure. The DEPT experiment has presented a methionic signal at \(\delta\) 70.9. Therefore in comparison with compound **1**, compound **2** must have a substituent at C-10. The absence of an amide carbonyl group at C-2, as well as the evidences for the presence of the substituent at C-10, could be demonstrated from the HIMBC data, correlating H-10 (\(\delta\) 2.36) to C-2 (\(\delta\) 52.9) C-8 (\(\delta\) 27.9). C-9 (\(\delta\) 37.3). C-11 (\(\delta\) 60.8), C-18 (\(\delta\) 117.4), C-19 (\(\delta\) 24.7), and C-23 (\(\delta\) 123.0) (Fig. 1A; Table 2). In the same experiment, the correlation of H-23 (\(\delta\) 66.7/2.77). D to C-10 (\(\delta\) 70.9), C-19 (\(\delta\) 24.7) and C-21 (\(\delta\) 40.4) (Fig. 1B; Table 2) and the correlation of H-25 (\(\delta\) 2.20/2.15) to C-23 (\(\delta\) 123.0/122.0) and C-24 (\(\delta\) 168.0) (Table 2) has also been observed. The coupling of H-23 (\(\delta\) 6.67/ 2.15) to C-23 (\(\delta\) 123.0/122.0) has been shown by the COSY and HSQC experiments. HIMBC experiments has shown that the methyl C-25 (\(\delta\) 2.20/7.27) correlates to C-24 (\(\delta\) 168.0) and C-23 (\(\delta\) 123.0/122.0), confirming the presence of an acetylamide portion at the substituent (Fig. 1B). Restricted rotation around C-N bond at the acetylamide moiety has caused the doubling of \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals at C-23 and C-25 (Table 2). The same has been observed in \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra, at positions H-23 and H-25, as previously observed in the literature.[1, 14] The stereochemistry of the substituent at C-10 in compound **2** has been demonstrated to be equatorial, as it could be seen by the coupling of H-8\({}_{\rm{ax}}\) with H-10\({}_{\rm{ax}}\) in the COSY experiment (Table 2). These data are fully supportive of structure **2**, previously reported by the literature.[14] However, literature \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data have shown the following attribution to C-6 (\(\delta\) 57.9), C-7 (\(\delta\) 37.1), C-9 (\(\delta\) 44.8), C-11 (\(\delta\) 67.6), C-19 (\(\delta\) 33.3), and C-20 (\(\delta\) 25.7).[14] These data are not consistent with the ones we have

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l} \hline \hline H & \(A_{\rm H}\) & COSY/HSQC & HIMBC & C \\ \hline H\({}_{2}\) & H\({}_{2\infty}\) - 1.59 & H\({}_{2\infty}\), H\({}_{6}\) & n.o. & 54.6 \\ H\({}_{2}\) - 3.32 & H\({}_{2\infty}\) & \({}_{2\infty}\) & \({}_{2}^{\dagger}\) C\({}_{6}\) & \\ H\({}_{3}\) & 1.53 & n.o. & n.o. & 26.2 \\ H\({}_

## Page 3

observed, namely at C-6 (\(\delta\) 67.5), C-7 (\(\delta\) 33.0), C-9 (\(\delta\) 37.3), C-11 (\(\delta\) 60.8), C-19 (\(\delta\) 24.7), and C-20 (\(\delta\) 21.6). Our attribution can be considered more reliable, however, since it was based in 2-D experiments, not available at the time of the previous literature report. The spectral data for compound **3** were similar to those observed for **2**, except for ring **D**. Mass spectrum for compound **3** has shown a molecular ion at m/z 373, sixteen units higher than compound **2**, suggesting the presence of a hydroxyl group. Further evidence for the presence of this group was observed by the IR absorption at 3393 cm\({}^{-1}\), by DEPT experiment showing a carbon ionic signal at \(\delta\) 68.6 and by the shifting of C-12 and C-14 \({}^{13}\)C NMR signal from \(\delta\) 34.3 to \(\delta\) 42.9 and from \(\delta\) 25.7 to \(\delta\) 34.2, respectively (Table 1). The \(\gamma\)-gauche effect observed by analyzing C-11 and C-15 \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals of compound **3**, when compared to the equivalent signals in **2** (Table 1), has shown that the hydroxyl group is in an axial position. These data were consistent with the literature structure for the alkaloid acosmine.14 Typically, quinolizidine alkaloids \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra show poorly resolved signals at the region \(\delta\) 3.75-1.25. The presence of two methyl groups, attached to electronegative atoms, at \(\delta\) 2.24 and \(\delta\) 2.18, however, could be observed in \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra from **4**, differing from compound **3** by presenting an extra methyl group. Olefinic hydrogens were evidenced by the multiplet centered at \(\delta\) 5.57 and the double duplet at \(\delta\) 5.02 at \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra.1 The respective olefinic carbons could be observed in \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra at \(\delta\) 136.1 and \(\delta\) 116.3, relating to tri-substituted (=CH-) and bi-substituted (=CH2) carbons, respectively, according to the DEPT spectra. The analysis of the HMRC spectra analysis has shown that the methyl hydrogen H-15 (\(\delta\) 2.24) correlated to C-11 (\(\delta\) 59.3) and C-17 (\(\delta\) 50.9), showing that this methyl group is bonded to the nitrogen atom at ring C in compound **4**. H-12 (\(\delta\) 2.16) methylene hydrogen correlation to C-9 (\(\delta\) 34.3) and C-11 (\(\delta\) 59.3) as well as the allylic group C-13 (\(\delta\) 136.1) and C-14 (\(\delta\) 116.3) (Table 3) has also been observed. COSY spectrum has shown H-6 and H-2x coupling with each other, as well as the coupling of H-2x with H-2y and H-6, suggesting a chair conformation to ring **A** in compound **4** (Fig. 2). The non-observation of H-10 coupling to H-8 indicates that the acetylamide group is in an equatorial position. This equatorial stereochemistry was further confirmed by the correlation of H-9 with axial H-10 and H-9 with H-8x and H-8y, with small \(J\) values, justifying the observed H-9 large singlet. The diaza-adamantane alkaloid **5**, namely panacosmine, has been previously described in the literature1 and the spectral data (\({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H NMR, IR and high resolution MS) are fully consistent with the ones we have obtained.17 The newly described compound **6** spectral data19 were compared with the related

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l} \hline Position & \(s_{\rm H}\) & HMRC & C \\ \hline H\({}_{3}\) & 5.06 & \({}^{1}\)C\({}_{5}\) & 116.7 \\ H\({}_{4}\) & 5.65 (1H, m) & \({}^{1}\)C\({}_{5}\) & 134.6 \\ H\({}_{5}\) & 2.54 (2H, m) & \({}^{1}\)C\({}_{4,}\)\({}^{1}\)C\({

## Page 4

compound **7**.1 Heteronuclear HMBC spectra have shown H-15 (\(\delta\) 5.73) and H-16 (\(\delta\) 5.08) coupling to C-14 (\(\delta\) 35.5), as well as H-14 (\(\delta\) 2.54) coupling to C-11 (\(\delta\) 52.8), C-15 (\(\delta\) 135.6), and C-16 (\(\delta\) 117.2) (Table 4), demonstrating, therefore, that this allylic group is bonded to C-11, in accordance with compound **7** reported data.1 Compound **6**13C and 1H NMR spectra have shown, in addition, signals at \(\delta\) 35.0, \(\delta\) 134.6, \(\delta\) 116.7 and a multiplet at \(\delta\) 5.65, respectively, demonstrating the presence of a second allylic portion. HMBC correlations from H-3 (\(\delta\) 5.06) to C-5 (\(\delta\) 35.0), from H-4 (\(\delta\) 5.65) to C-5 (\(\delta\) 35.0) and from H-5 (\(\delta\) 2.54) to C-4 (\(\delta\) 134.6), C-3 (116.7), C-6 (\(\delta\) 64.6) and C-7 (\(\delta\) 24.9) (Table 4) placed this second allylic group at C-6.

## Acknowledgement

We wish to thank FAPEMAT, CAPES, CNPq, and CPP for financial support.

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.tettet.2008.06.124.

## References

* (1) (a) Nuzillard, J. M.; Connolly, J. D.; Delaude, C.; Richard, B.; Zdches-Anrot, M.; Men-Oliver, I. Tetrahedron **1999**, 5, 11511-11518; (b) Connolly, J. D. Pure Appl. Chem. **2001**, 7567-7571; (c) Michael, J. P. Nat. Prod. Rep. **2004**, 21, 625-649.
* (2) Ricker, M.; Daly, O. C.; Veen, G.; Robbins, E. F.; Sinta, M.; Chota, J.; Cygan, F. C.; Ringhorn, A. D. Britration **1999**, 57, 44-43.
* (3) Bridgewater, S. G.; M.; Striton, C. H. _Kew Bull._**1997**, 52, 471-475.
* (4) Lorenzi, H.; Arvores brasileiaran: michael de identificacao e cultivo de plantas arbores de Brasil; Plantarum, 2nd ed. 1998.
* (5) Rodrigues, A. A. G. Ph.D. Thesis. Instituto de Biociencias da Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, 1996.
* (6) Lewis, G. P. _Lepunes of Babila_. Royal Botanic Garden, Kew, 1987.
* (7) Silva, V. N. T.; Oliveira, F. M.; Conserva, L. M. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2001**, 29, 1189-1192.
* (8) Veliera, R. A.; Lapa, A. J.; Lima, T. C. M. _Simposio de Plantas Medicina do Brasil, XVI_. Recife, 2000.
* (9) Mafapour, P., Ph.D. Thesis, Escola Paulista de Medicina, 1990.
* (10) Rocha, R. F. M.S.Cb Dissertation, Escola Paulista de Medicina, 1984.
* (11) Daly, J. W.; Carraffo, H. M.; Spande, T. F. In _Allakolids: Chemical and Biological Perspectives_; Pelletier, S. W., Ed.; Pergamon: New York, 1999; Vol. 13, pp 1-161.
* (12) (a) Michael, J. P. _Nat. Prod. Rep._**2001**, 18, 520-542; (b) Michael, J. P. In _The Alkaloids_; Cordell, G. A., Ed.; Academic Press: New York, 2001; Vol. 55, pp 91-258.
* (13) Spasov, A. A.; Khamidova, T. V.; Bugaeva, L. I.; Morozov, I. S. _Pharm. Chem. J._**2000**, 34, 39-4.
* (14) Balandrin, M. F. Ph.D Thesis, University of Illinois, 1982; (b) Andrade-Ceto, A.; Wiedenfeld, H. J. _Ethnombarrocod._**2004**, 90, 217-220.
* (15) (a) HPLC analysis was done with the help of SHMAD2U-LC8A-Preparative Liquid Chromatograph equipment, with preparative column (CS310-2G SHODEX SAKHPAHPA), 5 ml/min, Inc 15 8/6m/m pressure, methanol as eluent and UV-280 nm detector. Column chromatography was performed on MERCK*silica gel 60 (63-230 um; Art. 7734), Cl4Cl2NH4OH 28K (500:1) as eluent system, increasing the polarity with methanol. Preparative thin-layer chromatography experiments were carried out using MERCK*silica gel 62x (Art. TA 260949-835) with hexane-diethylamine (9:1) as eluent system. UV light at 365 and 254 nm and Dragonfly reagent were used to visualize the chromatographic elution.
* (16) Lupomacomacomac = Brown, oil \(x\)25 = 26 (Mott: C: 0.5), H (Nicol film) : \(\gamma\) = 2930, 2857, 1646 (C-0), 1498, 1259, 990, 752 cm\({}^{-1}\). In NMR (400 40 MHz, ClClCl): \(\delta\) 1.33, 1.37, 1.53, 1.59, 1.60, 1.66, 1.79, 1.83, 1.85, 1.97, 2.04, 2.16, 2.18 (3H, s)

