# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2013.09.022.pdf

## Page 1



# Unusual biotransformation products of the sesquiterpene lactone budlein A by Aspergillus species

Nilton Syogo Arakawa, Leonardo Gobbo-Neto, Sergio Ricardo Ambrosio, Gilmara Ausech Antonucci, Suely Vilela Sampaio, Monica Tallarico Pupo, Suraia Said, Thomas J. Schmidt, Fernando Batista Da Costa

# Abstract

Biotransformation of chemicals by microorganisms can be effective in increasing chemical diversity. Some fungi have been described to be useful for the biotransformation of sesquiterpene lactones. Nevertheless, in most cases, only minor or simple transformations of functional groups have been observed. Budden A is a sesquiterpene lactone found in high amounts in American sunflower-like species of the genus _Viguiera_ (Asteraceae). It shows important biological effects like _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ anti-inflammatory activity, as well as cytotoxicity against cancer cell lines. With the aim to obtain potentially bioactive derivatives of budlein A and taking into account that obtaining semi-synthetic analogues is a very complex task, the capability of soil fungi to promote biotransformation was investigated. In this work, the biotransformation of budlein A by the soil fungi _Apergillus terreus_ and _A niger_ affording three unusual sesquiterpenoid derivatives with carbon skeletons is reported. The chemical structures of the compounds were elucidated by 1D and 2D MMR spectrometry and HR-ESI-MS. The stereochemistry and molecular conformation of one derivative was assessed by molecular modeling techniques. The fungal metabolites displayed a reduced cytotoxicity against HL-60 cells when compared to the original natural product. The results show the versatility of microbial-catalyzed biotransformations leading to unusual derivatives.

## 1 Introduction

Sesquierpene lactones (SLs) have been isolated from numerous genera of the family Asteraceae. Besides their relevance as chemotaxonomic markers (Da Costa et al., 2005; Seaman, 1982), they show a wide range of biological activities, especially anti-inflammatory (Garcia-Pileres et al., 2001; Hehner et al., 1999; Lyss et al., 1997; Merfort, 2011; Schorr et al., 2002) and cytotoxic potential against tumor cell lines (Lee et al., 1971; Merfort, 2011; Schmidt, 2006). Since the pioneering work of Kupchan and co-workers (1971), the structural requirements of SLs to exert cytotoxicity have been further analyzed in detail (Schmidt and Heilmann, 2002) and discussed in many instances (Schmidt, 1999, 2006). A general mechanism explaining how SLs with a,b-unsaturated elements such as a-methylene-g-lactones, esters or cyclopentenones react with biological targets has been proposed (Schmidt, 1999). These structural elements preferably react with sulfhydryl groups of proteins by a Michael-type addition, thus exerting their biological effect (Kupchan et al., 1971; Lee et al., 1971; Schmidt, 1997, 1999, 2006).

Budden A (**1**) is a SL that was first isolated from the leaves of _Viguiera buddleijforms_ Benth. & Hookf. ex Hemsl. (Romo de Vivar et al., 1976). In the last years, aerial parts of Brazilian species of _Viguiera_ were found to contain this compound in high amounts (Arakawa et al., 2008; Da Costa et al., 2001). Budden A (**1**) shows potent _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ anti-inflammatory effect as well as cytotoxic activity against tumor cell lines. For example, it was shown that budlein A (**1**) inhibits the activity of transcription factor NF-kB (Siedle et al., 2004), inhibits the human neutrophil elastase (Arakawa et al., 2008), is a potent _in vivo_ inhibitor of LPS-induced leucocyte accumulation (Nicolete et al., 2009) and shows _in vivo_ antinociceptive activity (Valerio et al., 2007). It also presents cytotoxicity in vitro against human lung cancer (A549) and mouse melanoma cells (B16/BLG) (Taylor et al., 2008), _in vitro_ activity over

## Page 2

human epidermal carcinoma (KB and KB-VI) and murine leukemia (P388) (Villarreal et al., 1994) as well as human laryngeal carcinoma (HEp-2) and murine connective tissue cultures (Roche et al., 1979). Budlein A (**1**) also showed anticancer activity _in vivo_ over 3T3 mouse fibroblasts and 3T3 cells transfected with the 3T3/HER2 oncogene (Taylor et al., 2008).

Biotransformation employing cultured microorganisms can be used to perform chemical reactions in which the starting compounds and their products are of comparable chemical complexity (Choudhary et al., 2006). Microbial transformations can be considered "green chemistry" for their ecologically viable technology using mild conditions such as aqueous medium, moderate pH and low temperature (Vezina, 1987). Such transformations have recently been used for different purposes. For example, they can be used to modify chemical structures of biologically active products (Zhang et al., 2011), to prepare products which are difficult to obtain by conventional chemical methods (Adelin et al., 2012), to study the metabolism of xenobiotics (Abourashed et al., 1999) as well as to develop structure-activity relationship (SAR) models (Zhang et al., 2007).

Microorganisms such as fungi are multi-enzyme systems that can perform a wide variety of chemical transformations of different types of starting materials. Therefore, these organisms are an efficient and cost-effective alternative to obtain interesting compounds. Up to now, several microbial transformations of SLs by fungi have been reported (Galal et al., 1999; Kumari et al., 2003; Lamare and Furstoss, 1990; Parshikov et al., 2006; Rocha et al., 2012). The main enzymatic reactions of SLs catalyzed by _Aspergillus_ species are simple hydrogenations, hydroxylation, acetylations and reductions. Nevertheless, the biotransformation of the helianisolide tagitinin C by _Aspergillus terreus_ was recently reported where unusual chemical reactions took place to yield a rare bioactive derivative (Rocha et al., 2012). It involved epoxidation, methylation and ring formation through ether formation. Thus, the potential of _Aspergillus_ species could be better explored using other SLs as starting materials.

Based on the potential of microorganisms to generate new and biologically active derivatives, the capability of soil fungi to promote biotransformation of the SL budlein A (**1**) was investigated in order to obtain new potentially bioactive derivatives and, if possible, to study their structure-activity relationships. Herein, the isolation of three novel and unusual terpene derivatives is reported whose _in vitro_ activities against HL-60 breast cancer cells were compared to that of the parent compound, budlein A (**1**).

## Results and discussion

The biotransformation of budlein A (**1**) by _A. terreus_ afforded two structurally related compounds (**2** and **3**) while _A. niger_ afforded compound **4**, all of which represent very unusual structures not described as natural products up to present (Fig. 1).

Compound **2** (3 mg) was obtained as a yellow and amorphous solid. Its molecular formula is C17H22O6 as determined by HRESI-MS data (_m_/_z_ [M+H]+ = 323.1506; calcd. for C17H23O6: 323.1489), thus establishing the loss of three carbon atoms when compared with the elemental formula of **1** (C26H2O6). The \({}^{13}\)C NMR, HMQC and HMQC spectra of **2** confirmed the presence of 17 carbon atoms, including 3 -CH3, 3 -CH2-, 5 -CH- and 6 quaternary carbons. The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Table 1) showed signals similar to those of budlein A (**1**) which were assigned based on direct comparison (for \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectroscopic data of **1**, see Experimental). However, as a major difference to **1**, compound **2** did not display the typical resonances for the carbons of the a-methylenedi-\(\gamma\)-lactone moiety, indicating that a major change in the structure had occurred in this part of the molecule, probably by loss of the C-11(13), C-12 fragment.

The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum showed signals for 20 protons, including the three methyl groups. One methyl resonance was assigned to C-14 (\(\delta\) 1.33, \(s\)) as confirmed by its correlation with the signal at \(\delta\) 19.7 in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum observed in the HMQC experiment (Table 1). In the same way, the other two methyl groups together with the typical double quadruplet of H-3' at \(\delta\) 6.17 (\(\int\)\(\leq\) 1.0 and 7.2 Hz) were assigned to H-4' and H-5' (\(\delta\) 2.01, _brs_, and 1.86, _brs_, respectively) of an angelate moiety, therefore indicating that the C-8 side-chain ester of **1** was not modified by _A. terreus_. These data were also confirmed by COSY as well as HMQC spectroscopic data (Table 1).

Of the remaining ten proton resonances, seven were assigned as follows. Based on the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectroscopic data of **1**, the signal of an olefinic hydrogen at \(\delta\) 5.91 (\(s\)) in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **2** was assigned to H-5. COSY spectral data showed that this resonance is correlated with the two doublets at \(\delta\) 4.43 and 4.31 (\(J\) = 14.3 Hz) of a -CH2OH group, which were assigned to H-15, and also to a -CH-O- signal at \(\delta\) 4.23 (\(d\), \(J\) = 8.7 Hz) that corresponds to H-6. This latter resonance was correlated with a double doublet at \(\delta\) 2.49 that was assigned H-7. Finally, the signal at \(\delta\) 5.37 which was correlated with the typical double doublets of H-9 at \(\delta\) 2.03 (\(J\) = 4.2 and 15.1 Hz) and \(\delta\) 1.98 (\(J\) = 1.9 and 15.1 Hz) as well as to the above mentioned resonance of H-7 was assigned to H-8. These assignments were in accordance with \({}^{13}\)C NMR, HMQC as well as HMQC data (Table 1).

It should be mentioned that the signal of H-7 is shifted upfield by 1.25 ppm in comparison with the corresponding resonance of budlein A (**1**), which appears as a complex multiplet at \(\delta\) 3.74. This relative abnormal downfield shift of H-7 in **1** is due to its proximity to the oxygen atom between C-10 and C-3 (Romo de Vivar et al., 1976), situation which also occurs in closely related compounds containing a vinyl-3(2H)-furanone and a lactone ring in the cyclo-decadienone ring (Le Quesne et al., 1982).

In agreement with the lack of the a-methylene-\(\gamma\)-lactone moiety already mentioned above, the typical signals of H-13a/H-13b of the a,b-unsaturated exocyclic methylene moiety at the \(\gamma\)-lactone ring, which are usually coupled to H-7, were not observed in the \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectra of **2**. Thus, it was clearly shown that the structure of compound **2** lacked the lactone ring, which explains the upfield shift of the H-7 signal (\(\delta\) 2.49) as well as its appearance as a double doublet (\(J\) = 3.3 and 8.7 Hz) only coupled to H-6 and H-8. Quite noteworthy, H-7 - besides its usual correlation with C-6 in the HMBC spectrum - also showed a correlation with C-3 (\(\delta\) 84.5) as well as a methylene signal at \(\delta\) 42.2, which could be assigned to C-2, since its proton signals (\(d\), \(\delta\) 2.53 and 2.58, \(J\) = 17.9 Hz) showed correlations with C-1 (\(\delta\) 212.8) as well as C-7 (Fig. 2). This pattern of correlations can only be explained by the formation of a new five-membered ring in which C-7 and C-3 are directly connected with each other. Furthermore, during this cyclization, the C-2/C-3 double bond of **1** must have been lost (Fig. 1). In conclusion, the biotransformed product **2** still contained the ten-membered ring and most substituents and functionalities of **1**. It is thus proposed that this undescribed natural ring skeleton is formed as follows. First, the C-11/C-13 double bond of **1** is oxidized to a diol (Fig. 3). This step is supported by a similar reaction that has been recently demonstrated by biomimetic detoxification oxidative reactions (like phase 1 metabolism) and _in vivo_ models where the oxidation of double bounds in linear chains and in quinone systems affords diols (Niehues et al., 2012). Considering a similar physiological process occurring at the C-11/C-13 double bond of **1**, a sequential proton loss from the hydroxyl group at C-11 may result in a carbonium intermediate at C-7 that in turn attacks C-3 (e.g. by Michael-type addition) by a concerted reaction mechanism, therefore forming the new skeleton. Finally, the loss of a carboxylic 

## Page 3

acid moiety through an ester hydrolysis mechanism renders the final metabolites **2** or **3** as depicted in Fig. 3. This proposed pathway also takes into account the preservation of the stereochemistry at C-6 and C-7 of **2** during the reactions.

The relative stereochemistry of **2** was proposed by correlation of the vicinal \({}^{1}\)H,\({}^{1}\)H-coupling constants (Table 1) with those obtained for eight possible stereoisomers of **2** by molecular modeling simulations. Theoretically, a compound with five asymmetric centers can form 25 stereoisomers. In case of **2**, C-3 and C-10, due to their connection within the spirocylic system, must both have the same absolute configuration, i.e. both are either \(R\) or \(S\) configured. Hence, only 16 stereoisomers, representing 8 enantiomeric pairs, are possible, so that only eight different configurations had to be taken into consideration. Thoroughly optimized structural models for each stereoisomer were obtained by low-mode molecular dynamics conformational search (LMD-method as implemented in MOE, Chemical Computing Group, 2011) and subsequent energy minimization of the lowest energy conformer using the AMI Hamiltonian (Dewar et al., 1985). For each optimized structure, the \({}^{3}\)J values for H-6, H-7, H-8 and H-9 were

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l} \hline Pos. & \(\delta_{\rm H}\) (\(\int\) ln Hz) & \({}^{1}\)H,\({}^{1}\)H-COSY & \(\

## Page 4

calculated by the method proposed by Haasnoot et al. (1980) and implemented in the modeling program PCmodel (v. 9.2). These calculated values were compared with the experimental data. Of the eight stereoisomeric models (for a full list of calculated values, see Supplementary data), only the 3\(R\),_GR_,_TR_,_BR_,10R form (see Fig. 4) showed an excellent agreement with respect to all diagnostically important coupling constants; this would - by definition - also hold true for the all-S-enantiomer. Due to the fact that the absolute configuration of budlein A (1) at C-6, C-8 and C-10 is \(R\) (in agreement with Herz and Goedken, 1982), it is proposed that the natural product **2** indeed represents the all-_R_-enantiomer as depicted in Figs. 1 and 4.

It should be mentioned that the minimized 3D structure of **1** shows that H-7 is indeed very close to the oxygen atom of the C-3,C-10 ether bridge (distance = 2.11 A), while H-7 of **2** is positioned farther away (3.82 A). Such distances confirm the already mentioned differences observed in the chemical shifts of H-7 of **1** and **2** in their respective \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra. Moreover, the 3D structure of **2** also explains the presence of the two separated doublets for each H-15 (instead the 2H broad singlet of **1**) in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **2** due to the formation of an intramolecular hydrogen-bond with the oxygen atom of the C-3,C-10 ether bridge (see Fig. S1, Supplementary data).

The HR-ESI-MS data of compound **3** (2.5 mg) indicated the same molecular formula as **2** (C17H2O6). The NMR spectroscopic data of **3** were compared to those of **2** and the only significant difference was the \({}^{1}\)H signal assigned to H-3 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 6.86 \(dq\)) of the ester group which is indicative of a tighter instead of an angelate moiety (for \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data, see experimental section). Compound **3**, also new as a natural product, was thus unambiguously identified as the tighter analogue of **2**.

Compound **4** (3.5 mg) was obtained as a white powder. The HR-ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula C30H32O10 as determined by HR-ESI-MS (\(m\)/2 [M+Na]\({}^{\ast}\) = 575.1894; calcd. for C30H32. NaO10: 575.1893). The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectroscopic data of **4** were compared to those of **1** (for its \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectroscopic data, see Experimental) and a high degree of similarity was observed among the signals of the terpenoid core group of both structures. All proton resonances of **1** could be located in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **4**, except the typical H-2 singlet at \(\delta\) 5.66. These signal assignments were confirmed by the COSY spectrum (Table 2). In addition, six extra proton signals were observed in the spectrum of **4**. Ten additional carbon resonances were observed in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **4**, six of them belonging to a benzene ring. This benzene moiety was shown to consist of a methine group (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 7.43, \(s_{\text{c}}\) and \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 131.2) and five quaternary sp\({}^{2}\) carbons (\(\delta\) 111.8, 113.3, 160.5 and 161.6), therefore suggesting a pentasubstituted benzene ring. Four of the substituents could be identified as two hydroxyl (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 9.72, s, and 13.55, \(s_{\text{c}}\)) and one methyl group (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.22, s, and \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 16.4) as well as an acetyl moiety (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.55, s, \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 26.2 for the methyl group, and \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 203.2 for the carbonyl group). Finally, the remaining substituent in the aromatic ring was found to be an sp\({}^{3}\) methylene group (two doublets at \(\delta\) 3.18 and 3.72, \(J\) = 14.5, and \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 15.2) which was shown to be attached to the C-2 (\(\delta\) 116.4) of the terpenoid core group by its HMBC correlations (Table 2 and Figs. 1 and 2). The positions of the five substituents in the aromatic ring were assigned by their HMBC correlations (Fig. 2 and Table 2), thus leading to the structure of a 2,6-dihydroxy-5-methyl-3-methylketorylenediyl moiety attached to C-2 of budlein A (**1**), as depicted in Fig. 1. This same aromatic moiety has been previously identified as part of the

Fig. 4: Molecular model of the 3\(R\),_GR_,_TR_,_BR_,10R stereoisomer of compound **2** showing the diagnostically important dihedral angles and calculated coupling constants between diagnostically important protons.

Fig. 3: Proposed pathway for the formation of **2** and **3** through the attack of an electron pair at C-3 by Michael-type addiction.



## Page 5

structure of erabulenol B, a biologically active natural compound produced by the fungus _Penicillium_ sp. FO-5637 that contains a phenalene skeleton (Tabata et al., 1998). Therefore, reported herein is the first occurrence of this aromatic moiety attached to a natural terpenoid as a product of biotransformation carried out by an _Aspergillus_ strain. Our proposal for the formation of **4** is that the aromatic moiety was biosynthesized by the fungus and then enzymatically incorporated to compound **1**. Because the aromatic moiety is linked at C-2, the formation of **4** may involve a C-alkylation of the a-carbon of an enolate of **1** or an electrophilic addition where the aromatic moiety accepts the electron pair of the 2H-furenone. Similar mechanisms that might explain the formation of such C-C bonds as in **4** are observed in tandem Michael additions or in the Baylis-Hilman reaction, where the a-alkylation of a,b-unsaturated carbonyls are observed.

It is interesting to observe that both fungi have a different effect in hulelein A (**1**). When the HPLC chromatograms of the incubations were cross-checked, the new derivatives from one fungus were not found in the other and vice versa.

The cytotoxic activity of budlein A (**1**) as well as its derivatives **2** and **4** was evaluated against cancer cell line (HL-60) with the aim to observe if they could elicit cell death at different concentrations. Bulletin A reduced tumor cell growth as well as cell viability in a dose dependent manner even at the lowest tested doses (Fig. 5a). It showed an IC50 value of 0.5 mM (Fig. 5a), while its derivatives **2** and **4** exhibited IC50 values three times higher (1.5 mM each, Fig. 5b and c). The IC50 of the positive control, cisplatin, was 10 mM. These results show that all tested compounds have cytotoxic effect and that the chemical alterations carried out by the fungi in the structure of **1** caused a decrease of the cytotoxic activity of the derivatives.

Many researchers pointed out that SLS are cytotoxic due to the presence of the a,b- or a,b,g, d-unsaturated carbonyl structures such as a-methylene-g-lactones or a,b-unsaturated cyclopentenones. As already mentioned, the proposed mechanism of action is that these structural elements preferably react with nucleophiles, especially sulfhydryl groups by a Michael-type addition (Kupchan et al., 1971; Lee et al., 1971; Schmidt, 1997, 1999, 2006). It has been shown in various structure-activity relationship studies on the cytotoxic activity of SLS, that the presence of Michael acceptor structures is a requirement for high activity (Schmidt and Heilmann, 2002; Schmidt, 2006). Thus, the higher activity of **1** may be due to the presence of three conjugated carbonyl structure elements. As expected, compound **2**, which neither contains the a-methylene-g-lactone moiety nor the a,b,g,d-unsaturated ketone system C-1-C-5, showed lower cytotoxicity when compared to **1**. The only a,b-unsaturated carbonyl structure of this compound is its angelate ester side chain attached to C-8. However, compound **4**, which presents the same structural requirements for a high activity as **1**, it is also less cytotoxic. Its low activity must therefore be attributed to the presence of the aromatic moiety which possibly exerts steric hindrance along the furanone and/or lactone rings, therefore decreasing the availability of the reactive groups to the respective target proteins. Thus, our results confirm earlier observations that the cytotoxic activity of SLS does not depend only on the unsaturated structural elements but also on other structural features.

## 3 Concluding remarks

In this work, the versatility of microbial-catalyzed biotransformations leading to unusual derivatives is reported. The new

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline Pos. & \(\delta_{\mathrm{H}}\) (Jin Hz) & COS7H,7H & \(\delta_{\mathrm{C}}\) & HMBC \\ \hline
1 & – & – & 209.6 & – \\
2 & – & – & 116.5 & – \\
3 & – & – & 181.3 & – \\
4 & – & – & 136.4 & – \\
5 & 6.32 \(dd\) (2.1, 4.2) & H-6, H-15 & 134.6 & C-15 \\
6 & 5.21 \(m\) & H-5, H-7, H-15 & 75.0 & C-4,

## Page 6

analogues **2** and **4** showed reduced cytotoxicity against HL-60 cells when compared to the original natural product **1** and thus confirmed once more that Michael acceptor systems are necessary for high cytotoxic activity, although other structural factors may influence the activity to a significant extent.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker DRX 500 spectrometer (500 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H and 125 MHz for \({}^{13}\)C). Samples were dissolved in CDCl\({}_{3}\) and the spectra were calibrated using the solvent signals at \(\delta\)\(\cdot\) 7.26 (\({}^{1}\)H) or 77.1 (\({}^{13}\)C); chemical shifts are expressed in ppm. High-resolution mass spectra (HR-MS) were recorded by direct infusion of 0.1 mg/mL solutions (MeCN-H\({}_{2}\)O 7:3 v/v) using a syringe pump at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/h on a Ultro-TOF spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, USA) with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source operating in the positive mode, using a drying gas (N\({}_{2}\)) flow of 3 mL/min, drying gas (N\({}_{2}\)) temperature of 180 degC and nebulizer gas pressure of 2 bar. The instrumentation for HPLC analyses consisted of a Shimadzu (SCL-10_Avp_) multi-solvent delivery system coupled to a Shimadzu SCL-M10_Avp_ photodiode array (DAD) detector (Shimadzu, Japan) operating with the Class-VP software (v. 5.02), and Shimadzu or Supelco-Hypersil ODS columns (\(4.6\times 250\) mm, 5 mm). Liquid chromatography was carried out in isocratic mode (MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O 55:45 v/v, at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min, 60 min) during the screening phase for the evaluation of the degree of transformation of compound **1**, as well as for comparison of chromatographic fractions (condition A). The mobile phase used for isolation of compounds **2** and **3** by HPLC was MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O 2:3 (condition B) and MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O 3:2 (condition C) for compound **4**, both in isocratic mode, in analytical scale, with repeated injections of small aliquots of the samples, with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min over 30 min for each run. DAD analysis was performed at 225 and 265 nm (chromophores of bulletin A (1)) and the chromatograms were plotted at 225 nm. TLC was carried out on pre-coated aluminum sheets with silica gel 60 F\({}_{254}\) (Merck, Brazil, art. No. 5554) using mixtures of \(n\)-hexane and EtOAc as eluent; detection was carried out with UV light (254 nm) as well as vanillin-H\({}_{2}\)SO\({}_{4}\) as spray reagent, followed by heating (\(ca\). 110\({}^{+}\)C). Column chromatography (CC) was carried out in a glass column (\(25\times 400\) mm) with silica gel 60 (0.063-0.200 mm, Merck, Brazil, art. No. 7734) using increasing amounts of EtOAc in \(n\)-hexane. Flash chromatography (Still et al., 1978) was run on a glass column (\(20\times 500\) mm) with silica gel (0.040-0.063 mm, Merck, Brazil, art. No. 9385) using a mixture of \(n\)-hexane-EtOAc 3:7 (v/v, flow rate adjusted to 5 cm/min), and 10 mL for each of the collected fractions. Vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC, Coll and Bowden, 1986) was carried out on a glass column (\(50\times 250\) mm) with silica gel 60H (Merck, Brazil, art. No. 7736) using increasing amounts of EtOAc in \(n\)-hexane. Budlein A (**1**) had been previously obtained as white crystals from a CH\({}_{2}\)Li\({}_{2}\) rings extract of entire air-dried leaves of _Viguira robust_, as described by Valerio et al. (2007). Its identity and purity (95-98%) were confirmed by \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectroscopy, TLC and HPLC as well as by comparison with an authentic sample from our laboratory.

Fig. 5: Cell viability in HL-60 cell line. Cells were exposed to different compounds for 24 h. Endpoint was evaluated by MTT assay: (a) HL-60 cells treated with budlein A (**1**); (b) compound **2**; (c) compound **4**. Each point represents the mean ± SD of three experiments with three replicates. The results are presented in\(\overline{\text{n}}\) comparatively to non-treated cells (NC) with 100% viability. *Statistically significant differences in relation to the negative control (NC), \(\text{p}<0.05\), PC (positive control ± cisplatin, 332 μM).



## Page 7



### Microorganisms

Cultures of _A. terreus_ (MT-6.4) and _A. niger_ (PC-1.7a) were isolated by Dr. S. Said from soil collected in 1988 on the border of Mirenda river, community Passo do Lomtra, between Miranda and Cournub, MT, Brazil, and identified by C.M.s. Motta from "Cole3ao de Culturas Microteca URM, Depto. de Microbiologia, CCB, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco" (Recife, PE, Brazil). The microorganisms were deposited in the collection "Colecao de Culturas Tropical" (Tropical Cultures Collection) of "Fundacao Andre Tosello de Pesquisa e Tecnologia" (Andre Tosello Research and Technology Tropical Foundation, www.fat.org.br), R. Latino Coelho 1301, 13087-010, Campinas, SP, Brazil, under accession numbers CCT-7461 (_A. terreus_) and CCT-7687 (_A. niger_).

All cultures were maintained on potato dextrose agar (PDA) slants and stored in a refrigerator at 4 degC until use. Prior to the bio-transformation, the fungi were pre-cultivated on PDA in Petri dishes for 7 days at 30 degC.

### Biotransformation of budlein A (1)

The procedure described below has been developed by the authors. A two-step culture was used for both strains (_A. terreus_ and _A. niger_). First, the fungi were grown in shake cultures at 30 degC in four conical flasks, each containing 750 mL of sterile Cza-pc-Dox Broth. The media were adjusted to pH 5.0 before sterilization. After this procedure, the strains were inoculated with 107 conidia/mL and incubated at 120 rpm for 48 h at 30 degC (step 1). The mycelial mass obtained was filtered, collected, inoculated in fresh media (750 mL) and re-incubated for an additional time of 144 h at the same conditions of step 1, except for the addition of 0.2 mg/mL of budlein A (step 1).

In each experiment, budlein A (1, 300 mg) was dissolved in DMSO 3 mL and uniformly distributed into four flasks, each containing 750 mL of sterile medium (step 1). Two culture controls (control 1 = medium, fungi and solvent; control II = medium and fungi) without budlein A and a third one containing only the medium, solvent (DMSO) and budlein A were incubated under identical conditions. A sample of 1 mL was collected from the medium every 24 h, partitioned with CHCl3 and analyzed by HPLC-UV-DAD (condition A). This procedure was used for monitoring the transformation procedure. After 144 h, the fermentation broth was separated from the mycelia by vacuum filtration.

### Isolation of metabolites

The mycelium of _A. terreus_ was filtered and the broth was extracted with CHCl3. The organic layer was dried over 370 mg Na2. SO4 and filtered through common filter paper to yield of a dry residue after solvent evaporation under reduced pressure. This residue was separated by VLC (see Section 4.1). Ten fractions (500 mL each) were collected and the solvent was eliminated by reduced pressure. Fraction 5 (75 mg, eluted in _n_-hexane-EtOAc 1:1) was fractionated by flash chromatography (10 mL each fraction, see Section 4.1) and fraction 2 (26.5 mg) was purified by HPLC (condition B) to afford 3 mg (1.0% yield) of **2** and 2.5 mg (0.8% yield) of **3**.

The mycelium of _A. niger_ was treated like above to yield a dry residue 203 mg, which was fractionated by CC (see Section 4.1). Seventeen fractions (200 mL each) were collected and the solvent was removed by reduced pressure. The Fractions were combined by TLC analyses and fraction **4** (30 mg, eluted in _n_-hexane-EtOAc 3:2) was fractionated by HPLC (condition C) to yield 3.5 mg (1.1% yield) of **4**.

### Budlein A (1)

White crystals. HPLC _t_R 13.69 min (MeOH-H2O 45:55, 1 mL/min); UV (online spectrum from HPLC) _l_(max) nm; UV (online spectrum from HPLC) _l_(max) nm 214, 266, 500 MHz, CDCl3, \(d\) in ppm, \(l\) in Hz: 1.47 (3H, s, H-14), 1.77 (3H, s-5), 1.91 (3H, hrs, H-4), 2.31 (4\(d\), \(d\), \(j\) = 3.5, 15.2; H-9b), 2.57 (4\(d\), \(j\) = 5.5, 15.2; H-9b), 3.74 (_m_, _H_-7), 4.37 (2H, s, H-15), 5.23 (_m_, H-8), 5.34 (3H, m-6), 5.66 (s, H-2), 5.68 (_d_, \(j\) = 2.4, H-13a), 6.10 (_dq_, \(J\) = 1.0, 7.0, H-3'), 5.19 (_m_, _H_-5

## Page 8

Formazan crystals were dissolved at 37 degC overnight. The absorbance of each well was read on a microplate reader at a wavelength of 540 nm. Cytotoxic rate was calculated as follows: % of cytotoxicity of compounds = 1 - absorbance drug treated/absorbance control x 100.

### Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed by Student's _t_-test. A \(p\) value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results are expressed as the mean +- SD.

### Molecular modeling

Molecular models of eight possible stereoisomers of compound **2** were generated with the modeling package MOE (Chemical Computing Group, 2011). For each isomer, a low mode dynamics conformational search was performed with the MMRF94x force field and using the standard settings of MOE. The conformer with the lowest energy was minimized using the semi-empirical AM1 Hamiltonian. Coupling constants were calculated using the established method of Haasnoot et al. (1980) as implemented in the modeling program PCModel (v. 9.2 Serena Software, Serena Software, Box 3076, Bloomington, IN 47402-3076; [http://www.serena-soft.com/pcm8.html](http://www.serena-soft.com/pcm8.html)).

The molecular coordinates as *.mol2-files are available from the authors on request. A table with the calculated coupling data for all stereoisomers is part of the Supplementary data (Table S-1).

11. (2Z4,R8,9R,11R)-13-1(3-acetyl-2,6-dihydroxy-5-methylphenyl)methyl-2-(hydroxymethyl)-11-methyl-7-methylidene-6,12-dioxo-5,14-dioxatricyclo[9.2.1.04,8]tetradeca-1(13),2-dien-9-yl[22]-2-methylbut-2-enoue (4)

White solid. HPLC _t_R 10.38 min (MeOH-H2O 45:55, 1 mL/min); UV (online spectrum from HPLC) _l_(max) nm 202, 250; HR-ESI-MS m/z 575.1891 [M+Na]* (calc. for C30H32Na010, 575.1893); for NMR spectroscopic data, see Table 2.

###### Acknowledgements.

 The authors are grateful to FAPESP for a fellowship to N.S. Arakawa (process No. 04/04374-3), BIOTA/BIOprospecTA FAPESP program (process No. 04/07935-6), CNPq and CAPES for funds and grants. We also thank Prof. N.P. Lopes, Prof. G.C Clososki, Prof. F.s. Emery, D.P.V. Faleiro and E.A. Silva-Jr. for technical support and fruitful discussions. Part of this work was performed within the Research Network Natural Products against Neglected Diseases (ResNetNPD).

## Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.09.022](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.09.022).

## References

* Abourashed et al. (1999) Abourashed, E.A., Clark, A.M., Hufford, C.D., 1999. Microbial models of mammalian metabolism of xenobiotics: an updated review. Curr. Med. Chem. 6, 359-374.
* Adelin et al. (2012) Adelin, E., Martin, M.T., Bricot, M.F., Cortial, S., Retailleau, P., Ouazzani, J., 2012. Biotransformation of natural compounds: unexpected thin conjugation of \(\delta\)-642305 with 3-mercaptoethanol catalyzed by _Npergillus niger_ ATCC 16404 cells. Phytochemistry **84**, 135-140.
* Arakawa et al. (2008) Arakawa, N.S., Schorr, K., Ambrosio, S.R., Merfort, L., Da Costa, F.B., 2008. Further sesquiterpene lactones of _Viguera robusta_ and their potential anti-inflammatory activity: inhibition of human neutrophil elastase release. Z. Naturforsch. 63, 533-538.
* Chemical Computing Group (2011) Chemical Computing Group Inc., 1010 Sherbooke St. West, Suite #910, Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 2R7.
* Choudhary et al. (2006) Choudhary, M.L., Ranjit, R., Afta-A-Hahman, Devkota, K.P., Musharraf, S.G., Shrestha, T.M., 2006. Hydroxylation of the sesterterpene leucocystine by the fungus _Rhinose stolanfer_. Phytochemistry 67, 439-443.
* Coll & Bowden (1986) Coll, J.C., Bowden, B.F., 1986. The application of vacuum liquid chromatography to the separation of terpene mixtures. J. Nat. Prot. 49, 934-936.
* Da Costa et al. (2001) Da Costa, F.B., Schorr, K., Arakawa, N.S., Schilling, E.E., Spring, O., 2001. Infraspecific variation in the chemistry of glandular trichomes of two Brazilian Viguere species (Idelianthee, Asteraceae). J. Riza. Chem. Soc. 3, 403-407.
* Da Costa & Terfroth (2005) Da Costa, F.B., Terfroth, L., Castegier, J., 2005. Sesquiterpene lactone-based classification of three stereaceae tribes: a study based on self-organizing neural networks applied to chemosystematics, Phytochemistry 66, 345-353.
* Dewar et al. (1985) Dewar, M.J.S., Zoubisch, E.C., Healy, E.F., Stewart, J.J.P., 1985. Development and use of quantum mechanical molecular models. 76. Aff: a new general purpose quantum mechanical molecular model. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 107, 3902-3909.
* Galli et al. (1999) Galli, A.M., Ibrahim, A.S., Mossa, J.S., E-Federly, F.S., 1999. Microbial transformation of parheonhelix. Phytochemistry 51, 761-765.
* Garcia-Pineres et al. (2001) Garcia-Pineres, A.J., Castro, V., Mora, G., Schmidt, T.J., Strunck, E., Buhl, H.L., Merfort, L., 2001. Cysteine 38 in p65N-kappaB plays a crucial role in DNA binding inhibition by sesquiterpene lactones. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 39713-39720.
* I: an empirical generalization of the Karlgus equation. Tetrahedron 36, 2783-2792.
* Hehner et al. (1999) Hehner, S.P., Hofmann, T.G., Droge, W., Schmitz, M.L., 1999. The antiinflammatory sesquiterpene lactone parthenoblie inhibits NR-kappaB b targeting the l kappa b kinase complex. J. Immunol. 163, 5617-5623.
* Herz & Coedker (1982) Herz, W., Coedker, V.L., 1982. Structure of goyazensolide and its congeners. J. Org. Chem. 47, 2798-2800.
* Kumari et al. (2003) Kumari, G.N., Misalamani, S., Ganesh, M.R., Aravind, S., 2003. Microbial transformation of zaluzanin-D. Phytochemistry 62, 1101-1104.
* Kupchan et al. (1971) Kupchan, S.M., Eakin, M.A., Thomas, A.M., 1971. Tumor inhibitors. 69. Structure-cytotoxicity relationship among the sesquiterpene lactones. J. Med. Chem. 12, 1147-1152.
* Lamare & Vrutskos (1990) Lamare, V., Vrutskos, R., 1990. Bioconversion of sesquiterpenes. Tetrahedron 46, 4109-4132.
* Lee et al. (1971) Lee, K.H., Huang, E.S., Piantadosi, C., Pagano, J.S., Geissman, T.A., 1971. Cytotoxicity of sesquiterpene lactones. Cancer Res. 31, 16149-1654.
* Quesne et al. (1982) Quesne, P.W., Mencher, M.D., Pastore, M.P., Kelley, C.J., Brennan, T.F., Onan, K.D., Raffauf, R.F., 1982. Antitumor plants. 12. Further sesquiterpenenoid constituents of _yl__thyl__thyl__thyl__th__th__ed__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__th__ed__ed__th__ed__

## Page 9

accessible surface area descriptors (Q_frA/SAs). Quant. Struct.-Act. Relat. 21, 276-287.
* [19] Schorr, K., Garcia-Pineres, A.J., Siedle, B., Merfort, L., Da Costa, F.B., 2002. Guanidnels from _Viguera gardner_ inhibit the transcription factor NF-kB. Phytochemistry 60, 733-740.
* [20] Seaman, F.C., 1982. Sesquiterpene lactones as taxonomic characters in the Asteraceae. Rep. Rev. 48, 123-551.
* [21] Siedle, B., Garcia-Pineres, A.J., Murillo, R., Schulte-Monting, Castro, V., Rungeler, P., Klaas, C.A., Da Costa, F.B., Kisiel, W., Merfort, L., 2004. Quantitative structure-activity relationship of sesquiterpene lactones as inhibitors of the transcription factor NF-kB. J. Med. Chem. 47, 6042-6054.
* [22] Still, W.K., Kahn, M., Mitra, A., 1978. A rapid chromatographic technique for preparative separations with moderate resolution. J. Org. Chem. 43, 2923-2925.
* [23] Tabata, N., Tomoda, H., Omura, S., 1998. Fuaplaubolitis. inhibitors of cholesteryl ester transfer protein produced by Penicillin's. P.C-5637. II. Structure elucidation of equabeluchenols A and B. J. Antibioticol. 51, 624-628.
* [24] Taylor, P.G., Loo, O.A.D., Bonilla, J.A., Murillo, R., 2008. Anticancer activities of two sesquiterpene lactones, milileemoletide and thilelein isolated from _Viguera_ sylvatorendiene dilehenen. Heterogenia 79, 428-432.
* [25] Valerio, D.A.R., Cunha, T.M., Arakawa, N.S., Lemos, H.P., Da Costa, F.B., Parada, C.A., Ferreira, S.H., Cunha, F.Q., Verri Jr., W.A., 2007. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of the sesquiterpene lactone hudelin A in mice: inhibition of cytokine production-dependent mechanism. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 562, 155-163.
* [26] Vezina, C., 1987. Biotransformations. In: Bufock, J., Kristiansen, J. (Eds.), Basic Biotechnology. Academic Press, London, pp. 461-483.
* [27] Villarreal, M.L., Alvarez, L., Alonso, D., Navarro, V., Garcia, P., Delgado, G., 1994. Cytotoxic and antimicrobial screening of selected terpenoids from Asteraceae species. J. Ethnopharmacol. 42, 25-29.
* [28] Zhang, J., Guo, H., Tian, Y., Liu, P., Li, N., Zhou, J., Guo, D., 2007. Biotransformation of 20(5)-protopanaxatroid by _Muxor spinosis_ and the cytotoxic structure activity relationships of the transformed products. Phytochemistry 68, 2523-2530.
* [29] Zhang, X., Ye, M., Dong, Y.-B., Dong, Y., Hu, H.-b., Tao, S.-j., Yin, J., Guo, D.-a., 2011. Biotransformation of bufadienolides by cell suspension cultures of _Sususware involucrata_. Phytochemistry 72, 1779-1785.



