# 10.1021@np50017a019.pdf

## Page 1



# Volatile constituents of Brazilian euphorbiaceae. genus _Croton_\({}^{1}\)

A. A. Craveiro, A. S. Rodrigues, C. H. S. Andrade, F. J. A. Matos, J. W. Alencar and M. I. L. Machado

Universidade Federal do Cetra, Departamento de Quimica Organica e Inorganic, 60.000 Fortaleza, Cetra, Brazil

###### Abstract.

The analysis of essential oils in several species of the Euphorbiaceae family was conducted as part of an intensive program of chemical investigation of odoriferous flora of northeastern Brazil. From 24 different _Croton_ species studied, we have selected nine to report on in this work: _C. sonderianus, C. essequiboensis, C. urgyrophylloides, C. effinis mucronifolius, C. ribontifolus, C. nepetafelolus, C. jacobinensis, C. micus_ and _C. sehmeri_; in the latter species at least two varieties were detected as far as the chemical composition is concerned. The isolated oils were analyzed by ge/ms with open tubular glass column coupled to a data processing system. Library search programs for identification of essential oils constituents were developed; algorithms were used for computation of chromatographic retention times (Kovat's indexes) and simplified mass spectra (ms). Confirmations were made by comparison of full ms or other spectroscopic data with that of standard samples whenever available. Library search programs using mass spectral data and Kovat's indexes were found to be an efficient method for identification of chemical constituents in essential oil analysis.

Before 1975 very little information was available about odoriferous flora of northeastern Brazil. At the present time over two hundred essential oils from different plants are under pharmacological and chemical screening as well as botanical investigation.

In the Euphorbiaceae family, the genus _Croton,_ due to high incidence and species dispersion, contains by far the largest number of essential oil producing plants in the Brazilian northeast.

This communication describes library search programs based on gas chromatography (gc) and mass spectrometric data developed for essential oil analysis and its application to the investigation of ten samples extracted from Brazilian Euphorbiaceae genus _Croton; C. argyrophylloides_ Nuell. Arg. (1); _C. essequiboensis;_ Kl; _C. jacobinensis_ Baill; _C. micans_ Muell. Arg.; _C. sonderianus_ Muell. Arg. (2); _C. nepetafelolus_ Baill. (3); _C. rhamifolus_ H.B.K.; _C. zehunieri_ var _anethole_ Pax et (4) Hoff.; and _C. zehunieri_ var _eugenol_ Pax et Hoff.

Among several works (5-11) dealing with retention index coupled to mass spectral data in library search programs, only one is concerned with identifications of lower terpenoids and sesquiterpenoids and uses _n_-heptyl acetate (=1.000) as internal standard to calculate retention times (10).

After creating a library of 200 entries and developing a library search program based on mass spectral data for identification of components in essential oils (12), we found it necessary to improve the program with the inclusion of retention indexes.

To minimize the standard deviation arising from employing a sole substance as internal standard, we decided to employ a retention index, namely, Kovat's Index (13) obtained by use of a mixture of the essential oil with eight _n_-alkanes (C8, C9, C10, C11, C12, C14, C16 and C18) as internal standards. This approach greatly improved the identification, especially for those compounds with very similar fragmentation patterns.



## Page 2



## Discussion

_Kovat's indexes calculations by mass chromatography._--To calculate Kovat's indexes, eight _n_-alkanes were mixed in convenient proportions to the essential oil to be analyzed. The mixture was then injected in a gc/ms equipped with an open tubular glass column and a data processing system. For comparision purposes, separated runs of _n_-alkanes and the essential oil were made.

Reconstructed mass chromatograms of the _n_-alkanes were obtained by use of the ion \(m\) _z_ 85 (11). The computer reconstructed gc of the essential oil was obtained by mass chromatography with ion \(m\) _z_ 91, which was always present in terpenes, sesquiterpenes, their oxygenated derivatives, and aromatic compounds commonly found in the essential oils (12). The relative intensity of ion \(m\) _z_ 91 in these substances never fell below 30% of the base peak.

Mass chromatography of the ions \(m\) _z_ 85 and \(m\) _z_ 91 made it possible to obtain, with a single injection of the essential oil plus _n_-alkanes, information usually obtained with more than two injections, such as:

a) the computer plot of the total ion current of the mixture (see fig. 1 as an example). This information is important for calculating Kovat's indexes.

b) computer reconstructed _n_-hydrocarbons standards chromatogram where only the peaks having \(m\) _z_ 85 are plotted. (see fig. 2).

c) essential oil computer reconstructed chromatogram where only the peaks having the ion \(m\) _z_ 91 are plotted (see fig. 3). This ion reproduces a clear qualitative plot of the essential oil when compared with the total ion current of the same oil.

The peak superposition, if present, is easily detected by matching the total ion chromatogram against reconstructed chromatograms of ions \(m\) _z_ 85 and \(m\) _z_ 91.

_Computer programs._--Essential oil analysis of the species related here were performed with the aid of three computer programs AREA 1, KOVT 16, and BSMO 10 written in BASIC language.

Figure 1: Total ion chromatogram of the essential oil of _Croton micans_ plus _n_-alkanes.



## Page 3



## Page 4

BSKO 10.--A library search program for automatic identification of unknowns based on mass spectral data using visually interpretative peaks (VIP) (14) and Kovat's indexes (13).

It uses the expression (2) for calculating an Identity Grade (IG), matching the unknown against each library entry. It also uses the arbitrary factor (IG+1)/2 for raising IG if the Kovat's index of the selected entry is within the range +-3 of the calculated Kovat's index for the unknown. The factor IG/2 is used for decreasing IG if the range is larger than +-3.

\[\begin{array}{l} {\text{IG} = \frac{1}{2}\text{N}\quad\text{I}_{1}} \\ {\text{(C} + \Sigma\quad

## Page 5

BSKO 10 to find the right answer by matching Kovat's indexes of the unknown against the Kovat's indexes of selected entries.

_Essential oils.--_Essential oils found in table 3 were analyzed by the method described. Confirmations of the identified compounds were made by visual matching of each mass spectrum against standards of a certified collection (15),

and by the use of other spectrometric methods (nmr) and authentic samples, if available. The final results are summarized in table 4.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Plant collection.--The plants were collected at the locations mentioned in table 3. Botanical identifications were made by Prof. Afranio G. Fernandes, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Brazil, and Prof. G. L. Webster University of California, USA. Voucher specimens

## Page 6

Sep-Oct 1981] Craveiro et al.: Volatiles of _Croton_

Table 4. Chemical composition of essential oils from Euphorbiaceae species, genus _Croton_.*

\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c} Compound* & & & & & &

## Page 7

were deposited in the herbarium of the Departamento de Biologia Universidade Federal do Ceara under the numbers specified in table 3.

Extraction.--Essential oil extraction was carried out by steam distillation of finely ground plant material (16). The yields (volume/volume) are reported in the text. Each essential oil, after separation, was dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and sealed in glass vials under nitrogen atmosphere.

Analysis.--The fresh oils were analyzed on a FINNIGAN 3300 quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to a gas chromatograph with an open tubular glass column (30m x 0.25mm id) with SP 2100 as the stationary phase with helium as the carrier gas. On line mass chromatography computations were made on a 6115 Finnigan data processing system with 32 K configurations with the aid of 3 megabite disk, magnetic tapes and the library search programs described here (17).

The nmr data were obtained in a Varian EM 360 and Varian XL 100 nmr instruments.

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Banco do Nordeste do Brasil S.A., (BNB), Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for financial support, and Prof. C. Edmonds, University of Utah, USA, for helpful discussions.

## References

* [1] A. A. Craveiro, F. J. Monte, F. J. A. Matos and J. W. Alencar, _Rev. Latinoamer. Quim._, 9, 98 (1978).
* [2] A. A. Craveiro, E. R. Silveira, F. J. A. Matos and J. W. Alencar, _Rev. Latinoamer. Quim._, 9, 95 (1978).
* [3] A. A. Craveiro, C. H. S. Andrade, F. J. A. Matos and J. W. Alencar, _J. Nat. Prod._, 43 (6), 756 (1980).
* [4] A. A. Craveiro, C. H. S. Andrade, F. J. A. Matos and J. W. Alencar, _J. Agric. Food. Chem._, 26, 773 (1978).
* [5] H. Nau and K. Biemann, _Anal. Lett._, 6, 1071 (1973).
* [6] H. Nau and K. Biemann, _Anal. Chem._, 46, 426 (1974).
* [7] C. C. Sweeley, N. D. Young, J. F. Holland and S. C. Gates, _J. Chroma._, 99, 507 (1974).
* [8] B. E. Blaisdell, _Anal. Chem._, 49, 180 (1977).
* [9] F. W. Karasek, D. W. Chan and R. E. Clement., _Anal. Chem._, 50, 82 (1978).
* [10] K. R. Betty and F. W. Karasek, _J. Chromat._, 166, 111 (1978).
* [11] R. P. Adams, M. Granat, L. R. Hogge and E. von Rudloff, _J. Chromat. Sci._, 17, 75 (1979).
* [12] A. A. Craveiro and J. W. Alencar, 178th ACS National Meeting, paper 70 AGFD Div., Washington D. C. September (USA) (1979).
* [13] E. Kovats, _Adv. Chroma._, 1, 229 (1965).
* [14] M. C. Hamming and M. G. Foster, 'Interpretation of Mass Spectra of Organic Compounds' Academic Press, New York (1972).
* [15] E. Stenhagen, A. Abrahamson, F. W. Mcafferty (editors), ''Registry of Mass Spectral Data'' J. Wiley & Sons, New York (1974).
* [16] A. A. Craveiro, J. W. Alencar e F. J. A. Matos, _J. Chem. Educ._, 53, 652 (1976).
* [17] Program listings are available on request.



