# 10.1016@S0040-4020(01)88671-3.pdf

## Page 1

Isolation, Structure Determination, and Absolute Configuration of Barbatusol, A New Bioactive Diterpene with a Rearranged ABIETANE SKELETON from the LABIATE COLEUS BARBATUS

Alphonse Kelcom

Nucleo de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, CCS Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.

Bloco H Itha do Fundao, 21941, Rio de Janeiro RJ. Brazil

November 7, 2021

###### Abstract

Barbutasol, isolated from the Labiate _Coleus barbatus_ Bentham, is shown to be a new phenolic diterpene with a rearranged abietane skeleton. Absolute configuration is established by hemisynthesis of barbatusol dimethyl-ether from the known carnosol. Barbatusol is endowed of biological activity.

In this paper, we report on the isolation, structure elucidation, absolute configuration and partial synthesis of barbatusol (I), (5S)-9(10-20)-_abeo-_abeta-_1(10), 8,11,13-tetraen-11,12-diol, a new bioactive diterpene obtained from _C. barabatus_ collected in the surroundings of Rio de Janeiro.

In a previous communication, we reported that the dichloromethane crude extract of the bark and heart-wood of _C. barbatus_ showed, at doses of 10 mg/kg (i.v.), a small cardiovascular activity in nembutal anaesthetised rats. Purification of the crude extract was monitored by bioassays and involved gel filtration on Sephadex LH-20 followed by silica gel column chromatography. Besides (+)-ferruginol (II) (yield: 0.07%), we isolated a yellow gummy compound, turning to reddish-brown on standing, for which the name barbatusol (yield: 0.15%) was coined, and which induced at 3 mg/kg (i.v. rats) potent lowering of blood pressure associated to discrete brady-cardy.

High resolution mass spectrometry of barbatusol (I) established empirical formula Ca2Ha2O3 (300.2089, requires 300,2089). The IR spectrum shows OH absorption (_v_OH 3580 and 3540 cm - 1). Acetylation of I afforded diacetate III showing that both O atoms are part of OH groups. The phenolic nature of the OH groups was suggested by the absence from the 1C NMR spectrum of I of any saturated C substituted by an O atom, and also by the position of the CO vibrations in the IR spectrum of III (_v_C-O 1760 cm - 1) together with the low field position of both Me signals (2.29 and 2.30 ppm) and the absence of deshieled carbonl protons in the 1H NMR spectrum of diacetate III. The diphenol was further substantiated by the UV spectrum of I (_l_max, 275 nm, \(e\) = 2400 and 210 nm, \(e\) = 18000) also showing that the OH groups are not _para_ to each other.* The _ortho_ relationship between the OH groups was established by Ag2O oxidation of I into _o_-quinone IV characterized by CO absorptions in IR at 1670 and 1645 cm - and UV absorptions at 438 (_e_ = 1000), 270 (_e_ = 4095) and 227 nm (_e_ = 8390).* The pentabustituted nature of the aromatic ring depended on the presence in the 1H NMR spectrum of a 1H aromatic broad singlet at 6.52 ppm in I deshieled to 6.92 ppm in III. Four of the seven unsaturations of barbatusol (I) are introduced by the aromatic nucleus. A fifth was found associated with a trisubstituted double bond (IR: 970 cm-1; 1H NMR: 1H t at 5.50 ppm J = 3.0 Hz; 1C NMR: 140.25 ppm (s) and 120.89 ppm (d)). The two remaining unsaturations were thus attributed to two additional rings. Hence, barbatusol (I) is a tricyclic aromatic diterpene for which an abietane skeleton could be postulated since several abietane diterpenes, including (+)-ferruginol (II), had already been isolated from _C. barbatus_.16 The 1H NMR spectrum of I shows striking similarities with that of psiferol (V),10 and was characterized by the presence of only four Me signals, two as superposed doublets (J = 7.0 Hz) at 1.20 ppm and two as singlets at 0.85 and 0.89 ppm. Noteworthy was the absence of the C-20 Me signal, a singlet at ca 1.20 ppm in the ferruginol series.1 The two Me singlets were associated with a _gem_-dimethyl moiety since only one quaternary saturated C was observed in 1C NMR (32.01 ppm,s). On the other hand, double irradiation experiments proved that the two Me doublets were part of an isopropyl group whose methine proton shift (3.10 ppm) suggested the _i_-propyl group to be linked to the aromatic ring.11 This was confirmed by the small upfield shift (0.23 ppm) of the methine proton of the isopropyl group observed, on acetylation, in the 1H NMR spectrum of II. This spectrum also shows that the Me groups of the isopropyl were no longer equivalent (two 3H d J = 7.0 Hz at 1.19 and 1.20 ppm) due to hindered free rotation of the isopropyl group2 and suggested that the latter is probably flanked by an OH group. The C-7 benzyl methylene of tricyclic aromatic diterpenes2 was observed as a 2H ill-resolved dd (W1/2 = 16 Hz) at 2.82 ppm; the multiplicity of this signal showed that the C-7 methylene is adjacent to another methylene group. Finally, a 2H AB quartet (J = 15 Hz) was observed at 3.09 and 3.70 ppm; the large coupling constant associated to it was found in good agreement with a _gem_ coupling.



## Page 2

The low field position of this methylene group suggested it to be adjacent to two deshielding groups, namely the aromatic ring and the trisubstituted double bond. This conclusion was further supported by catalytic hydrogenation of J to the mixture of primers at C-1 (VL+) whose 1H NMR spectrum was devoid of the AB signals downfield from 3.00 ppm. Furthermore, the absence of coupling between the olefinic proton and the allylic-benzylic methylene allowed to propose the following sequence: \(\left\{ {\text{C}} \right\} = {\text{C}} - {\text{C}} {\text{H}}_{{\text{C}}} - {\text{C}} {\text{H}}_{{\text{C}}} - {\text{H}}_{{\text{C}}}\). Indeed, irradiation of the vinylic proton (bt at 5.50 ppm J = 3 Hz) did not affect the AB pattern, but slightly modified the spectrum at 1.90 ppm. Conversely, irradiation at the latter frequency transformed the triplet at 5.50 ppm into a broad singlet, but had no effect on the C-7 methylene signal at 2.82 ppm. Based on the abietane skeleton hypothesis (for the arrangement of the aromatic substituents), fragment "A" best accomodate for all our observations.

However, the presence of two benzylic methylenes suggested that barbatusol had a rearranged abietane skeleton where the missing C-20 Me group should be included in ring B, by formal migration of the Cg-C10 bond into the Cg-C20 position and subsequent loss of one proton at C-1 to give rise to the trisubstituted double bond between C-1 and C-10. Hence, structure I could be proposed for barbatusol. The 1C NMR spectra of I and III were found consistent with this proposal.

Final proof of structure I and determination of the absolute configuration of barbatusol came by obtention of barbatusol dimethyl-ether (XII) from carosol (VII), a dieterine whose absolute configuration had been established by correlation with (+)-terruginol (II).2

Carosol (VII) was isolated from the cultured Rosemary (_Rosemarius officinalis_) by techniques identical to those used for purification of barbatusol. Thus, obtention of barbatusol dimethyl ether (XII) from VII was achieved, after protection of the catechol moiety, by removal of the functionality at C-7; rearrangement of a C-20 hydroxymethylene group, leading to B-ring expantion, furnished the desired derivative XII (Scheme I).

Under anhydrous conditions, methylation of carosol (VII), into dimethyl-ether XIV, is known to proceed slowly.13 When conducted in wet acetone with K2CO3 2H2O as catalyst, methylation of the phenol groups is accompanied by opening of the lactone ring and elimination of the O function at C-7 affording compound VIII in one step. These conditions are not sufficient to promote alkaline hydrolysis of the d-lactone.12,13 Since carosol dimethyl-ether (XIV) did not react under similar operating conditions, assistance of the OH group at C-12 could be postulated. Obtention of VIII may thus proceed as proposed in Scheme 2. Carosol dimethyl-ether (XIV) was also obtained, together with VIII, but in lower yield.

Catalytic hydrogenation of VIII readily furnished IX, a derivative already obtained by total methylation of carosolic acid (XV), but for which only partial chemical data had been reported.14,15 I.4H reduction of the ester IX, inefficient at room temperature, furnished on refluxing the expected hydroxymethylene X in only 60% yield, together with carnoxic acid dimethyl-ether (XVI; 23%). Acid XVI is obviously not an intermediate in the reduction of IX into X since the latter was not produced on L.AH treatment of XVI in refluxing THF. Strong steric hindrance by the axial b-Me group at C-4 may explain the low yield in X.16 Treatment of X with TsCl17 afforded the less polar XI homogeneous in TLC in various solvent systems. The IR spectrum of XI proved the absence of an OH or toxyl group, and was found practically iden

## Page 3

tical to the IR spectrum of barbatusol dimethyl-ether (XII), obtained by direct methylation of barbatusol (I). GLC analysis (3% OV-17), MS and UV data also supported the identity of XI with XII. However, 1H NMR showed XI to be a 6:4 mixture of double bond isomers identified as XIa and XIb. All our attempts to separate both isomers on silver nitrate impregnated silica gel TLC plates failed. The orientation of XIa from carosol (VII) proved the correctness of the structure of barbatusol (I).

Optical rotation measurements of barbatusol dimethyl-ether (XII) and of the synthetic material XIa-b showed that both samples were heavytoratory. Since XIb is optically inactive, this proved barbatusol dimethyl-ether (XII) to have the same 5S absolute configuration as XIa, i.e. the H at C-5 is a-oriented. This conclusion could have been anticipated since it is the same absolute configuration as that of (+)-fervaiond (II) isolated from _Coleus barbatus_ together with barbatusol (I). Hence barbatusol is: (5S)-9(10-20)-_abeo_-abieta-1(I). 8.11,13-tetraen-11,12-diol. It seems reasonable to speculate that the driving force for the hydroxymethylene rearrangement of X into XI, promoting the B-ring expansion, may be seen in the presence of the bulky OMe group at C-11, since TSCI rearrangement of pisifert (V) led only to A-ring enlargement, affording pisifert (XVII).2 Finally, treatment of the mixture XIa-b, with BBr3 in dry CH2Cl2* afforded, but in poor yield, the mixture of double bond isomers XIII, where barbatusol (I) is less than 10% abundant as deduced from the 1H NMR spectrum of XIII.



## Page 4

Barbatusol (I) is one of the few representatives of the highly unusual 9(10-20)-_abco_-abietane skeleton, only found in icetexone and romulogazone, two diterpenes isolated from the Labatie _Saleia baltoideafora_,20 and in nihglerron A and B, two bis-diterpenes obtained from another Labiate, _Plectranstins alighericus._ As far as we know, no biological activities were reported for these compounds. The structures of icetexone and romulogazone came from X-ray diffraction analysis and spectral data respectively and the ningherrons A and B had their absolute configurations proposed on biogenetic considerations only (at least for what concerns C-5 of the _abco_-abietane moiety). The bioactive fraction we isolated from _Coleus barbatus_ contains at least three aromatic diterpenes in addition to the reported (+)-fer-ruginol and barbatusol. Their structure elucidation and biological activity investigation are under way in our laboratory.

## EXPERIMENTAL

M.ps were determined on a Buchi SMP-20 apparatus or on a Kofler hot stage and are uncorrected. Optical rotations were measured with a Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter at ambient temp, in CHCls solns. IR spectra were recorded in CHCls solns with a Perkin-Elmer 3758 spectrophotometer or as films with a Perkin-Elmer 137 apparatus. Low resolution mass spectra (MS) were determined on a Micromass MM12F instrument; high resolution MS were determined on a Varian CH 5 DF instrument; intensities of the fragments are expressed as percentages of the base peak (100%). 1H NMR spectra were recorded with a Varian XI-100 or with a Varian SM 390 apparatus equipped with the Varian 390 spin decoupler system; unless otherwise mentioned, spectra were recorded in CDCl3 solns using TMS as internal reference; shifts are expressed in the \(b\) scale; the following abbreviations are used: _b_= broad, d = doublet, d = multiplet, t = triplet, s = singlet, q = quadruplet and hep = heptuplet. UV spectra were recorded in MeOH solns on a Varian TCHCl365 or on a Beckman DB-CT grating spectrophotometer coupled to a Lin- ear 261 MM or to a Beckman 10' recorder. GLC were performed on a Varian Aerograph 2800 apparatus, coupled to a Varian A-25 recorder, and equipped with a FID detector system, on a 7x 187 stainless steel column packed with 3% UV-17 on Varanor 30, operating in isotherm mode at 235deg. Analytical and preparative TLC were performed on E. Merck Kieselgk 1F4-355 mlF and 105 mlF4

## Page 5

0.70 and 0.80 (both < 4_b_/Me), 0.89 and 0.93 (both < 4_a_/Me), 1.13 (6H d J = 7.0 Hz iPrMe), 2.93 (1H hep J = 7.0 Hz iPrClb) and 6.53 ppm (1H s C-14 b).

### Methylation of barbatsol

Barbatsol (1, 200 mg), dissolved in acetone (10 ml), was treated with Mel (2 ml) and K2CO3 2H2O (2 g) at room temp. during 1 day. The solids were then filtered off, washed with acetone and the filtrate evaporated to dryness. The residue was purified by silica gel column chromatography (eluent: gradient of AcOEt in hexane from 0 to 10%). Compound XII was obtained as light yellow solid (XII) (78 mg):

\[\begin{equation*}\mathit{Compound}\mspace{6mu}X\mspace{6mu}\mathrm{II},\end{equation*}\]

\[\begin{equation*}\mathit{Compound}\mspace{6mu}X\mspace{6mu}\mathrm{II},\end{equation*}\]

\[\begin{equation*}\mathit

## Page 6

crude residue was purified by preparative silica gel TLC (eluent:hexane AcOEt 7%). This yielded 8 mg of the mixture of double bond isomers XIII identical in TLC with natural 1.

_Compound_ XIII. Gum: \(\left| \alpha \right| = \frac{589}{-12.0}\)\(-\)\(17.4\)\(-\)\(45.3^{\circ}\) (\(c=0.33\) in CHCl\(\left| \alpha \right|\); UV: \(\lambda_{\max}\) 222. 278 and 312 nm; IR: \(\nu_{\rm OH}\) 3448 cm-1, 2924, 2825, 1628. 1493, 1440, 1380, 1362, 1325, 1275, 1215, 1160, 1110, 1085, 1000, 970 (weak). 935 and 870 cm-1: MS; highest \(m/z\) 300 (98, C\({}_{\rm 2}\)H\({}_{\rm 2}\)O\({}_{\rm 2}\)), 285 (28), 271 (5), 257 (23), 244 (14), 231 (100), 229 (26), 215 (30), 204 (17), 191 (20), 189 (18), 179 (34), 178 (34), 165 (19) and 149 (15); \({}^{\rm H}\) NMR: 0.72 (s), 0.87 (s), 0.94 (s), 0.98 (s), 1.23 and 1.25 (each d J = 7.0 Hz), 3.12 (m), 3.60 (bs exchangeable by D\({}_{2}\)O), 5.50 (bt) and 6.43 ppm (complex).

_Acknowledgements--_We thank I. C. da Cunha Sobreiro-Kelecom for the bioassays all along the purification work, Prof. Yatagai for spectra of pisiferol (V) and related compounds, Prof. C. H. Eugster for samples of nilgherrons A and B, the laboratories Silva Araujo Roussel S. A. (S.A.R.S.A.) for equipment facilities. the FINEP and CNPq for financial support.

## References

* [1]R. Zelnik, D. Lavie, E. C. Levy, A. H. J. Wang and I. C. Paul. _Tetrahedron_**33**, 1457 (1977).
* [2]P. Ruedi and C. H. Eugster, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**55**, 1994 (1972); and **56**, 1129 (1973).
* [3]J. S. Tandon _et al.__Ind. J. Chem._**15b**, 880 (1977); **16b**, 341 (1978); **16B**, 1055 (1978); **17B**, 321 (1979) and **18B**, 214 (1979); \({}^{\rm s}\). V. Bhat, B. S. Bajwa H. Dornauer, N. J. De Souza and H. Fehlhaber, _Tetrahedron Letters_ 1669 (1977).
* [4]M. P. Dubey, R. C. Srinal, S. Nityanand and B. N. Dhawan, _J. Ethnophamacol._**3**, 1 (1981).
* [5]K. B. Seamon, W. Padgett and J. W. Daly, _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A._**78**, 3363 (1981).
* [6]A. Kelecom and I. C. Sobreiro-Kelecom, _Ciencia e Cult._ (Supl), _VII Cong. Bras. Med. Plants_, Belo Horizonte (1982), in press
* [7]In ref 6, I was named "barbatol"; this name is however not available.
* [8]A. I. Scott. _Interpretation of Ultraviolet spectra of Natural Products_, pp 91-97. Pergamon, Oxford (1964).
* [9]T. Miyase, P. Ruedi and C. H. Eugster, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**60**, 2789 (1977).
* [10]M. Yatagai and T. Takahashi, _Phytochem._**18**, 176 (1979).
* [11]T. Matsumoto, S. Usui and T. Morimoto, _Bull. Chem. Soc. Jap._**50**, 1575 (1977).
* [12]C. H. Brieskorn. A. Fuchs, J. B.-son Bredenberg, J. D. McChesney and E. Wenkert, _J. Org. Chem._**29**, 2293 (1964).
* [13]C. H. Brieskorn and A. Fuchs, _Chem. Ber._**95**, 3034 (1962).
* [14]H. Linde, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**47**, 1234 (1964).
* [15]W. L. Meyer, R. A. Manning, E. Schindler, R. S. Schroeder, and D. C. Shew, _J. Org. Chem._**41**, 1005 (1976).
* [16]L. F. Fieser and M. Fieser _Reagents for Organic Synthesis_, Vol. I, p 585. Wiley, New York (1967).
* [17]T. Kametani, H. Matsumoto, T. Honda and K. Fukumoto, _Tetrahedron I. Letters_ 2379 (1981).
* [18]M. Yatagai and T. Takahashi, _Phytochem._**19**, 1149 (1979).
* [19]J. F. W. McDonie. M. L. Watts and D. E. West, _Tetrahedron_**24**, 2289 (1968).
* [20]X. A. Dominguez, H. Gonzalez, R. Argon, M. Gutierrez, J. S. Marroquin and W. Watson, _Planta Med._**30**, 237 (1976).
* [21]C. W. Brandt and L. G. Neubauer, _J. Chem. Soc._ 1031 (1939).
* [22]C. R. Enzell and I. Wahlberg, _Acta Chem. Scand._**23**, 871 (1969); \({}^{\rm c}\)T. Nishida, I. Wahlberg and C. R. Enzell, _Org. Magn. Res._**9**, 203 (1977).



