# 10.1016@j.jep.2007.09.020.pdf

## Page 1



# Compounds from _Vitex polygamma_ active against kidney diseases

Margareth B.C. Gallo

margareth.gallo@gmail.com

Paulo C. Vieira

Joao B. Fernandes

Maria Fatima das G.F. da Silva

Fatima R. Salimena-Pires

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, Sao Paulo, Brazil Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil

Received 27 June 2007; received in revised form 1 September 2007; accepted 14 September 2007

###### Abstract

_Vitex polygamma_ Cham. (Lamiaceae, formerly Verbenaceae) is a familiar Brazilian species popularly known as Taruma whose leaf tea has been used by population to treat kidney diseases. The aim of this research was to investigate the hydroalcoholic extract of leaves in order to isolate the active compounds. Hydroalcoholic extract of leaves was obtained by stirring the previous hexane and methanol extracted leaves residue with 50% aqueous MeOH solution by ultra-sonic mixing. The obtained extract was partitioned with _n_-butanol. The yielded fraction was subsequently submitted to several chromatographic procedures to lead to the isolation of _O_-glycosidicflavones orientin and isoorientin as well as _C_-glycosylflavones schafoside and carlinoside along with their isomers, known as potent anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive and antioxidant agents, then identified as the active constituents, justifying the folk use of the plant to combat and prevent kidney stone and inflammation.

keywords: _Vitex polygamma_; Verbenaceae; Lamiaceae; Kidney diseases; _C_-glycosylflavones; _O_-glycosylflavones +
Footnote †: journal:

## 1 Plant

_Vitex polygamma_ Cham. (Lamiaceae, according to Cantino et al., 1992; formerly Verbenaceae, in keeping with Moldenke and Moldenke, 1957) is a widespread and well-known Brazilian species which occurs mainly in the States of Minas Gerais, Espirito Santo, Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo (Moldenke and Moldenke, 1957). The plant was collected in July 2000, in the city of Pocos de Caldas, Minas Gerais State, Brazil, and authenticated by Dr. Fatima Regina Salimena-Pires, a taxonomic botanist from Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora (UFJF). A voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbarium of Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciencias e Letras da Universidade de Sao Paulo, _campus_ Ribeirao Preto (SPFR), Brazil, under the acquisition number 9968.

## 2 Use in traditional medicine

The leaf tea is used in Brazilian folk medicine to treat and prevent kidney stone and inflammation (Rodrigues, 2001).

## 3 Previously isolated classes of constituents

In preceding studies, _Vitex polygamma_ has been found to contain sesquiterpenes, fatty acids (Barbosa et al., 1995), 2''_O_-caffeoylorientin besides other common flavones simultaneously with some _O_-glycosylated derivatives, flavonols, phenolic acids (Leitao and Delle Monache, 1998), several monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes in the essential oil (Leitao et al., 1999), phytosteroids, caffeoylesters from quinic acid (Santos, 2000), and ecdysteroids (Santos et al., 2001).

## 4 Materials and methods

The powder of the air-dried leaves (423.0 g) was extracted successively with hexane and methanol (MeOH) through percolation process at room temperature. Hydroalcoholic extract was obtained by stirring 100 g of the residue with 50% aqueous MeOH solution by ultra-sonic mixing for 10 min (3\(\times\) 300 mL).



## Page 2

The resulting filtrates were subsequently combined, evaporated _in vacuum_ (40 degC) and lyophilized. Afterward, the extract (31 g, 31%, w/w of the dry leaves weight (DLW)) was dissolved in distilled water and fractionated through liquid-liquid partition using ethyl acetate (EA) and _n_-BuOH (BU) (5\(\times\) 300 mL each) to yield EA (2.2 g, 2.2%, w/w DLW) and BU (10.7 g, 10.7%, w/w DLW) fractions, respectively. BU fraction was subjected to CC using XAD7 (46.0 cm x 4.0 cm) and subsequent elution with 500 mL of water (WV), water/MeOH 1:1 (WMV) and 2 L of MeOH (MV). One gram of the dried fraction MV (6.75 g, 6.75%, w/w DLW) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (53.0 cm x 3.0 cm) using MeOH as eluent resulting in 41 fractions of 30 mL, which were pooled into seven fractions (MV1 to MV7). Fraction 4 (MV4, 168.1 mg, 1.13%, w/w DLW) was chromatographed over the same column containing Sephadex LH-20 and eluted with MeOH. Twenty-three fractions of 30 mL were collected and pooled into seven (MV4s to MV4z). Fraction 4 (MV4v, 57.9 mg, 0.39% w/w DLW) was further purified by R-HPLC (column ASAHIPAK GS-310 SHODEX, mobile phase MeOH, flow-rate 3 mL min\({}^{-1}\); \(\lambda\) 330 nm) to yield compounds **1** and **2** (5.5 mg, 0.04%, w/w DLW), substances **3** and **4** (3.1 mg, 0.02%, w/w DLW) after three cycles of 54 min. Fraction 5 (MV5, 293.1 mg, 1.98%, w/w DLW) was submitted to the same R-HPLC system to yield compounds **5** and **6** (20.5 mg, 0.14%, w/w DLW) as mixture, and compounds **7** and **8** (3.0 mg, 0.02%, w/w DLW) also as mixture. Fraction WV, after recrystallization in 90% aqueous MeOH solution, afforded substance **9** (280.0 mg).

## Results

From _n_-BuOH partition of hydroalcoholic extract of leaves from _Vitex polygamma_ were isolated the compounds caffeoyl 6-_O_-b-d-glucopyranoside (**1**), caffeoyl 6-_O_-a-d-d-glucopyranoside (**2**), schafoside (**3**), isoschafoside (**4**), orientin (**5**), isoorientin (**6**), carlinoside (**7**), isocarlinoside (**8**) and metacrylic acid (**9**) whose chemical structures (Fig. 1) were identified by means of \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR as well as HMBC, HSQC and negative ESI/MS spectra data which were in accordance with previously reported data (Kitagawa, 1984; Besson et al., 1985; Dayrit et al., 1987; Shimomura et al., 1988). Schafoside and its isomer is known for its efficacy as anti-inflammatory (Melo et al., 2005) and preventive effect against kidney stone in rats, as evaluated by urine output, excretion of Ca, citric acid, and creatinine analysis (Kubo et al., 1989). Moreover the _C_-glycosidic flavones **3**, **4**, **7** and **8** are being reported for the first time in the genus _Vitex_.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to ALCOA S.A. for facilitating the plant collection.

Figure 1: Chemical structures of compounds isolated from _Vitex polygamma_ _n_-butanoic extract.



## Page 3

This study has been supported by Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPQ).

## References

* [1] Barbosa, L.C.A., Demuner, A.J., Howarth, O.W., Pereira, N.S., Veloso, D.P., 1995. Chemical study of the leaves of _Vitex polygamma_. Fitoterapia 66, 279-280.
* [2] Besson, E., Dellamonica, G., Chopin, J., Markham, K.R., Kim, M., Koh, H., Fukami, H., 1985. C-glycosylflavones from _Oryza sativa_. Phytochemistry 24, 1061-1064.
* [3] Cantino, P.D., Harley, R.M., Wagstaff, S.J., 1992. Advances in Labiate science. In: Harley, R.M., Reynolds, T. (Eds.), Royal Botanic Gardens. Kew.
* [4] Dayrit, F.M., Lapid, M.R.G., Cagampang, J.V., Lagurin, L.G., 1987. Phytochemical studies on the leaves of _Vitex negando_ L. ("Lagundi"). I. Investigation of the bronchial relaxing constituents. Philippine Journal of Science 116, 403-410.
* [5] Kitagawa, M., 1984. Acidos ramificados de C4 a C7 como marcadores sistematicos de dicotideoneas. Thesis of Doctor, Instituto de Quimica--USP, Sao Paulo.
* [6] Kubo, T., Kajimoto, T., Nohara, T., Hirayama, H., Shokuuyu, O., Ikegami, K., Irino, N., 1989. Extraction of flavonoids from _Desmodium styracolim_ for prevention of kidney stones. Japanese patent Application: JP 88-132874 19880601. Jpn. Kokai Tokkyo Kobo (1989), CODEN: JKXXAF JP 01305080 A 19891208 Heisei, 6 pp.
* [7] Leitto, S.G., Delle Monache, F., 1998. 2''_O_-caffeoylorientin from _Vitex polygamma_. Phytochemistry 49, 2167-2169.
* [8] Leitto, S.G., Fonseca, E.N., Santos, T.C., 1999. Essential oils from two Brazilian _Vitex_ species. Acta Horticultura 500, 89-92.
* [9] Melo, G.O., Muzitano, M.F., Legora-Machado, A., Almeida, T.A., Oliveira, D.B., Kaiser, C.R., Koatz, V.L.G., Costa, S.S., 2005. C-glycosylflavones from the aerial parts of _Eluexino indica_ inhibit LPS-induced mouse lung inflammation. Planta Medica 71, 362-363.
* [10] Moldenke, H.N., Moldenke, A.L., 1957. Materials toward a monograph of the genus _Vitex_. Phytologia 6, 80-89.
* [11] Rodrigues, L.A., 2001. Estudo floristico e estrutural da comunidade arbustiva e arborea de una floresta em Luminarias, MG, e informacoes entobonitancas da populacao local. Dissertation of Master, Universidade Federal de Lavras, 190 p.
* [12] Santos, T. C., 2000. Estudo quimico de especies brasileiras do genero _Vitex_. Thesis of Doctor, vol. I and II, Nucleo de Pesquisa de Produtos Naturais--UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro.
* [13] Santos, T.C., Delle Monache, F., Leitto, S.G., 2001. Ecdysterosids from two Brazilian _Vitex_ species. Fitoterapia 72, 215-220.
* [14] Shimomura, H., Sashida, Y., Adachi, T., 1988. Phenylpropanol glycose esters from _Prunus buregeriana_. Phytochemistry 27, 641-644.



