# 10.1016@0031-9422(81)85198-9.pdf

## Page 1



# Sonderianin, a furanoid diterpene from _Croton Sonderianus_

Afranio A. Craveiro, Edilberto R. Silveira, R. Braz Filho

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Rural do Rio de Janeiro, 23.460-Seropedica-RJ, Brazil. Instituto de Fisica e Quimica de Sao Carlos, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 13.560-Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil.

Ivone P. Mascarenhas

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Rural do Rio de Janeiro, 23.460-Seropedica-RJ, Brazil. Instituto de Fisica e Quimica de Sao Carlos, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 13.560-Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil.

November 6, 2021, A furanoid diterpene from _Croton Sonderianus_

###### Abstract

From the heartwood of _Croton sonderianus_ was isolated a new furanoid diterpene, sonderianin. The structure was elucidated by spectral analysis, X-ray studies and chemical evidence.

## Introduction

The benzene extract of the heartwood of _Croton sonderianus_ Muehl. Arg. has been shown to have specific activity against _Mycobacterium smegmatis_ and _Staphylococcus aureus_ (J. D. McChesney and L. A. Mitscher, unpublished results). From this extract was isolated a novel diterpene, sonderianin (1), bearing the backbone-rearranged clerodane-type carbon skeleton.

## Results and Discussion

The molecular formula of sonderianin (1), C21H26O5, was determined by high resolution MS [M++ obs. 358.1756 (12%), calc. 358.1773]. The IR spectrum revealed the presence of carbonyl groups (_g_-lactone, 1760 cm-1 and \(a\),_b_-unsaturated ester, 1710 cm-1), one double bond (1645 cm-1) and one _b_-substituted furan system (1515 and 880 cm-1)[1,2]. The 1H NMR spectrum in CDCl2, (270 MHz) showed signals for three furan protons (_d_ 7.45, H-15; 7.43, H-16; 6.40, H-14), one olefinic proton (_d_ 6.53, H-3), one tertiary methyl (_d_ 1.46, Me-18), one secondary methyl (_d_ 1.02, Me-17), one methoxy group (_d_ 3.70, MeCO-19), and one - CH2CHOCO system (_d_ 2.40, CH2-11 and 5.40, H-12). The other assignments for the additional proton signals and their correlations were determined by extensive decoupling experiments (Table 1). The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) allowed the assignments of two quaternary carbons, three CH, five CH2, and confirmed the presence of two methyl groups.

The occurrence of a mono-_b_-substituted furan moiety, an \(a\),_b_-unsaturated ester, a _g_-lactone and a secondary methyl and analysis of analogous diterpene structures in the literature [1, 3, 4, 5, 6] made it possible to propose a clerodane-type diterpene structure (1).

The multiplet at \(d\) 1.48 (H-8) (1H NMR spectrum) changed to a pair of doublets (_J_ = 4, 10 Hz) on irradiation of the methyl at 1.02 (Me-17). These \(J\) values indicated that the H-8 is axial. The signal at 1.59 appeared as a pair of doublets (_J_ = 4, 10 Hz) and revealed that the H-10 is axial.

The structure proposed for sonderianin (1) was confirmed by 13C NMR analysis. Table 1 lists the carbon shifts, assigned by comparative analysis of the proton-noise decoupled and single-frequency off-resonance decoupled spectra, by standard chemical shift theory and comparison with the data reported for other furanoid diterpenes with the clerodane skeleton [1, 3, 4, 5, 6].

Catalytic hydrogenation of 1 gave a neutral crystalline hexahydro derivative (mp 169-171deg) and an acid octahydrosonderianin, the latter formed by catalytic hydrogenolysis of a _g_-lactone allylically situated to a furan ring, a reaction well documented in the literature [7, 8]. In both derivatives, the 1H NMR spectrum showed the disappearance of the bands at 5.745, 7.43, 6.40, 6.53 and 5.40, assigned to the furan, oxymethine and olefinic protons respectively. In their place appeared a four-proton multiplet centred at 3.80. In addition the 1H NMR of the octahydro derivative presented a broad signal at 10.80 interchangeable by addition of D2O.

Unequivoivoal proof of the structure and relative configuration of sonderianin (1) was achieved by X-ray crystallographic analysis. The colourless crystals of 1 have the space group P212121 with \(a\) = 7.314, \(b\) = 10.481 and \(c\) = 24.276A. Independent data were obtained for 2098 planes of which 975 had \(F\) > 30 (_F_) and were used in the refinement. Intensities were measured using graphite monochromatic CuK_a_radiation. The structure was solved by the MULTAN method. Table 2 shows angles and interatomic distances (standard deviation in parentheses) related to Fig. 1.

## Experimental

Mps are uncorr. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 270 and 25.2 MHz respectively, and chemical shifts (_d_ ppm) were measured from TMS as internal standard.

_Isolation of sonderianin_ (1). Chromatography of the C6H6 extract (25 s) on Si gel (125 g) of heartwood of _Croton sonderianus_, collected on Taperoaba-Sobral, Ceara, Brazil, yielded colourless needles of sonderianin (1, 800 mg).



## Page 2



###### Acknowledgements.

This work was supported by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos S.A. (FINEP) and Banco do Nordeste do Brasil (BNB). The authors are indebted to Dr. P. Baker (NPPN, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) and to Dr. Hugo E. Gottlieb (The Weizman Institute of Science, Israel) for recording the \({}^{13}\)C NMR and \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra, respectively.

## References

* [1] M. A. (1978) _Molecular biology_. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.
* [2] M. A. (1978) _Molecular biology_. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.
* [3] M. A. (1978) _Molecular biology_. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.
* [4] M. A.



## Page 3



## References

* (1) Bilett, D., Durgeset, M., Heitz, S. and Aahond, A. (1975) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 3823
* (2) Wagner, H., Chari, V. M., Seitz, R., Lotter, H. and Herz, W. (1977) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 3039
* (3) Wagner, H., Seitz, R., Lotter, H. and Heitz, W. (1978) _J. Org. Chem._**43**, 3339.
* (4) Heitz, W., Pollotti, A.-M., Soderholm, A.-C., Shuhama, I. K. and Vichnewski, W. (1977) _J. Org. Chem._**42**, 3913.
* (5) Burke, B. A., Chan, W. R. and Prince, E. C. (1976) _Tetrahedron_**32,** 1881.
* (6) Chatterjee, A. and Banerjee, A. (1977) _Tetrahedron_**33,** 2407.
* (7) Chan, W. R., Taylor, D. R. and Willis, C. R. (1968) _J. Chem. Soc. C_ 2781.
* (8) Ito, K. and Furukawa, H. (1969) _Chem. Commun._ 653.
* (9) Budzikieviz, H., Djerassi, C. and Williams, D. H. (1964) in _Structure Elucidation of Natural Products by Mass Spectrometry_, Vol. 2, p. 156. Holden-Day, San Francisco.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline  & & & & & Angle & 1–2–3 \\ A1 1 & At 2 & At 3 & \(d_{12}\)(Å) & \(d_{23}\)(Å) & (degrees) \\ \hline C2 & C1 & C10 & 1.55(1) & 1.57(1) & 108.9(7) \\ C2 & C1 & C11 & 1.55(1) & 1.55(1) & 108.3(7) \\ C2 & C1 & C13 & 1.55(1) & 1.48(1) & 112.3(7) \\ C10 & C1 & C11 & 1.57(1) & 1.55(1) & 108.6(6) \\ C10 & C1 & C13 & 1.57(1) & 1.48(1)

