# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)91063-X.pdf

## Page 1



# Vellozone, a Tetracyclic triterpene from _Vellozia Stipitata_*

Angelo C. Pinto, Paul M. Baker, Benjamin Gilbert, Richard Pinchin, Francisco A. M. Reis, Magda S. Waineraich, Dorothea H. T. Zocher

# Abstract

The isolation of (20_R_)-20-hydroxy-24-methylenediammar-3-one from _Vellozia stipitata_ is described.

## INTRODUCTION

Previous papers [1, 2] have dealt with the chemical study of the hexane extract of _Vellozia stipitata_**L**. B. Smith & Ayensu which led to the isolation of a naphthalene norditerpene, lupeol, lupeome and 22-hydroxy-21_R_H-hopan-3-one. Subsequent work has resulted in the isolation of oleanolic acid and a new triterpene named vellozone (1) from the same extract. Vellozone, isolated in 0.6deg\({}_{\odot}\) yield of the dry plant, had previously been obtained from _V. aloifolia_ Martius [3].

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The molecular formula of vellozone (**1**), C3,H52O2, mp 141deg, was determined by high resolution MS [M+ observed at _m_/_e_ 456.395020, requires 456.396484]. Vellozone gave a positive test with tetranitromethane [4]. The 1R spectrum presented absorption bands for hydroxyl, carbonyl, terminal methylene (1640 and 880 cm-1) and _gem_-dimethyl groups (1380 cm-1).

The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** showed, _inter alia_, signals for five quaternary methyl groups between \(d\) 0.9 and 1.1, a signal at 1.18 for a methyl on the same carbon as an oxygen, and a doublet at 1.02 (6H, \(J\) = 7 Hz) assigned to an isopropyl group. Two broad singlets at 4.7 and 4.76 and a signal at 1.38, which disappeared upon the addition of deuterium oxide, provided further evidence for a terminal methylene and hydroxyl group, respectively.

A detailed study of the 13C NMR spectrum of this tetracyclic triterpene showed a signal at \(d\) 75.6, attributed to C-20 which bears a tertiary hydroxyl group [5]. Signals at 106.8 (_t_) and 157.4 (s) confirmed the presence of a terminal methylene group. The signals at 50.6, 47.6, 40.4 and 37.0 for four quaternary carbons, and a singlet at 219.3 suggested that vellozone had a dammarane skeleton with a carbonyl group at C-3 [6]. The signals at 22.1 (_q_) and 34.1 (_d_) can be attributed to an isopropyl group z to a double bond, thus characterizing the nature of the side chain [7].

Reduction of vellozone with sodium borohydride gave a did (**2**). This, upon acetylation with acetic anhydride and pyridine, gave a monoacetate (**3**) which presented absorption bands in the IR for a hydroxyl group as well as the terminal methylene and acetate groups.

The 1H NMR of 3 showed signals for six quaternary C-Me groups, an isopropyl group and one acetyl Me. The double doublet at \(d\) 4.5 (_J_ = 10 and 6 Hz) is characteristic of an acetyl carbonicic proton z-oriented in a cyclohexane ring, and supported the presence of a 3-keto group in vellozone.

Analysis of the MS of **1** and its derivatives (Table 1) determined the nature of the tetracyclic skeleton.



## Page 2

Cleavage of ring C of **1**, **2**, and **3**, gave peaks at _m/e_ 205, 207, and 249, respectively, which limited the choice of skeletons to the dammarane group and excluded the euphane and lanostane type skeletons [8, 9]. Rupture of the bond between C-17 and C-20 gave peaks at _m/e_ 315, 317 and 359 for the cyclic part of the three compounds [10] and another at _m/e_ 141, which in turn loses water (m* at _m/e_ 107.3 corresponds to 141-123), for the side chain.

The CD curve of **1** gave a weakly negative Cotton effect, similar to (20_R_)-20-hydroxydammar-24-en-3-one [11], which made it possible to postulate the A and B-rings as being _trans_-anti-_trans_ with the C-5 hydrogen a-oriented.

Care had to be taken when working with vellozone to avoid epimerization at C-20 (from \(R\) to _S_). This was observed to occur if, during the chromatographic purification of the extracts, the compound remained in contact with the Si gel for several days. Ozonolysis, in CH2Cl2 at 0deg, of the epimer gave Mills' trisonlactone (**4**) [12, 13], thus proving the \(R\) configuration at C-20 in vellozone. Thus vellozone is assigned the structure (20_R_)-20-hydroxy-24-methylenediammar-3-one.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Mps are uncorr. IR spectra in KBr disc. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded in CDCl3 at 100 and 25.2 MHz, respectively, and chemical shifts (d ppm) measured from TMS as internal standard. Column chromatography was on Merck Si gel (0.05-0.20 mm), TLC on Merck Si gel H, G or PF254 + 366.

_Isolation of vellozone_ (**1**). Chromatography of the hexane extract (90 _g_) of the trunk, roots and leaf sheaths of _Velloza situriata_, collected in the Serra do Cipo, Minas Gerais, Brazil, yielded vellozone (**1**) as white needles, mp 141deg; UV \(\dot{\chi}_{\max}^{\text{KBr}}\) nm:288 (_c_ = 24). IR \(\dot{\chi}_{\max}^{\text{KBr}}\) nm - 1: 3340, 1700, 1640 and 880. 1H NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3: d 0.90 (3 H, s), 0.92 (3 H, s), 0.94 (3 H, s), 1.02 (6 H, d, \(J\) = 7 Hz), 1.05 (3 H, s), 1.1 (3 H, s), 1.18 (3 H, s), 1.38 (1 H, _br_ s), exchangeable with D2O), 2.5 (2 H, _m_), 4.7 (1 H, _br_ s) and 4.76 (1 H, _br_ s). MS _m/e_ (rel. int.): 456 (M*, 3), 441 (2), 438 (7), 413 (4), 359 (16), 316 (48), 315 (4), 205 (23), 141 (71), 123 (100), 83 (53), and 81 (51).

_Reduction of vellozone_ (**1**). Compound **1** (50 mg) was reduced with NaBH4 in MeOH for 10 min at room temp. The product was recrystallized from a mixture of hexane and EtOAc to give needles of the diol **2**, (42 mg), mp 102-3deg.

_Acetylation of diol_**2**. Ac2O (2 ml) was added to a soln of **2** (30 mg) in C_H_5Cl2 (30 ml) was deionized for 3 hr at 0deg. The ozonide was decomposed with conc K1 soln, and extracted with CH2Cl2 (5 x 20 ml). The combined extracts were washed with H2O, dried and coned. Purification by chromatography gave colourless crystals (90 mg), mp 181-182deg, as the principle product. The spectral data were identical to those reported for Mills' trisonlactone [12, 13], mp 181-183deg (lit. 181-183deg): \(\dot{\chi}_{\max}^{\text{KBr}}\) cm - 1: 1760 and 1700. The MS showed significant peaks at _m/e_ (rel. int.): 414 (M*, 75), 399 (M* - 15, 10), 205 (78) and 99 (100).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are indebted to Dra. Nanuza L. de Menezes for identification of the plant and to the Ministry of Planning (FINEP), the National Research Council (CNPq), and the Research Council of this Universtiy (CEPG) for financial assistance.

## References

* (1) Pinto, A. C., Pinchin, R., Zocher, D. H. T. and Lopes, C. C. (1979) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 405.
* (2) Pinto, A. C., Zocher, D. H. T., Gonzaga, L., Pinchin, R. and Lopes, C. C. (1980) _Cienc. Cult._ (_Suppl._) **32**, 122.
* (3) Reis, F. A. M. (1972) M. Sc. Thesis, NPPN, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
* (4) Fieser, L. F., and Fieser, M. (1967) _Reagents for Organic Synthesis_, Vol. 1, p. 1147. Interscience, New York.
* (5) Roberts, J. D., Weigert, F. J., Kroschwitz, J. I. and Reich, H. J. (1970) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**92**, 1338.
* (6) Asakawa, J., Kasai, R., Yamasaki, K. and Tanaka, O. (1977) _Tetrahedron_**33**, 1935.
* (7) Khuong-Hun, F., Sangare, M., Chari, V. M., Berkaert, A., Devys, M., Barbier, M. and Lukacs, G., (1975) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 1789.
* (8) Djerassi, C., Wilson, J. M. and Budzikiewicz, H. (1963) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**85**, 3688.
* (9) Hinge, J. K., Paknikar, J. K., Das, B. C., Boset, A. R. and Battacharya, S. C. (1968) _Tetrahedron_**22**, 2861.
* (10) Duffield, A. M., (1969) in _Recent Advances in Phytochemistry_, Vol II, p. 107. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.
* (11) Baker, P. M., Barreiro, E. J. L. and Gilbert, B. (1976) _Photochemistry_**15**, 785.
* (12) Mills, J. S. (1956) _J. Chem. Soc._ 2196.
* (13) Cascon, S. C. and Brown K. S., Jr. (1972) _Tetrahedron_**28**, 315.



