# 10.1002@cbdv.201000011.pdf

## Page 1

Chemical Constituents of _Papulaspora immersa_, an Endophyte from _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ (Asteraceae), and Their Cytotoxic Activity

Margareth Borges Coutinho Gallo\({}^{\text{a)}}\), Bruno Coelho Cavalcanti\({}^{\text{b)}}\), Francisco Washington Araujo Barros\({}^{\text{b)}}\), Maneol Odorico de Moraes\({}^{\text{b)}}\), Leticia Veras Costa-Lotufo\({}^{\text{b)}}\), Claudia Pessoa\({}^{\text{b)}}\), Jairo Kenupp Bastos\({}^{\text{a)}}\), and Monica Tallarico Pupo\({}^{\text{a)}}\)

###### Abstract

_Papulaspora immersa_ H. H. Hotson was isolated from roots and leaves of _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ (Poepp. and Endl.) H. Rob. (Asteraceae), traditionally known as Yacon. The fungus was cultured in rice, and, from the AcOEt fraction, 14 compounds were isolated. Among them, (22\(E\),24_R_)-8,14-epoxygerosta-4,22-diene-3,6-dione (**4**), 2,3-epoxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene-_c_-1,c-4,8-triol (**10**), and the chromone papulasporin (**13**) were new secondary metabolites. The spectral data of the known natural products were compared with the literature data, and their structures were established as the (24_R_)-stigmast-4-en-3-one (**1**), 24-methylenecycloartan-3_b_-ol (**2**), (22\(E\),24_R_)-ergosta-4,6,8(14),22-tetraen-3-one (**3**), (-)-(3\(R\),4_R_)-4-hydroxymellein (**5**), (-)-(3_R_)-5-hydroxymelelin (**6**), 6,8-dihydroxy-3-methyl-isocoumarin (**7**), (-)-(45)-4,8-dihydroxy-_a_-tetraolone (**8**), naphthalene-1,8-diol (**9**), 6,7,8-trihydroxy-3-methylisocoumarin (**11**), 7-hydroxy-2,5-dimethylchromone (**12**), and tyrosol (**14**). Compound **4** showed the highest cytotoxic activity against the human tumor cell lines MDA-MB435 (melanoma), HCT-8 (colon), SF295 (glioblastoma), and HL-60 (promyelocytic leukemia), with _IC_50 values of 3.3, 14.7, 5.0 and 1.6 mM, respectively. Strong synergistic effects were also observed with compound **5** and some of the isolated steroidal compounds.

## Introduction

_Smallanthus sonchifolius_ (Poepp. and Endl.) H. Rob. (Asteraceae), traditionally known as _Yacon_, is a tuber crop originated from the Andes. Nowadays, it has been mainly cultured in Brazil and Japan due to the production of natural sweeteners from its roots [1]. Additionally, leaves exhibit antidiabetic, antifungal, and antioxidant properties [2]. Chemical studies of both leaf and root constituents revealed several compounds including the inulin-type oligofructans, antimicrobial melampolide-type sesquiterpene lactones, and chlorogenic and caffeic acid derivatives, along with kaurene-type diterpenes [3][4].

Plants can harbor complex microbial interactions in a variety of relationships ranging from mutualistic to pathogenic. Endophytes are assumed to supply their host plant with a plethora of compounds that afford protection and eventually survival value to the plant. In addition, these compounds may interact with other biological systems representing targets suitable for the development of novel products for the pharmaceutical industry [5].

_Papulaspora immersa_ H. H. Hotson (Ascomycetes, Sordariales, Chaetomiaceae) is a familiar soil competitor mold in the culture of mushrooms [6], and it has been 

## Page 2

recently reported as endophyte in a few plant species such as _Vitex negundo_[7], _Taxus chinensis_[8], and _Solanum tuberosum_[9]. Moreover, this fungus has been highlighted as antimicrobial [7][10], and as a producer of some important metabolites such as taxol [8], diketopiperazines [11], as well as phenol-oxidizing and amylase enzymes [12].

As a part of our program to find endophytes in medicinal Asteraceae as potential new cytotoxic secondary metabolites producers [13][14], we have isolated 32 endophytic fungi from _S. sonchifolius_ tissues. Among them, _P. immersa_ extracts displayed strong cytotoxicity and were considered as promising sources of bioactive compounds [15]. The aim of this study was to isolate and describe the constituents of the active extracts in order to evaluate their cytotoxicity. As a result, fourteen substances were isolated and characterized. Three of them were found as new secondary metabolites and designated as (22\(E\),24_R_)-8,14-epoxyergosta-4,22-diene-3,6-dione (**4**), 2,3-epoxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene-_c_-1,_c_-4,8-triol (**10**), and papulas-porin (**13**).

## Results and Discussion

_Chemistry._ Extensive chromatographic purification of the cytotoxic AcOEt-soluble fraction from the solid culture of _P. immersa_ yielded the new secondary metabolites **4**, **10**, and **13** (_Fig._). In addition, eleven known compounds were found and identified by analysis of their optical rotation, IR, 1D- and 2D-NMR, and

Figure. _Structures of compounds isolated from_ Papulaspora immersa



## Page 3

MS data, as well as by comparison with data reported in the literature as (24_R_)-stigmast-4-en-3-one or sitostenone (**1**) [16], 24-methylenecyloartan-3_b_-ol (**2**) [17], (22\(E\),24_R_)-ergosta-4,6,8(14),22-tetraen-3-one (**3**) [18], (-)-(3\(R\),4_R_)-4-hydroxymethylein (=(-)-(3\(R\),4_R_)-mellein-4-ol; **5**) [19], (-)-(3_R_)-5-hydroxymethylein (=(-)-(3_R_)-mellein-5-ol; **6**) [20], 6,8-dihydroxy-3-methylisocoumarin (=3-methylisocoumarin-6,8-diol; **7**) [21], (-)-(45)-4,8-dihydroxy-_a_-tetralone (**8**) [22], naphthalene-1,8-diol (**9**) [23], 6,7,8-trihydroxy-3-methylisocoumarin (**11**) [24], 7-hydroxy-2,5-dimethylchromone (**12**) [25], and tyrosol (**14**) [26]. The structure elucidation of the new compounds **4** and **13**, and the new natural product **10** are described in the text below.

(22\(E\),24_R_)-8,14-Epoxyergosta-4,22-diene-3,6-dione (**4**) was isolated as a yellow oil. The HR-ESI mass spectrum displayed a _quasi_-molecular [_M_ + Na]+ ion (_m/z_ 447.2921) consistent with the molecular formula C28H40O3, which was confirmed by the NMR data. The IR spectrum showed bands of the stretching vibrations of the CO groups at 1696 cm-1 and the C=C bond conjugated with them at 1607 cm-1. An absorption band at 250.5 nm observed in the UV spectrum corroborated the presence of a D4-3,6-dione system [27]. The CD spectrum displayed positive peaks at 230 and 270 nm, and a negative peak at 300 nm characteristics of \(a\),_b_-unsaturated oxosteroids and 3,6-dioxosteroids, respectively [28][29]. In the 1H-NMR spectrum (_Table 1_), the downfield signal at _d_(H) 6.35 (H-C(4)), corresponding to the H-atom of a trisubstituted olefinic moiety, the signals assigned to six Me groups including four _doublets_ at _d_(H) 0.81, 0.83, 0.91, and 1.08 (Me(26), Me(27), Me(28), and Me(21), resp.), two _singlets_ at _d_(H) 0.98 and 1.25 (Me(18) and Me(19), resp.), and a _multiplet_ assigned to two olefinic H-atoms at _d_(H) 5.25 - 5.27 (H-C(22) and H-C(23)) confirmed the structure of **4** as a D4,22-3,6-dioxoergosteroid. The C(22)=C(23) bond in the side chain was corroborated by HMDC key correlations of Me(21) (_d_(H) 1.08) and Me(28) (_d_(H) 0.91) with C(23) (_d_(C) 132.6), and its configuration was assumed to be (_E_) as for the co-metabolite **3**[18], since it was not possible to determine the \(J\) value of the _multiplet_ at _d_(H) 5.25-5.27. The 13C-NMR spectrum along with the HMDC contour map (_Table 1_) revealed 28 C-atom signals, including two O-bearing C-atom signals at _d_(C) 71.5 and 62.5 (C(8), C(14)). Further HMDC long-range correlations of H-C(9) (_d_(H) 2.83), CH2(11) (_d_(H) 1.92-1.82 and 1.97-2.06), and Me(18) (_d_(H) 0.98) with C(14) (_d_(C) 62.5), respectively, together with the EI-MS diagnostic fragment-ion peaks at _m/z_ 150 ([_M_ - C19H30O]+), 175 ([_M_ - C17H29O]+), 189 ([_M_ - C16H27O]+), and 257 ([_M_ - C12H23]+), indicated the presence of an epoxy-ring linking C(8) (_d_(C) 71.5) to C(14) (_d_(C) 62.5). The _b_-configuration was assigned based on the optical-rotation increment studies of 8,9- and 8,14-epoxy steroids, which presented negative optical rotation for the _a_-epimer [30]. The (_R_)-configuration at C(24) (_d_(C) 43.5) was established based on the configuration of the similar isolated metabolite **3**. The foregoing data enabled the determination of the structure of **4** as (22\(E\),24_R_)-8,14-epoxyergosta-4,22-diene-3,6-dione. Steroids with 3,6-dioxo functions represent a rare group of natural products produced by sponges, red algae [29], and plants [31]. This is the first report from a fungal source.

Compound **10** was isolated as a brownish solid and had the molecular formula C10H10O4 determined by HR-ESI-MS (observed peak at _m/z_ 217.0519). The molecular-ion peak was not observed in the EI mass spectrum, but a peak corresponding to ([_M_ - H2O]+) at _m/z_ 176 and an intense peak at _m/z_ 147 ([_M_ - CHO]+) instead, due to 

## Page 4

radical-cation rearrangement characteristic of 2,3-tetralin epoxide compounds [32]. The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum (600 MHz; _Table 2_) revealed a group of signals characteristic of a trisubstituted aromatic ring at d(H) 7.08 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 7.8, 7.2, H - C(6)), 6.82 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 7.8, 1.2, H - C(7)), and 6.74 (br. \(d\), \(J\) = 7.2, H - C(5)). Two OH-bearing CH groups with signals at d(H) 5.30 (H - C(1)) and 4.88 (H - C(4)) displayed coupling constants of 2.4 Hz, suggesting a _cis_-arrangement along with two CH H-atoms with signals at d(H) 3.46 and 3.44 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 3.6, 2.4, 1.2, H - C(2), H - C(3)), which were ascribed to epoxidic H-atoms of a 2,3-epoxy-tetrahydrofuranphalenol system [33]. The _cis_-orientation was confirmed on the basis of NOESY correlations H - C(1)/H - C(2) and H - C(3)/H - C(4). An additional NOESY correlation H - C(4)/H - C(5) reinforced the positions of these H-atoms. The IR spectrum revealed bands at 1278, 968, and 829 cm-1, characteristic of an epoxy ring [34]. The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectrum (_Table 2_) showed ten C-atom signals corroborating the signals observed in the \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum. HMBC Long-range correlations between the signals of H - C(1) (d(H) 5.30), and those of the 

## Page 5

C-atoms C(2), C(10), C(8), and C(9) (d(C) 52.7, 122.3, 156.5, and 137.6, resp.) were observed. On the basis of the above mentioned data, the structure of **10** was established as 2,3-epoxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene-_c_-1,_c_-4,8-triol. A similar ring system was found in the structures of mycochrysone and cervicarcin, compounds produced by fungi [32]; however, compound **10** had been previously obtained only as a synthetic reduction product of juglone epoxide [33].

Compound **13** had the molecular formula C12H12O4 determined from the HR-ESI-MS adduct ion peak at _m/z_ 243.0709 ([_M_ + Na]+). The 1H-NMR spectrum (500 MHz, (D6)acetone; _Table 3_) revealed signals similar to those of the isolated isocumarins, except for the signal at d(H) 5.95 (H-C(3)), characteristic of an \(a\),_b_-unsaturated ketone function, and an additional Me group signal at d(H) 2.65 (Me(12)). HMBC Long-range correlations of H-atom signals at d(H) 5.95 (H-C(3)) and 2.36 (Me(11)) to the C-atom signal at d(C) 164.0 (C(2)) together with UV absorptions at 223.5, 246, 253, and 292.5, typical of 2-methylchromones [35][36], corroborated the compound's class. The 5-linkage site for the Me group with the signal at d(H) 2.65 (Me(12)) was carefully determined by HMBC key correlations with the C-atom signals at d(C) 117.0 (C(4a)) and 136.0 (C(5)) (downfield shift caused by the electron-withdrawing effect of the CO group, as observed in compound **12**) along with NOE observed on the H-atom with the signal at d(H) 6.71 (H-C(6)) upon irradiation of the neighboring Me group. HMBC between the signals at d(H) 6.71 (H-C(6)) and d(C) 154.0 (C(7)), together with fragment-ion peaks at _m/z_ 91 ([_M_ - Me - 2 CO - HCCMe - H2O]+) and 67 ([_M_ - Me - 2 CO - HCCMe - HCCOH]+), ascertained the OH linkage site at C(7). Further 13C-NMR and HMBC spectra in (D3)MeCN and (D6)DMSO (150 and 600 MHz, resp.; _Table 3_) allowed the assignment of C-atoms C(4) and C(8a), the signals of which had not been formerly observed in the 13C-NMR spectrum performed in (D6)acetone. The structure of compound **13** was then established as papulasporin (= 7-hydroxy-8-methoxy-2,5-dimethylchromone).

_Biology._ The concentrations of each tested compound to inhibit 50% of tumor cell growth (_IC_50) are listed in _Table 4_. According to the results, some structure-activity relationships can be inferred from the assay. Compound **4** showed the most significant 

## Page 6

cytotoxicity results and was about ten times more effective than compound **3** against three tumor cell lines. Compounds **3** and **4** present different substitution patterns in \(B\) and \(C\) rings, when compared to compound **1**, which was less active, suggesting that a higher oxidation level at rings \(B\) and \(C\) enhances their cytotoxic activity. Based on the reported cytotoxic synergistic result obtained between the steroid **3** and the pentaketide 8-hydroxy-6-methoxy-3-methylisocoumarin [15], compounds **1**, **3**, and ergosterol peroxide (**15**) were tested against the studied cancer cell lines in mixture with isocumarin **5**. Significant increases in the cytotoxic activities of compounds **1** and **15** were observed in this case (_Table 4_), corroborating the potential anticancer synergistic effect of isocumarin compounds, which has also been detected with other drugs [37][38].

The isolation of isocoumarins **5**-**7** and naphthalene derivatives **8**-**10** may explain the good antimicrobial activity of extracts from _P. immersa_ reported in the literature [7][10], since it is known that both classes of compounds present antimicrobial activities [19][39], and can act synergistically [40][41].

This work was funded by grants from _Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo_ (FAPESP), No. 04/07935-6 and 08/09540-0, as well as _Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico_ (CNPq), _Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos_ (FINEP), and _Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior_ (CAPES). The authors thank _Claudia C. Macedo_ and _Silvana F. dos Santos_ for technical assistance, Dr. _Antonio Jose da Costa Filho_ (Universidade de Sao Paulo, campus Sao Carlos, Brazil) for the CD analysis, Dr. _Vasiliv Korotchenko_ and _Adam Hoye_ (University of Pittsburgh, USA) for carrying out the 600-MHz NMR analyses, as well as _Miranda J. Sarachine_ and Dr. _Billy W. Day_, University of Pittsburgh, for English revision. _Margareth B. C. Gallo_ acknowledges FAPESP for postdoctoral fellowship (grant No. 05/56259-6).



## Page 7



## Experimental Part

_General_. HPLC: _Shimadzu LC-6AD_ pump, an _SPD-20A_ UV/VIS detector with a _CBM-20A_ interface; data acquisition on _LC Solution_ software version 1.1. Optical rotations: _Digital Jasco DIP-370_ polarimeter. CD Spectra: in CHCl3 on a _Jasco J-715_. UV Spectra: _Shimadzu UV-1650PC_ UV/VIS spectrophotometer; \(l\) (log _e_) in nm. IR Spectra: _NICOLET_ FT-IR (_Protege 460_) spectrometer in NaCl cell; in cm-1. 1D- and 2D-NMR spectra: in deuterated solvents (CDCl3, (D6)acetone, CD3CN, (D6)DMSO, D2O, or CD3OD) on _Bruker_ spectrometers (_DRX-400_ and _-500_, and _Ultra Shielded Plus-600_); the NOESY experiment (600 MHz) was acquired using the NOESYPHSW sequence with 0.7-s mixing time; TMS was used as internal reference; \(d\) in ppm, \(J\) in Hz. EI-MS: _Shimadzu_ GC/EI-MS _OP2010_ employing an _AOC-20i_ auto-injector and a _DBS-MS_ (30 m x 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm) column; in _m/z_ (rel. %). HR-ESI-MS: _Ultro-TOF_ (_Bruker-daltonics_, Billarica, USA); in _m/z_.

_Plant and Fungal Materials_. Leaves, roots, and stem of _Yacon_ were collected in February 2006 in the city of Ribeirao Preto (S21deg 11.933' NO47deg 46.699'), Sao Paulo State, Brazil. A voucher specimen was deposited with the Herbarium of Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciencias e Letras da Universidade de Sao Paulo (SPFR) campus Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. _P. immersa_ was isolated, identified, and stored according to the procedure reported in [15].

_Cultivation and Extraction_. Based on the promising cytotoxic activities of extracts resulting from the fungus culture in rice [15], 30 _Erlenmeyer_ flasks of 500 ml, each one containing 90 g of parboiled rice in 90 ml of dist. H2O, previously twice autoclaved at 120deg for 40 min, were used for a large-scale extract preparation in order to isolate the active secondary metabolites. At r.t., the flasks containing the autoclaved rice were vigorously manually shaken before being inoculated with agar plugs (_ca._ 2 x 2 cm) cut from the 7-d cultures on PDA agar. The flasks were incubated for 20 d in a BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) device at 30deg with daily shaking for the first few days to provide the fungus a uniform penetration into the rice. One flask without inoculum was kept for control use. After the incubation time,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compound & _IC_50 [μg/ml] (μm) & [_CI_95]a) & & \\ HCT-8 & MDA-MB435 & SF 295 & HL-60 \\
**1** & \textgreater{} 25 (60.6) & \textgreater{} 25 (60.6) & \textgreater{} 25 (60.6) & \textgreater{} 25 (60.6) \\
**2** & \textgreater{} 25 (56.8) & \textgreater

## Page 8

400 ml of EtOH was added to each flask, the contents were strongly agitated and allowed to stand overnight at r.t. Crude extract was obtained after vacuum filtration and removal of EtOH under vacuum at 40deg. The resulting extract was diluted in 400 ml EtOH/H2O 1:1 and fractionated by liquid-liquid partition with _ca._ 3 x 200 ml AcOEt. The resulting org. layer was evaporated under reduced pressure to produce the AcOEt fraction of solid culture (EaS) and a residue (RS) that was lyophilized.

_Isolation of Compounds_. EaS fraction (15.61 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC) on SiO2 (150.0 g, 400-230 mesh, _ph_ 8.0 x 9.0 cm) using a gradient from 100% hexane, hexane/AcOEt to AcOEt/MeOH (11 of each) to yield 13 fractions, _EaS1_-_EaS13_. Fr. EaS3_ (3.53 g) was chromatographed (SiO2; 230-80 mesh, _ph_ 5.0 x 28.0 cm; hexane/AcOEt 9:1). A total of 35 fractions of 20 ml each were collected and pooled into eleven fractions, _EaS3_-_a_-_EaS3_-_k_, according to their composition determined by TLC and visualized under UV light and spraying with sulfuric vanillin. _Fr. EaS3_-_e_ (447.0 mg) was further purified by HPLC (_Nucleosil_ SiO2 _100-7_ column, 250 x 10 mm i.d. x 7 mm, hexane/AcOEt 9:1; flow rate of 3.0 ml/min and the detection acquired at 254 nm) to afford three fractions, _EaS3_-_e_1 -_EaS3_-_e_3_. Fr. EaS3_-_e_1_ (28.8 mg, 17.4 min) was purified by prep. TLC on laboratory-prep. plate (20.0 x 20.0 cm; 2.0 mm thickness) covered with SiO2 _60 F254_, developed with hexane/AcOEt 9:1 and UV detection, to yield compound **1** (10.0 mg). _Frs. EaS3_-_e_2 (1.2 mg, 18.8 min) and _EaS3_-_e_3 (4.9 mg, 21.0 min) afforded compounds **2** and **3**, resp. _Fr. EaS4_ (984.0 mg) was chromatographed (SiO2, 400-230 mesh, _ph_ 3.0 x 24.0 cm; gradient from hexane/AcOEt 9:1 to 100% MeOH). A total of 16 fractions of 125 ml each were collected and combined into five fractions, _EaS4_-_A_-_EaS4_-_E_. _Fr. EaS4_-_B_ (308.6 mg) was rechromatographed (SiO2, 230-80 mesh, _ph_ 2.0 x 22.0 cm; gradient from hexane/AcOEt 9:1 to 100% EtOH). A total of 38 fractions of 20 ml each were collected and pooled into ten fractions, _EaS4_-_Ba_-_EaS4_-_B_. _Fr. EaS4_-_B_ (20.5 mg) was purified by prep. TLC and developed with hexane/AcOEt 8:2 to yield compound **4** (10.1 mg). _Fr. _EaS4_-_B_ (40.1 mg) was further purified by HPLC (_Shimpack C18_ column, 250 x 20 mm i.d. x 15 mm, coupled to a _G-ODS8_ guard column; gradient elution with MeOH (_B_) in H2O (5-100% \(B\) in 30 min, followed by 100% \(B\) during 15 min)) to provide compounds **5** (1.9 mg; 32.7-34.5 min), **6** (1.3 mg; 35.4-37.2 min) and **7** (1.2 mg; 37.3-40.0 min). _Fr. EaS4_-_C_ (90.2 mg) was chromatographed (SiO2, 230-80 mesh, _ph_ 2.0 x 18.0 cm; gradient from hexane/AcOEt 8:2/1% AcOH to 100% EtOH). A total of 19 fractions of 20 ml each were collected and pooled into nine fractions, _EaS4_-_CA_-_EaS4_-_CI_. _Fr. EaS4_-_CE_ (28.1 mg) was purified by HPLC employing the same conditions for _EaS4_-_Bi_ but using MeOH/H2O 85:15 isocratic elution, and yielded compound **5** (12.5 mg; 21.5-24.5 min) and _Fr. EaS4_-_CE2_ (26.5 min, 5.0 mg), that was further rechromatographed using recycling HPLC (_Shimadzu LC-GAV_ (_UV-SPD-10AV_), _Asahipak Shocker GS-310 26_ column (500 x 20 mm i.d. x 13 mm); MeOH/H2O 9:1; flow rate of 3 ml/min and detector at 290 nm) to yield compound **8** (2.0 mg; second peak after three cycles of 26.0 min. each). _Fr. EaS5_ (1.36 g) was chromatographed (SiO2, 230-80 mesh, _ph_ 4.0 x 26.0 cm; gradient from hexane/AcOEt 65:35 to 100% AcOEt and 100% MeOH). A total of 16 fractions of 150 ml each were collected and pooled into seven fractions, _EaS5_-_a_-_EaS5_-_Fr. _EaS5_-_d_ (153.8 mg) was chromatographed (_Sephadex LH-20, _ph_ 2.5 x 55.0 cm; EtOH). A total of ten fractions of 60 ml each were collected and pooled into eight fractions, _EaS5_-_d_-_EaS5_-_d_8_. _Fr. EaS5_-_d_5 (16.7 mg) spontaneously crystallized to afford compound **11**. _Fr. _EaS5_-_d_3_ (5.2 mg) was further purified by HPLC (_Nucleosil_ SiO2 _100-7_ column, 250 x 10 mm i.d. x 7 mm; hexane/AcOEt 1:1; flow rate of 1.5 ml/min and detector at 290 nm) to afford compound **12** (0.6 mg; 34.7-37.8 min), and a mixture **13/14** 5:1 ratio (0.6 mg; 39.2-42.5 min). _Fr. EaS6_ (2.45 g) was submitted to CC (SiO2, 400-200 mesh, _ph_ 5.0 x 24.0 cm; gradient from hexane/AcOEt 35:65, 100% AcOEt, and 100% MeOH). The resulting fractions were pooled into eight fractions, _EaS6_-_a_-_EaS6_-_h_. _Fr. _EaS6_-_g_ (202.2 mg) was purified by HPLC (_Asahipack Shocker GS-310 20G_ column, 500 x 20 mm i.d. x 13 mm; MeOH; detector at 254 nm and a flow rate of 1.5 ml/min) to yield _Fr. EaS6_-_g_1 (74.1 mg; 36.0-44.0 min) that was purified by prep. TLC (hexane/AcOEt 8:2) to afford compounds **9** (10.0 mg) and **10** (12.4 mg).

_(14b,22E,24R)_-_8,14-Epoxyergosta-4,22-diene-3,6-dione_ (**4**). Yellow oil. [a]28 = + 15.5 (_c_ = 1.0, CHCl3). UV (MeOH): 194 (3.84), 205 (3.86), 250 (3.95). IR (NaCl): 3395, 2957, 2925, 2854, 1696, 1607, 1462, 1382, 1239, 1175, 979, 887, 756. 1H- and 13C-NMR: see _Table 1_. EI-MS: 424 (20), 409 (5), 396 (5), 381 (5), 327 (5), 300 (5), 285 (15), 257 (10), 229 (30), 189 (10), 175 (5), 150 (15), 137 (30), 109 (25), 69 (100), 55 (65). HR-ESI-MS: 4472886 ([_M_ + Na)+, C28H40NaO3+; calc. for 4472875).



## Page 9

rel-_(1a_S,2S,7R,7_a_R)_-1a,2,7,7a-Tetrahydronaphtho[2,3-b]oxirene-2,3,7-triol_ (**10**). Brownish solid. \([a]_{0}^{2\gamma} = - 74.4\) (\(c = 1.35\), MeOH). UV (MeOH): 223 (3.12), 279 (3.22). IR (NaCl): 3356, 1595, 1472, 1406, 1278, 1019, 968, 829, 723. 1H- and 13C-NMR: see _Table 2_. EI-MS: 176 (20), 159 (15), 147 (100), 131 (5), 119 (5), 103 (10), 91 (40), 77 (10), 65 (20), 51 (10). HR-ESI-MS: 217.0484 (\([M + \text{Na}\rbrack^{+}\), C\({}_{10}\)H\({}_{10}\)NaO\({}_{\overline{4}}^{+}\); calc. 217.0477).

_Papulasporin_ (\(=7\)_-Hydroxy-8-methoxy-2,5-dimethyl-4_H-_chromen-4-one_; **13**). Compound **13** reported here was a 5 : 1 mixture with compound **14**. White amorphous powder. UV (MeOH): 223, 246, 253, 292. 1H- and 13C-NMR: see _Table 3_. EI-MS: 220 (60), 205 (70), 177 (100), 137 (40), 109 (15), 91 (5), 77 (10), 67 (5). HR-ESI-MS: 243.0633 (\([M + \text{Na}\rbrack^{+}\), C\({}_{12}\)H\({}_{12}\)NaO\({}_{\overline{4}}^{+}\); calc. 243.0633).

_Tumor Cell Culture and Cytotoxic Bioassay._ Human tumor cell lines MDA-MB435 (melanoma), HCT-8 (colon), SF295 (glioblastoma), and HL-60 (promyelocytic leukemia) were obtained from _National Cancer Institute_ (Bethesda, MD, USA). All cell lines were cultured in _RPMI-I640_ medium, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin). Cultures were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37\({}^{\circ}\) under 5% CO2 atmosphere. The cytotoxic effect was assessed using the MTT (\(=3\)-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2_H_-tetrazolium bromide) assay for cell viability described by _Mosmann_ [42]. The cells were placed in 96-well plates at the following densities: \(0.7 \times 10^{5}\) (HCT-8), \(0.6 \times 10^{5}\) (SF295), \(0.3 \times 10^{6}\) (HL-60), and \(0.1 \times 10^{6}\) (MDA-MB435) cells/ml. Compounds were tested at a range from 0.048 to 25 mg/ml during 72 h. To test the synergic effect of compound **5** on compound **1**, **3**, and ergosterol peroxide (**15**) activities, a fixed concentration of 25 mg/ml was established for compound **5**, while a range from 0.39 to 25 mg/ml was carried out for compounds **1**, **3**, and **15**. Control groups received the same amount of vehicle. Doxorubicin (_Doxoplun_ 98%, _Zodiac Produtos Farmaceuticos S/A_, Brazil) was used as pos. control. The growth inhibition rate was quantified as the percentage of control absorbance of the reduced dye at 550 nm in accordance with the following equation:

\[\text{Inhibition rate} = [(OD_{\text{control well}} - OD_{\text{treated well}}) \times (OD_{\text{control well}})^{- 1}] \times 100\]

Each sample was tested in two independent experiments, each performed in triplicates. The results consisted of the average value for each experimental unit. The _IC_50 values and their 95% confidence intervals were obtained by nonlinear regression using GraphPad Prism software (_Intuitive Software for Science_, San Diego, CA).

## References

* [1] S. B. Genta, W. M. Cabrera, A. Grau, S. S. Sanchez, _Food Chem. Toxicol._**2005**, _43_, 1657.
* [2] K. Valentova, N. T. Truong, A. Moncion, I. de Waziers, J. Ulrichova, _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2007**, _55_, 7726.
* [3] K. Schorr, F. B. Da Costa, _Phytochem. Anal._**2005**, _16_, 161.
* [4] K. Schorr, I. Merfort, F. B. Da Costa, _Nat. Prod. Commun._**2007**, \(2\), 367.
* [5] M. B. C. Gallo, D. O. Guimaraes, L. S. Momesso, M. T. Pupo, in 'Microbial Biotechnology', Ed. R. Saikai, R. L. Bezbaruah, T. C. Bora, New India Publishing Agency, India, 2008, p. 139.
* [6] R. Fudo, T. Ando, S. Sato, T. Kameyama, S. Yamanaka, _Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem._**1997**,_61_, 183.
* [7] N. S. Raviraja, G. L. Maria, K. R. Sridhar, _Eng. Life Sci._**2006**, \(6\), 515.
* [8] K. Hu, F. Tan, K. Tang, S. Zhu, W. Wang, _Shanxi Daxue Xuebao (Ziran Kexueban)_**2006**, _31_, 134.
* [9] M. O'Callaghan, E. M. Gerard, N. W. Waipara, S. D. Young, T. R. Glare, P. J. Barrell, A. J. Conner, _Plant Soil_**2004**, _266_, 47.
* [10] G. H. Braun, H. P. Ramos, S. Said, 10th International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Conference, Salvador, Brazil, 2007.
* [11] A. Trigos, F. Sandoval, _Micol. Apl. Int._**2002**, _14_, 7.
* [12] P. R. Adams, _Mycopatologia_**1990**, _112_, 35.
* [13] D. O. Guimaraes, W. S. Borges, C. Y. Kawano, P. H. Ribeiro, G. H. Goldman, A. Nomizo, O. H. Thiemann, G. Oliva, N. P. Lopes, M. T. Pupo, _FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol._**2008**, _52_, 134.



## Page 10

* [14] K. B. Borges, W. S. Borges, M. T. Pupo, P. S. Bonato, _J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal._**2008**, _46_, 945.
* [15] M. B. C. Gallo, F. O. Chagas, M. O. Almeida, C. C. Macedo, B. C. Cavalcanti, F. W. A. Barros, M. O. de Moraes, L. V. Costa-Lotufo, C. Pessoa, J. K. Bastos, M. T. Pupo, _J. Basic Microbiol._**2009**, _49_, 142.
* [16] P. Georges, M. Sylvestre, H. Ruegger, P. Bourgeois, _Steroids_**2006**, _71_, 647.
* [17] S. Seo, A. Uomori, Y. Yoshimura, K. Takeda, H. Seto, Y. Ebizuka, H. Noguchi, U. Sankawa, _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans 1_**1988**, 2407.
* [18] H. Fujimoto, E. Nakamura, E. Okuyama, M. Ishibashi, _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**2004**, _52_, 1005.
* [19] K. Krohn, I. Kock, B. Elsasser, U. Florke, B. Schultz, S. Draeger, G. Pescitelli, S. Antus, T. Kurtan, _Eur. J. Org. Chem._**2007**, 1123.
* [20] M. Devys, M. Barbier, J.-F. Bousquet, A. Kollmann, _Photochemistry_**1994**, _35_, 825.
* [21] J. K. Kendall, T. H. Fisher, H. Thomas, H. P. Schultz, T. P. Schultz, _J. Org. Chem._**1989**, _54_, 4218.
* [22] S. K. Talapatra, B. Karmacharya, S. C. De, B. Talapatra, _Photochemistry_**1988**, _27_, 3929.
* [23] M. H. Wheeler, B. D. Bruton, L. S. Puckhaber, J. Zhang, R. D. Stipanovic, _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2004**, _52_, 4113.
* [24] M. Yamazaki, Y. Satoh, Y. Maebayashi, Y. Horie, _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1988**, _36_, 670.
* [25] S. Kametani, A. Kojima-Yuasa, H. Kikuzaki, D. O. Kennedy, M. Honzawa, I. Matsui-Yuasa, _Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem._**2007**, _71_, 1220.
* [26] S. Christophoridou, P. Dais, _Anal. Chim. Acta_**2009**, _633_, 283.
* [27] A. Migliuolo, V. Piccialli, D. Sica, _J. Nat. Prod._**1990**, _53_, 1262.
* [28] K. Kuriyama, M. Moriyama, T. Iwata, K. Tori, _Tetrahedron Lett._**1968**, _13_, 1661.
* [29] L. K. Shubina, T. N. Makarieva, V. A. Denisekenko, A. S. Dmitrenok, A. G. Guzii, O. S. Dmitrenok, V. A. Stonik, _Nat. Prod. Res._**2006**, _20_, 1183.
* [30] L. F. Fieser, G. Ourisson, _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**1953**, _75_, 4404.
* [31] K. Franke, A. K. Nasher, J. Schmidt, _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2004**, _32_, 219.
* [32] L. Prajer-Janczewska, K. Chmielenska, Z. Siatecki, _Spectrosc. Lett._**1977**, _10_, 91.
* [33] A. Rashid, G. Read, _J. Chem. Soc. C_**1969**, 2053.
* [34] R. A. Nyquist, 'Interpreting Infrared, Raman, and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectra: Variables in Data Interpretation', Vol. 1, Elsevier, New York, 2001.
* [35] G.-Y. Li, B.-G. Li, T. Yang, G.-Y. Liu, G.-L. Zhang, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**2008**, _91_, 124.
* [36] Y. Kimura, T. Mizuno, H. Nakajima, T. Hamasaki, _Biosci., Biotech., Biochem._**1992**, _56_, 1664.
* [37] J. S. Zhu, M. Q. Song, G. Q. Chen, Q. Li, Q. Sun, Q. Zhang, _World J. Gastroenterol._**2007**, _13_, 4131.
* [38] N. Agata, H. Nogi, M. Milhollen, S. Kharbanda, D. W. Kufe, _Cancer Res._**2004**, _64_, 8512.
* [39] D. Ezra, W. M. Hess, G. A. Strobel, _Microbiol._**2004**, _150_, 4023.
* [40] A. Cabras, M. A. Mannoni, S. Serra, A. Andolfi, M. Fiore, A. Evidente, _Eur. J. Plant Pathol._**2006**, _115_, 187.
* [41] G. A. Strobel, S. Spang, K. Kluck, W. M. Hess, J. Sears, T. Livinghouse, _FEMS Microbiol. Lett._**2008**, _283_, 140.
* [42] T. Mosmann, _J. Immunol. Methods_**1983**, _65_, 55.



