# 10.1016@j.bse.2012.03.005.pdf

## Page 1

Dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives from _Hortica_ species and their chemotaxonomic value in the Rutaceae

Patricia A.C. Braga, Vanessa G.P. Severino, Samya D.L. de Freitas, Maria Fatima das G.F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira, Jose R. Pirani, Milton Groppo

# Abstract

Phytochemical studies of _Hortica brasiliana_ and _Hortica__o__readica_ (Rutaceae) have led to the identification of three novel dihydrocinnamic acids: 5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-8-propanoic acid, 5,6-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-8-propanoic acid and _erythro_-2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-3-(1,2,3-trihydroxy-3-methylbutyl) benzenpropanoic acid from _H. brasiliana_ and the second compound and six known dihydrocinnamic acids from _H. oreadia_. Engler included _Hortica_ as the single Neotropical genus in the Toddaliaoideae subtribe Toddaliane. However, the range of dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives found in _H. brasiliana_ and _H. oreadia_ show that they contain similar compounds to other species of _Hortica_ and clearly point to their phytochemical affinities with other Rutoideae species.

## 1 Introduction

_Hortica_ is a Neotropical genus of the Rutaceae, traditionally included in the sub-family Toddaliaiodeae, subtribe Toddaliaiae (Engler, 1931). The ten species are distributed from Panama to the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, with most of the species occurring in the Amazonian region. Vandelli (1788) first described the genus based on numerous collections sent to him from Brazil (Minas Gerais state), without naming any species. De Candolle (1824) described _Hortica brasiliana Vand._ based on a specimen from Vandelli in the Jussieu herbarium, which was collected in southeastern Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro states. Saint-Hilaire (1824) described a shrub collected in Goias and western Minas Gerais, and named it _H. brasiliana_ (Vand.) H.S. He was aware that his name had been applied to an arborescent species by De Candolle (1824), but pointed out that he himself had not collected the specimens. Engler (1874) also attributed the name _H. brasiliana_ Vand. to the shrubby species of central Brazil. In the same treatment he described a new arborescent species, _Hortica arborea_ Engl. Recently, Groppo et al. (2005) showed that _H. brasiliana_ and _H. arborea_ represent the same arborescent species, and that _H. brasiliana_ Vand. ex DC. is the correct name while _H. arborea_ is a synonym. Albeit well known, the shrubby species of central Brazil remained unnamed, so Groppo et al. (2005) called it _Hortica oreadia_ Groppo, Kallunki & Pirani. Our taxonomic interest in the Rutaceae motivated an investigation of the taproots, stem and leaves of _H. oreadia_ and the stem, stem bark and leaves of _H. brasiliana_. The stem bark of _H. oreadia_ could not be stripped away from the woody, thus they were analyzed together as stem. The population of _H. brasiliana_ was small and root material was not collected as this might risk the survival of the trees.



## Page 2



## Material and methods

### General experimental procedures

NMR: on a Bruker DRX-400 and ARX-200, with TMS as internal standard; IR: Bomen-Ft/IR; UV: Varian 500 Scan UV-VIS-NIR; [a]D: Perkin Elmer 241 instrument; R-HPLC: Recycling High-Performance Liquid Chromatography on a model Shimadzu SCL-10A; the column used was a Shocke Asahipak GS-310 2G; eluant: MeOH 100%; flow rate: 3.0 mL min-1; detection (Shimadzu SCL-10A): UV? 254 nm; High Speed Countercurrent Chromatography (HSCCC): on a P.C. Inc., Potomac, MD 20854, USA; Elemental analyses: on an EA 1108, CHNS-O (Fisons); GC-MS: low resolution on an HP-2576 instrument; ESI-MSMS: Micromass Quattro LC instrument equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source.

### Plant material

_H. brasiliana_ Vand. Ex. D.C. was collected (May 2000) in Linhares, Espirito Santo state, Brazil. _H. oreadica_ Groppo, Kallunki & Pirani was collected (Sep 2005) in the Adolpho Ducke Forest Reserve, Itacoatiara, Amazonas state, Brazil. All the plants were identified by Prof. Dr. Jose Rubens Pirani of the Department of Botany, University of Sao Paulo, and vouchers are deposited in the herbarium of the same department (Pirani 4672 and Groppo Jr. 458, respectively).

### Extraction and isolation

Ground taproots (3.3 kg), stem (2.5 kg) and leaves (3.2 kg) of _H. oreadica_, and stem (938 g), stem bark (270 g) and leaves (655 g) of _H. brasiliana_ were extracted 3 times at room temperature using hexane, followed by CH2Cl2 and finally MeOH. The concentrated dichloromethane extract from _H. oreadica_ (67.6 g) taproots was subjected to column chromatography (CC) over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH yielded 6 fractions. The dichloromethane fraction was subjected to CC over silica gel (230-400 mesh). Elution with hexane-acetone gradient yielded 13 new fractions. Fraction 2 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel with hexane-EtOAc (19:1), yielding the compound **8** (14.4 mg). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as above using hexane-acetone (19:1) to yield compound **4** (774.4 mg). Fraction 7 was rechromatographed as above to yield compound **6** (119.6 mg). Fraction 11 was rechromatographed twice as described above (hexane-acetone 19:1, then hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone 16:3:1), affording compound **5** (78.9 mg). Fraction 13 was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel and eluted with hexane-acetone 6:1, yielding 8 new fractions. Fraction 7 was subjected to recycling high-performance liquid chromatography (R-HPLC) (MeOH; detection UV? 254 nm, flow rate: 3.0 mL min-1, polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G), and yielded compound **9** (2.3 mg). Fraction 8 was subjected to R-HPLC (MeOH:CH2Cl2, 1:1; detection UV? 254 nm, flow rate: 3.0 mL min-1, polymeric column Shodex Asahipak GS-310 2G), yielding compound **7** (23 mg).

The concentrated MeOH extract (3.0 g) from _H. oreadica_ stem was partitioned into hexane, EtOAc and MeOH soluble fractions. The 1H NMR (200 MHz) spectra of these fractions showed that the major dihydroxymethyloric acids were in the EtOAc soluble fraction, this was subjected to gel permeation column chromatography (Sephadex LH 20, MeOH) affording compounds **7** (5.5 mg) and **2** (3.5 mg).

The dichloromethane extract from _H. oreadica_ leaves (2.5 g) was subjected to preparative High Speed Countercurrent Chromatography (HSCCC) equipped with a quadruple multilayer coil of 1.68 mm I.D. polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing and 443 mL, with a total capacity of 320 mL The _b_-value varied from 0.50 at the internal terminal to 0.85 at the external terminal and the revolution radius was 10 cm (_b_ = _r_/_R_, where \(r\) is the distance from the coil to the holder, and \(R\), the revolution radius or the distance between the holder axis and the central shaft). The speed was 800 rpm. The flow rate (3.0 mL min-1) was controlled with an FMI-50 QD-O SSY, B5/B5 (Fluid Metering Inc., NY, USA) constant-flow pump. The sample was injected with a P. C. Inc. injection module with a 5.0 mL sample injection loop. First, the coiled column was entirely filled with the stationary phase ethanol-H2O-MeCN (8:1:1; lower phase). The apparatus was then rotated forward at 800 rpm, while the mobile phase hexane (upper phase) was pumped into the column in a tail to head (T - H) direction at a flow rate of 3.0 mL min-1. After the mobile phase front emerged and hydrodynamic equilibrium was established in the column, 5.0 mL of the sample solution containing 2.5 g of the crude extract was injected through the injection module at a flow rate of 3.0 mL min-1. The sample (2.5 g) was dissolved in the stationary phase. A total of 34 fractions of 10 mL each were obtained with an automated fraction collector (Eyeia, DC-1200). The collected fractions were monitored by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and grouped into 8 fractions. Fraction 5 afforded **4** (14.8 mg).

The hexane and dichloromethane extracts from the stem of _H. brasiliana_ were combined into a single one on the basis of analytical TLC (4.5 g), which was subjected to CC over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH afforded 9 fractions. Fraction 6 was flash rechromatographed twice on silica gel and eluted with dichloromethane-acetone 9:1, hexane-EtOAc 3:1, respectively, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 7:3), yielding compound **1** (2.9 mg). Fraction 7 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel, eluted with hexane-acetone 9:1, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 8:2), to yield compound **2** (3.1 mg).

The hexane and dichloromethane extracts from the stem bark of _H. brasiliana_ were also combined into a single extract on the basis of analytical TLC (2.1 g), which was subjected to CC over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH afforded 9 fractions. Fraction 6 was flash rechromatographed twice on silica gel and eluted with dichloromethane-acetone 9:1, hexane-EtOAc 3:1, respectively, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 7:3), yielding compound **1** (2.9 mg). Fraction 7 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel, eluted with hexane-acetone 9:1, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 8:2), to yield compound **2** (3.



## Page 3

hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH afforded 8 fractions. Fraction 7 was flash recchromatographed on silica gel, eluted with hexane-EtOAc (20:5) and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 7:3), to render compound **3** (3.6 mg).

The dichloromethane extract of _H. brasiliana_ leaves (3.0 _g_) was subjected to CC over silica gel (230-400 mesh). Elution with hexane-MeOH gradient yielded 20 fractions. Fractions 10-14 were combined into a single fraction and rechromatographed by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-EtOAc 8:2), affording compound **5** (9.8 mg). Fractions 15-20 were also grouped and rechromatographed on silica gel (230-400 mesh), eluted with hexane-EtOAc 9:1, to give **6** (14.9 mg) and **7** (8.7 mg).

#### 2.3.1 5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-8-propanoic acid (1)

Amorphous white solid. UV _l_max/nm (CH2Cl2) 282, 236; IR (lit. film) _r_max/cm\({}^{-1}\) 3448 (OH), 2920, 2850 (CH), 1708 (carboxyl group), 1637, 1596, 1492, 1465, 1433, 1377, 1207; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; HMBC and HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3): see text; EA: Found: C, 68.68; H, 6.93; Calc. for C15H18O4: C, 68.69; H, 6.92; O, 24.40; GC-MS low resolution: EIMS 70 eV: m/z (rel. int. %): 262 [M]\({}^{+}\) (30), 247 [M - CH3]\({}^{+}\) (100), 187 [247-CH3COOH]\({}^{+}\) (30), 173 (25).

#### 2.3.2 5,6-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-8-propanoic acid (2)

Amorphous white solid. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; HMBC and HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3): see text; EA: Found: C, 65.75; H, 6.91; Calc. for C16H20O5: C, 65.74; H, 6.90; O, 27.37; GC-MS low resolution: EIMS 70 eV: m/z (rel. int. %): 292[M]\({}^{+}\) (30), 277 [M - CH3]\({}^{+}\) (100), 217 [277-CH3COOH]\({}^{+}\) (30), 203 (20).

3.3 Erythro-5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-4-(1,2-dihydroxy-2-methylpropyl)-4H-1-3-benzodioxin-8-propanoic acid (3)

Amorphous white solid. [a]5\({}^{+}\) 34.0\({}^{+}\) (CHCl3; c 0.0012); UV _l_max/nm (CH2Cl2) 324, 284, 236; IR _r_max/cm\({}^{-1}\) (lit. film) 3444 (OH), 2979, 2927, 2850 (CH), 1710 (carboxyl group), 1610, 1602, 1492, 1463, 1440, 1379, 1216; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; HMBC and HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3): see text; EA: Found: C, 61.01; H, 7.38; Calc. for C18H20O7: C, 61.00; H, 7.39; O, 31.60; ESI-MSMS, m/z (rel. Int. %): 355 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (90), 337 [M + H-H2O]\({}^{+}\) (100), 295 [M + H-CH3COOH]\({}^{+}\) (30).

#### 2.3.4 Methyl 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (4)

Yellow oil. UV _l_max/nm (CH2Cl2) 308, 288, 280, 236; IR (lit. film) _r_max/cm\({}^{-1}\) 2974, 2947, 2839 (CH), 1737 (ester), 1633, 1610, 1575, 1479, 1448, 1367, 1203; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; GC-MS low resolution: EIMS 70 eV: m/z (rel. int. %): 306 [M]\({}^{+}\) (50), 291 [M - CH3]\({}^{+}\) (100), 233 (30), 217 (30), 203 (20).

## 3 Results and discussion

The hexane and dichloromethane extracts from the stem and stem bark of _H. brasiliana_ were combined, three new dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives were obtained, **1** and **2** from the stem bark (Fig. 1). However, the dichloromethane extract from _H. oreadia_ taproots yielded only the known dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives methyl 5.7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**4**), 5.7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**5**), methyl 5.8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**6**), 5.8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**7**), methyl 5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**8**), and 5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**9**). The ethylacetate-soluble fraction of the methanol extract from _H. oreadia_ stem afforded **2** and **7**. The dichloromethane extract from _H. brasiliana_ leaves afforded **5**, **6** and **7**; and the same extract from _H. oreadia_ leaves afforded **4**. The methyl ester derivative **4** has already been isolated from _Hortica badini_ (Correa

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c} H & **1** & **2** & **3** \\
3 & 5.54 (1H, d, 10.0) & 5.65 (1H, d, 9.9) & – \\
4 & 6.63 (1H, d, 10.0) & 6.63 (1H, d, 9.9) & 5.32 (1H, d, 6.5) \\
6 & 6.32 (1H, d, 8.4) & – & 6.41 (1H, d, 8.4) \\
7 & 6.92 (1H, d, 8.4) & 6.60 (1H, s) & 7.04 (1H, d, 8.4) \\
2 & 2.63 (2H, t, 7.8) & 2.65 (2H, t, 7.4) & 2.62 (2H, m) \\
3′ & 2.84 (2H, t, 7.8) & 2.84 (2H, t, 7.4) & 2.86 (2H, m) \\
2-Me & 1.41 (6H, s) & 1.40 (6H, s) & – \\
1′′ & – & – & 4.14 (1H, d, 6.5) \\
3′′ & – & – & 1.48 (3H, s) \\
4′′ & – & – & 1.21 (3H, s) \\
1′′ & – & & 1.45 (3H, s) \\
5-OMe & 3.86 (3H, s) & 3.81 (3H, s) & 3.85 (3H, s) \\
6-OMe & – & 3.80 (3H, s) & – \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: \({}^{1}\)H NMR chemical shifts for **1–3**.



## Page 4

et al., 1975, 1979) and from _Hortica columbiana_ (Suarez et al., 2002), while the acid **5** has been isolated only from _H. badini_ (Correa et al., 1975, 1979). Derivatives **6** and **7** have been isolated only from _H. colombiana_ (Suarez et al., 2002) and **8** from _H. badini_ (Correa et al., 1975, 1979), _Hortica regia_ (Tinto et al., 1992) and _H. colombiana_ (Suarez et al., 2002), while the acid **9** has been isolated only from the two latter species (Tinto et al., 1992; Suarez et al., 2002). The HSQC and HMBC experiments on **4** allowed for minor corrections to previous \({}^{13}\)C NMR assignments (Suarez et al., 2002), and the signals for C-5 and C-8a (Table 2) were reassigned, exchanging one for the other.



## Page 5

tetrasubstituted. From the HMBC experiments, the correlation observed between the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 6.92, assigned to H-7, and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 25.0, which showed a one-bond correlation with the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 2.84 (CH\({}_{2}\)), indicated the presence of a methylene substituent at C-8. The correlation observed between the two signals at \(\delta\) 2.63 (CH\({}_{2}\)) and 2.84 (CH\({}_{2}\)) with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 177.5 confirmed the existence of a propanoic acid unit attached to the aromatic ring at C-8. The methoxyl signal at \(\delta\) 3.86 showed cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 154.0, while the olefinic signal of the chromene ring at \(\delta\) 6.63 showed a correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 151.3. The methylene signal at \(\delta\) 2.84 exhibited cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 151.3, suggesting that the chromene ring was located between C-5a and O-8a. Moreover, the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 6.92 assigned to H-7 was coupled to the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 6.32 and both signals also showed cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 154.0, thus indicating the methoxyl group to be located at C-5 and allowing for the assignment of the signal at \(\delta\) 6.32 to H-6. The new compound was therefore identified as 5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-8-propanoic acid (**1**).

Compound **2** exhibited similar NMR spectra to **1** (Tables 1 and 2), except for the absence of the signal for _ortho_-related aromatic protons and the presence of a singlet at \(\delta\) 6.60 (1H). Elemental analysis and EIMS indicated the molecular formula to be C\({}_{16}\)H\({}_{20}\)O\({}_{5}\), requiring the presence of additional oxygen and carbon in comparison with **1**. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 2) showed signals for two methoxyl groups at \(\delta\) 56.5 and 61.3. The methoxyl group _ortho_-disubstituted at \(\delta\) 61.3 showed a one-bond correlation with the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 3.81 and the latter cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 143.4. The methylene signal at \(\delta\) 2.84 exhibited cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 144.5 and not with 143.4, indicating the chromene ring between C-5a and O-8a and enabling the assignment of the signal at \(\delta\) 144.5 to C-8a. This implies that the methoxyls were located at C-5 (\(\delta\) 61.3) and C-6 (\(\delta\) 56.5) and determined the position of the unsubstituted methine at C-7 (\(\delta\) 6.60). From the HMBC experiments, the correlation observed between the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 6.60 and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 25.0, 143.4 and 146.0 led to their assignment as H-7, C-3', C-5 and C-6, thus confirming that the unsubstituted carbon must be vicinal to C-8. Thus, the structure of the new natural product is 5,6-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-8-propanoic acid (2).

Compound **3** showed spectral characteristics close to those of **1**. The principal change observed in the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR was the replacement of the resonance for a chromene ring by signals for an oxygenated premyl and acetonide groups. In the IUPAC name for compound **3**, the numbering for heterocyclic acetonide begins with the heteroatom; hence, the numbering of this ring is 1,2,3,4- (see structure of **3**). The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1), in addition to signals typical of **1**, revealed four methyl singlets at \(\delta\) 1.48, 1.45, 1.25 and 1.21, and two oxymetting protons at \(\delta\) 4.14 (1H, d, \(\delta\) 6.5 Hz) and 5.32 (1H, d, \(\delta\) 6.5 Hz), which were coupled to each other. The hydroxyl groups must be connected at C-1'' and C-2'' of the premyl unit, in view of the correlation observed between the two methyl singlets at \(\delta\) 1.21 and 1.48 and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 75.9 and 78.0. The two oxymetting protons at \(\delta\) 4.14 and 5.32 showed a one-bond correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 78.0 and 67.9, respectively, enabling the assignment of the signals at \(\delta\) 78.0 to C-1'' and \(\delta\) 67.9 to C-4, \(\delta\) 4.14 to H-1'' and \(\delta\) 5.32 to H-4, since they were coupled to each other. Thus, the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 75.9 was attributed to C-2''. Moreover, the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 7.04, assigned to H-7, was coupled to the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 6.41 and both signals also showed cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 157.9, indicating the location of the methoxyl group at C-5 and allowing for the assignment of the signal at \(\delta\) 6.41 to H-6. The correlation observed between the signal at \(\delta\) 4.14, assigned to H-1'', and H-6 at \(\delta\) 6.41, with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 110.5 allowed the latter signal to be attributed to C-5a and indicated that the oxygenated premyl group was located at C-5a. The methylene signal at \(\delta\) 2.86 and the H-4 signal at \(\delta\) 5.32 exhibited cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 151.3, suggesting that C-8a is oxygenated. The other two methyl singlets at \(\delta\) 1.45 and 1.25 and the H-4 signal at \(\delta\) 5.32 showed correlations with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 109.4, determining the position of the acetonide group between C-4 and C-8a.0, since this was the only location left in the aromatic ring. Compound **3** was presumed to have an _erythro_ configuration based on the large coupling constant of the H-4 to H-1'' (d, \(J\) 6.5 Hz) and its comparison with those of synthetic _three_-7-O-benzyl-8-(1,2,3-trihydroxy-3-methylbutyl)-coumarin **10** (H-1', \(\delta\) 5.69, d, \(J\) 2.4 Hz; H-2', \(\delta\) 3.54, d, \(J\) 2.4 Hz; Fig. 2) (Reisch and Voerste, 1994). The \({}^{1}\)H NMR data of **10** suggest a significant contribution from rotamer **10a**, where the C-H bonds are _gauche_ on the basis of the small \({}^{3}\)_H-1'/H-2' value at 2.4 Hz. This rotamer has the C-O/C-OH bonds opposite to each other and appear to be more stable in CDCl\({}_{3}\) solution. Compound **3** can be derived from _three_- or _erythro_-2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-3-(1,2,3-trihydroxy-3-methylbutyl)benzenepropanoic acid (Fig. 2). However, only the _erythro_ isomer shows conformance with the C-O/C-OH and H-4/H-1'' bonds opposite each other, and appears to be stably dominated in CDCl\({}_{3}\) solution, based on the large \({}^{3}\)_H-4/H-1'' value at 6.5 Hz.

Therefore, compound **3** was called _erythro_-5-methoxy-2,2-dimethyl-4-(1,2-dihydroxy-2-methylpropyl)-4_H_-1,3-benzodioxin-8-propanoic acid (**3**). However, compound **3** was purified by preparative TLC over silica gel and eluted with hexane-acetone 7:3, hence, **3** may not be a genuine natural product. Therefore, the new natural product appears to be _erythro_-2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-3-(1,2,3-trihydroxy-3-methylbutyl)benzenepropanoic acid (**3**a**).

A review of dihydrocinnamic acids in the Rutaceae shows that the major source of dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives with premyl or pyrano substituents is various species of _Horia_ (Fig. 3, Table 3). Thus, the range of dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives in _H. brasiliana_ and _H. oreadica_ indicates that they are related to other species of _Horia_. Gleason (1933) described _H. colombiana_ and stated that it is similar to _H. brasiliana_. According to Groppo (2004), _H. colombiana_ and _H. brasiliana_ represent the same species. _H. badini_ M.A. Lisboa was used to designate individuals of _Horia_, but this error was recently corrected by Groppo et al. (2005), who recognized it as _H. brasiliana_. However, _H. colombiana_ and _H. badini_ are cited in Table 3 as they appear in the original literature. Two linear pyrano dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives (**16**, Fig. 4; Table 3) were found in _Adiscanthus_ _fuscifcoritons_ Duke (Vieira et al., 1980). It is interesting to note that Groppo et al. (2008), in an analysis of sequence data from two noncoding regions of the chloroplast genome - _rps_ 16 intron and _trnl_-_trn_ from 65 species of 59 genera representing all the subfamilies and tribes of Rutaceae, suggested that _Adiscanthus_ and _Horia_ formed a very strong clade in all their analyses. Because of its baccate fruit and syncarpous ovary, Engler (1931) included _Horia_ as the single Neotropical genus 

## Page 6

Figure 3: Dihydrocinamic acid and dihydrocinnamyl alcohol derivatives isolated from _Horta_ species.

Figure 2: Probable route to compound **3** from _three_- or _erythro_-2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-3-(1,2,3-trihydroxy-3-methylbutyl)benzenepropanoic acid, and possible NMR coupling constants of the staggered conformers of compound **3** and model 10.



## Page 7

in the Toddalioideae, subrtipe Toddaliniae. On the basis of its follicular fruit and apocarpous ovary, he included _Adiscanthus_ in the Rutotideae, subrtipe Galipeinae, tribe Galipeae (names replacing the illegitimate Cusparariae and Cuspariae, proposed by Kallunki and Pirani, 1998). Based on chemical characteristics, da Silva et al. (1988) placed _Hortia_ with the Galipeae (_Cusparia_ informal tribe, da Silva). Many characteristics of _Adiscanthus_, such as actinomorphic flowers, free petals, anthers without

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Compounds & Occurrence & References \\
**4** & _Hortia badini_2 & Correa et al., 1975, 1979 \\ _H. colombiana_ Gleason3 & Suarez et al., 2002 \\ \(5\) & _H. badini_4 & Correa et al., 1975, 1979 \\ \(6\) & _H. colombiana Gleason3 & Suarez et al., 2002 \\ \(7\) & _H. colombiana Gleason3 & Suarez et al., 2002 \\ \(8\) & _H. badini3 & Correa et al., 1975, 1979 \\ _H. colombiana Gleason3 & Suarez et al., 2002 \\ _H. regia_ Sandwith & Tinto et al., 1992 \\ \(9\) & _H. colombiana_ Gleason & Suarez et al., 2002 \\ _H. regia_ Sandwith & Tinto et al., 1992 \\ _H. badini3 & Correa et al., 1975 \\ _H. badini3 & Correa et al., 1975 \\ _H. badini3 & Correa et al., 1979 \\ _H. badini3 & Correa et al., 1979 \\ _H. badini3 & Correa et al., 1975 \\ _H. subrtipe4 & Correa et al., 1975 \\ _H. subrtipe5 \& Moore4 & Vieira et al., 1980 \\ _H. subrtipe6 \& Mora & Vieira et al., 1980 \\ _H. subrtipe7 \& Wilson & Rashid et al., 1992 \\ _P. subrtipe8 \& Wilson\({}^{c}\) & Rashid et al., 1992 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations P.G. Wilson5 & Sarker et al., 1994a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations P.G. Wilson6 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations D.C.7 & Sarker et al., 1994b \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S. Moore7 & Gray and Waterman, 1978; \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations D.C.8 & Sarker et al., 1994c \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S. Moore8 & Gray and Waterman, 1978; \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations D.C.9 & Gray and Waterman, 1978; \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations D.C.9 & Rashid et al., 1991b. \\ _P._\#pragma ompiliations D.C.9 & Chlouichi et al., 2006 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Gray and Waterman, 1978 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Gray and Waterman, 1978 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sultana et al., 1999 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _P._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Chlouichi et al., 2007 \\ _P._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Chlouichi et al., 2007 \\ _P._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Gray and Waterman, 1978 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Gray and Waterman, 1978 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1978 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Chlouichi et al., 2007 \\ _P._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Gray and Waterman, 1978 \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995b \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995b \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995b \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995b \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995a \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.0.0 & Sarker et al., 1995b \\ _E._\#pragma ompiliations S.



## Page 8

appendages, and not placate cotyledons, are less common characters in Galipeinae. Despite the differences in fruit and in the connation of carpels, _Hortia_ and _Adiscanthus_ share simple leaves; free, valvate, and adaxially pilose petals; sparsely branched habit; quinolin-2(1_H_)-ones and furoquinoline alkaloids; and furocumarins (Vieira et al., 1980; Napolitano et al., 2003). _Zanthoxulum_ is the only representative of Rutoideae-Zanthoxyleae from which were isolated dihydrocinnamyl alcohols derivatives (**23**-**25**, **27**, Fig. 4).

_Drummondita calida_ (F. Muell.), P.G. Wilson, _Drummondita hassellii_ (F. Muell.), P.G. Wilson, _Eriostemon apiculatus_ P.G. Wilson, _Eriostemon coculatus_ C.A. Gardn., _Eriostemon cymyliformis_ P.G. Wilson, _Eriostemon deserti_ E. Pritz., _Eriostemon aliformis_ A. Cunn. ex Endl., _Eriostemon gardneri_ P.G. Wilson, _Eriostemon hipidulis_ Sieb. ex Spreng., _Eriostemon myoporoides_ DC., _Eriostemon rhomboideus_ P.G. Wilson, _Eriostemon thryptomenoides S._ Moore, _Eriostemon tomentellus_ Diels, _Eriostemon wonganensis_ P.G. Wilson, _Geleznowia verrucca_ Turcz., _Philotheca buxifolia_P.G Wilson, _Philotheca deserti_ (E. Pritz.) P.G Wilson, _Philotheca hassellii_ F. Muell., _Philotheca pachyphylla_ P.G. Wilson, _Philotheca scabra_ (Paxton) ssp. _latifolia_ P.G Wilson species of Rutoideae, tribe Boronieae, also produce typically dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives (Sultana et al., 2003; Table 3; Fig. 4). Wilson's classification (1998a, b) recognizes two distinct lineages as worthy of separation at the genus level. One lineage comprises only _Eriostemon australasius_ and _Eriostemon banksii_, while the other one includes the remaining species traditionally placed in _Eriostemon_, as well as members of _Philotheca_. The group that includes _E. australasius_ (the type species for _Eriostemon_) must retain the name _Eriostemon_, and the other group must take the name _Philotheca_. Nevertheless, _Eriostemon_ species are cited in Table 3 as they appear in the original literature.

The Aurnatiodeae represented by two species _Micromelum falcatum_ (Lour.) and _Micromelum minutum_ (G. Forst.) Wight & Arn. yielded specialized dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives, which are typically 3,4-dihydro-1,2-_secoco_umarins (**21** and **22**, Fig. 4; Table 3).

The Flandersioideae is a smaller sub-family of two genera and only _Flandersia_ R.Br. has been reported to contain dihydrocinnamyl alcohol derivatives (**25** and **26**, Fig. 4; Table 3).

Three types of hemiterpenoid dihydrocinnamic acids were found in rutaceous species, using the numbering as shown in Fig. 3, they are 2,4-dioxygenate, 2,4,5- and 2,4,6-trioxygenated. Until recently in _Hortia_ species they are 2,4-dioxygenate-3-prenylated, 2,4,5-trioxygenated-3-prenylated and 2,4,6-trioxygenated-3-prenylated, while _Adiscanthus_ appears to produce only the last type, and _Micromelum_ the first one and 2,4-dioxygenate-5-prenylated. The derivatives 2,4,6-trioxygenated-3,5-dipernylated occur in the Australian genera classified as Rutoideae, tribe Boronieae. Of the dihydrocinnamyl alcohol derivatives both 4-hydroxylated and 4-O-prenylated were found in _Zanthoxylum_ and _Flandersia_, and 4-hydroxylated-3-prenylated only in the first genus.

Figure 4: Dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives isolated from Rutaceae genera.



## Page 9

As pointed above, the dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives proved to have special taxonomic interest. The numerous similarities between the dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives from _Hortica_ species (Toddalioideae) and Rutoideae species clearly indicate the phytochemical affinities of the former with the latter sub-family, as suggested by da Silva et al. (1988) based on different classes of compounds and by Groppo et al. (2008) on cpDNA data. However, _Hortica_ species produce highly specialized limonoids (Jacobs and Ramdayal, 1986; Suarez et al., 1998, 2002) similar to those from _Flindersia_ (Flindersioideae, Rutaceae; Breen et al., 1984), Meliaceae and Cneoraceae families (A,B-_seco-_limonoids) (da Silva et al., 1987). Indeed the placement of Flindersioideae in the Meliaceae has been advocate, but the presence of rutaceous coumarins and anthranilic acid-derived alkaloids reinforce its position in the Rutaceae. Finally, the systematic significance of the dihydrocinnamic acid and dihydrocinnamyl alcohol derivatives was not robust to clarify the classification of the genus _Hortica_, since the limonoids are absent from all genera of Table 3, except in _Hotia_ and _Flindersia_. Molecular phylogenetic studies are now being utilized increasingly to provide additional characters to clarify genera of uncertain taxonomic placement in the Rutaceae (Chase et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2000; Samuel et al., 2001; Araujo et al., 2003; Poon et al., 2007; Groppo et al., 2008; But et al., 2009). Scott et al. (2000), Poon et al. (2007) and Groppo et al. (2008) described the molecular phylogenetic relationships in Rutoideae and Toddalioideae, however only the latter analyzed _Hortica_ genus. Scott et al. (2000) used DNA sequencing to construct two molecular phylogenies at the intra-family and intrageneric level within the Rutaceae, and the data indicated the inclusion of Flindersioideae within the Rutoideae. A unanimous conclusion from these works on molecular phylogenetic studies is the necessity to merge Rutoideae and Toddalioideae into a single sub-family as predicated by Waterman (1983, 1990, 2007) with morphological and chemical (alkaloids, coumarins and limonoids) parameters. According to DNA and secondary metabolite data _Hortica_ genus should be placed in the intersection of Rutoideae and Toddalioideae, similar in the Waterman (1983, 2007) phylogenetic diagram for Rutaceae.

Except for **7**, all the dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives isolated from _H. brasiliana_ and _H. oreadica_ were evaluated for their _in vitro_ activity against _Plasmodium falciparum_ and _Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiensis_, as previously described (Santos et al., 2009). An assay with KB cells was developed to compare the _in vitro_ toxicity of dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives with their selective action on the parasites, as previously described (Santos et al., 2009). The dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives **1-9** showed no appreciable activity against _P. falciparum_ and _T. brucei rhodesiensis_, and none of the compounds were toxic to KB cells (IC50 > 100 mM).

## References

- de Araujo, E.F., de Queiroz, L.P., Machado, M.A., 2003. What is Citrus? Taxonomic implications from a study of cp-DNA evolution in the tribe Citreea (Rutaceae subfamily Aurantioidaee), Org. Divers. Evol. 3, 55-62.

- Breen, G.W., Picker, K., Raston, C.L., Skelton, B.W., Taylor, W.C., White, A.H., 1984. Chemical constituents of the _Flindersia_. XXIII determination of the structure of findracercinn-2 as methyl (S)-(acetoxyl)[3?(3*3a,34a,56b,6a,6a,7a,10a,11a)]-5',6'-diacetoxy-7'-(furan-3*-yl)-2',2',3',6a,11a'-pentamethyl-12'-methylene-9'-oxo-2',3',3',4',5',6',8',9',10',11a'-decahydro-7'-H4',10a'-methano-10a'H-fur(2a,3-b)|pyrano-[3,4-g]|oxocin-3'-yl)acetate. Ausl. J. Chem. 37, 1461-1471.

- But, P.-P., Poon, A.W.,-S., Shaw, P.-C., Simmons, M.P., Greger, H., 2009. Contribution of molecular cladistics to the taxonomy of Rutaceae in China. J. Syst. Evol. 47, 144-150.

- Chase, M.W., Morton, C.M., Kalluki, J.A., 1999. Phylogenetic relationship of Rutaceae: a cladistic analysis of the subfamilies using evidence from _rbcl_ and _atp_ Sequence variation. Am. J. Bot. 86, 1191-1199.

- Chiouich, A., Girard, C., Tilletlein, F., Bevalot, F., Waterman, P.G., Muyard, F., 2006. Coumarins and furoquinoline alkaloids from _Philotheca desert_ var. _descrit_ (Rutaceae). Biochem. Syst. Evol. 34, 17-174.

- Chlouich, A., Girard, C., Bevalot, F., Waterman, P.G., Muyard, F., 2007. Taxonomically significant coumarins from three _Philotheca_ species (Rutaceae). Biochem. Syst. Evol. 35, 251-254.

- Correa, B., Cottlieb, D.R., Padua, A.P., 1975. Dihydrocinnamic acids from _Hortica badini_. Phytochemistry 14, 2059-2060.

- Correa, D.B., Cottlieb, D.R., Padua, A.P., 1979. Dihydrocinnamyl alcohols from _Hortica badini_. Phytochemistry 18, 351.

- De Candio, A., 1824. Prodromus systema naturalins persist persist Is Treuettet et Wurtz, Paris.

- Engler, A., 1874. Rutaceae: p. 2. In: Martinis, C.F., Eichler, A.G. (Eds.), _Flora brasiliensis_, vol. 12. Typographia Regia, Munich, Germany, pp. 75-196.

- Engler, A., 1931. Rutaceae: In: Engler, H.G.A., Prantl, K. (Eds.),Die Natrulichen Pflanzenfamilien, second ed., Teil 19a. Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig, Germany, pp. 187-359.

- Gleason, H.A., 1933. Studies on the flora of northern South America
- XVIII: Plantae Lawranceane Colombianae. Phytologia 1, 25.

- Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G., 1978. Coumarins in the Rutaceae. Phytochemistry 17, 845-864.

- Groppo, M., Kallunli, J.A., Pirani, J.R., 2005. Synonymy of _Hortica arbora_ with _H. brasiliana_ (Rutaceae) and a new species from Brazil. Brittonia 57, 28-34.

- Groppo, M., Pirani, J.R., Salatino, M.L.F., Blanco, S.R., Kallunli, J.A., 2008. Phylogeny of _Rutaceae_ based on two noncoding regions from cpDNA. Am. J. Bot. 95, 985-1005.

- Groppo, M., 2004. Filogenic data are evasive de Horita Vand. Doctoral Thesis, Instituto de Biocincia, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil.

- Han, Y.S., Byoun, K.E., 1996. Inhibitory effect of Sando (_Zanthoxylin pipetrium_) on the growth of food spoilage microorganisms and indentification of antimicrobial compounds. Adv. Food Sci. 18, 7-12.

- Jacobs, H., Ramdayal, F., 1986. Guyani, a novel tetranroretinergeticol. Structure elucidation by 2D NMR spectroscopy. Tersthedron Lett. 27, 1453-1456.

- Kallunli, J.A., Pirani, J.R., 1998. Synops of _Angew_ Roem. & Schult. of _Concochamps_ J. C. Mikan. Rev Bull. 53, 257-334.

- Kamperdick, C., Phuong, N.M., Sung, T.V., Schmidt, J., Adam, G., 1999. Coumarins and dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives from _Micromelum falcatum_. Phytochemistry 52, 1671-1676.

- Napolitano, H.B., Silva, M., Elena, J., Rocha, W.C., Vieira, P.C., Thiemann, O.H., Oliva, G., 2003. Redetermination and comparative structural study of isomipimpenillin: a new inhibitor against the leishmaniasis APR enzyme. Acta Cryst. E 59, e10506-e10508.



## Page 10

Poon, W.-S., Shaw, P.-C., Simmons, M.P., But, P.P.-H., 2007. Congruence of molecular, morphological, and biochemical profiles in Rutaceae: a cladistic analysis of the subfamilies Rutoidee and Toddalioideae. Syst. Bot. 32, 837-846.
* Rahmani et al. (1994) Rahmani, M., Tauftig-Yap, Y.H., Ismail, H.B., Sukari, A., Waterman, P.G., 1994. New coumarin and dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives from two Malaysian populations of Micromelum minutum. Phytochemistry 37, 561-564.
* Rashid et al. (1991a) Rashid, M.A., Armstrong, J.A., Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G., 1991a. Pyranocoumarins as chemotaxonomic markers in _Eriostemon coccineus_ and _Phylotheca cirrine._ Phytochemistry 39, 4033-4035.
* Rashid et al. (1991b) Rashid, M.A., Armstrong, J.A., Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G., 1991b. 5,7-Dioxygenated coumarins from the aerial parts of _Geleznowia verrucosa._ Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 19, 698.
* Rashid et al. (1992) Rashid, M.A., Armstrong, J.A., Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G., 1992. Alkaloids, flavonoids and coumarins from _Drummondita hasselliu_ and _D. calida._ Phytochemistry 31, 1265-1269.
* Reisch and Voerste (1994) Reisch, J., Voerste, A.A.W., 1994. Natural products chemistry. Part 181. Investigations on the synthesis of dihydropirano- and dihydrofurano-coumarins by applications of catalytic enantioselective cis-dihydroxylation. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 3251-3256.
* Reisch et al. (1989) Reisch, J., Wickramasinghe, A., Kumar, V., 1989. Two phenylpropanoids from _Findersia australis_ Stem Wood.
* Saint-Hilaire (1824) Saint-Hilaire, A., 1824. Plantes suelles des brasiliens. Grimbert Libraire, Paris.
* Samuel et al. (2001) Samuel, R., Ehrendorf, F., Chase, M.W., Greger, H., 2001. Phylogenetic analyses of Arunatioideae (Rutaceae) based on non-coding plastid DNA sequences and phytochemical features. Plant Biol. 3, 77-87.
* Santos et al. (2009) Santos, D.A.P., Braga, P.A.C., da Silva, M.F.G.F.G., Fernandes, J.B., Vieira, P.C., Magalhaes, A.F., Magalhaes, E.G., Marsaioli, A.J., Moraes, V.R.S., Rattray, L., Croft, S.L., 2009. Anti-African trypanoidal and antimalarial activity of natural flavonoids, dibenzoylmethanes and synthetic analogues. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 61, 257-266.
* Sarker and Waterman (1995) Sarker, S.D., Waterman, P.G., 1995. 3.4.8-trimethoxys-2-quinolone: a new alkaloid from _Eriostemon gardneri_. J. Nat. Prod. 58, 574-576.
* Sarker et al. (1994a) Sarker, S.D., Armstrong, J.A., Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G., 1994a. Pyranocoumarins from _Eriostemon apiculatus_. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 22, 641-644.
* Sarker et al. (1994b) Sarker, S.D., Armstrong, J.A., Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G., 1994b. Sesquiterpenyl coumarins and geranyl benzaldehyde derivatives from the aerial parts of _Eriostemon myoproides_. Phytochemistry 37, 1287-1294.
* Sarker et al. (1994c) Sarker, S.D., Armstrong, J.A., Waterman, P.G., 1994c. Angular pyranocoumarines from _Eriostemon thytromenoides_ (Rutaceae). Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 22, 863-864.
* Sarker et al. (1995) Sarker, S.D., Waterman, P.G., Armstrong, J.A., 1995. Coumarin glycosides from two species of _Eriostemon_. J. Nat. Prod. 58, 1109-1115.
* Scott et al. (2000) Scott, K.D., McIntyre, C.L., Playford, J., 2000. Molecular analyses suggest a need for a significant rearrangement of Rutaceae subfamilies and minor reassessment of species relationship within _Findersia_. Plant Syst. Evol. 223, 15-27.
* da Silva et al. (1987) da Silva, M.F., das, G.F., Gottlieb, O.R., 1987. Evolution of quasinoids and limonoids in the Rutales. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 15, 85-103.
* da Silva et al. (1988) da Silva, M.F.G.G., Gottlieb, O.R., Ehrendorf, F., 1988. Chemosystems of the Rutaceae: suggestions for a more natural taxonomy and evolutionary interpretation of the family. Plant Syst. Evol. 161, 97-134.
* Suarez et al. (1998) Suarez, L.E.C., Casablo, J., Monache, F.D., Molins, E., Espinosa, E., Miravitles, C., 1998. Hortialide A, a novel limonoid from _Hortia colombiana_. An. Quim 94, 307-310.
* Suarez et al. (2002) Suarez, L.E.C., Menichini, F., Monache, F.D., 2002. Tetranopterpenoids and dihydrocinnamic acid from _Hortia colombiana_. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 13, 339-344.
* Sultana et al. (1999) Sultana, N., Armstrong, J.A., Waterman, P.G., 1999. Benzopyran derivatives from the aerial parts of _Eriostemon rhombodies_. Phytochemistry 52, 895-900.
* Sultana et al. (2003) Sultana, N., Sarker, S.D., Armstrong, J.A., Wilson, P.G., Waterman, P.G., 2003. The coumarins of _Philotheca sensu lato_: distribution and systematic significance. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 31, 681-691.
* Tinto et al. (1992) Tinto, W.F., Melean, S., Reynolds, W., 1992. Hortiamide, a new tyramine alkaloid from _Hortia regia_. J. Nat. Prod. 55, 1676-1678.
* Vandelli (1978) Vandelli, D., 1788. Florea Lustriaceae et brasiliensis specimen. Typographia Academico-Regia, Conimbirace (Coimbra).
* Vieira et al. (1980) Vieira, P.C., de Alvaranga, M.A., Gottlieb, O.R., de Nazere, M., McDougall, V., Reis, F.M., 1980. Structural confirmation of dihydrocinnamic acids from _Adiscombus liesoffrious_ by carbon-13 NMR. Phytochemistry 19, 472-473.
* Waterman (1983) Waterman, P.G., 1983. Phylogenetic implications of the distribution of secondary metabolites within the Rutales. In: Waterman, P.G., Grundon, M.F. (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales. Academic Press, London, pp. 377-400.
* Waterman (1990) Waterman, P.G., 1990. Chemosystematics of the Rutaceae: comments on the interpretation of da Silva & al. Plant Syst. Evol. 173, 39-48.
* Waterman (2007) Waterman, P.G., 2007. The current status of chemical systematic. Phytochemistry 68, 2896-2903.
* Wilson (1998a) Wilson, P.G., 1998a. A taxonomic review of the genera _Eriostemon_ and _Philotheca_ (Rutaceae: Boronieae). Nuytsia 12, 239-265.
* Wilson (1998b) Wilson, P.G., 1998b. New species and nomenclatural changes in _Phebalium_ and related genera (Rutaceae). Nuytsia 12, 267-288.



