# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000300018.pdf

## Page 1



# New Pyrone and Quinoline Alkaloid from _Almeidea rubra_ and their Trypanocidal Activity

Alessandra R. P. Ambrozin, Jair Mafezoli, Paulo C. Vieira, Joao B. Fernandes, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Javier A. Ellena and Sergio de Albuquerque

e-mail: paulo@dq.ufscar.brPresent address: UNIFOR - CCS - Curso de Farmacia, Av. Washington Soares, 1321, CP 1258, 60811-341 Fortaleza - CE. \({}^{a}\)Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Rod. Washington Luiz, km 235, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil

\({}^{b}\)Instituto de Fisica de Sao Carlos, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Av. Trabalhador Sao Carlense, 400, 13560-970 Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil

\({}^{c}\)Departamento de Andilises Clinicas, Toxicologicas, Bromatologicas, Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Av. do Cafe, 14040-903 Ribeirao Preto - SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

O estudo da fracao accetato de etila do extrato metamolico das folhas de _Almeidea rubra_ A. St.-Hil. (Rutaceae) permitu to isolamento de duas substancias ineditas: 4-metoxi-6-[2-(metilamino)fenil]-2_H_-piran-2-ona e acetate de _rel-(7R,8R)_-8-[(_E_)-3-hidroxi-3-metil-1-butenil]-4,8-dimetoxi-5,6,7,8-tetraidrofuro[2,3-b]quinolin-7-ila; e dos alcaloides arborinina, \(N\)-metil-1-hloroxi-3-metoxiacridona, esquinimana, occusagina, isodutaprina, isocesquinimana iscocoastigma. Arves da analise dos dados espectroscopicos foram establecidas as estruturas quimicas das substancias isoladas sendo que para os alcaloides ineditos tais dados sao descritos pela primeira vez. Alem disso, os ensaios bilogicos sobre as formas triopmastigotas do _Trypanosoma cruzi_ das substancias isoladas mostraram que elas possuem atividade tripanocida moderada.

The investigation of the ethyl acetate fraction of methanol extract from leaves of _Almeidea rubra_ A. St.-Hil. (Rutaceae) afforded two new compounds 4-methoxy-6-[2-(methylamino)phenyl]-2_H_-pyran-2-one and _rel-(7R,8R)_-8-[(_E_)-3-hydroxy-3-methyl-1-butenyl]-4,8-dimethoxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofluoro[2,3-b]quinoline-7-yl acetate, along with the known compounds arborinine, \(N\)-methyl-1-hydroxy-3-methoxyacridone, skimimanine, kokusagine, isodutaprine, isoskinaminine, and isokousagine. Their structures were established based on their spectral data, and for the new compounds these data are described herein. Additionally, these compounds were assayed on the triopmastigote forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ showing moderate trypanocidal activity.

## Introduction

The genus _Almeidea_ belongs to Rutaceae family and is widely distributed in Brazil. Data about the secondary metabolites of this genus are available. From _Almeidea guyanensis_ was isolated \(C\)-arabinosyl flavones, 2- and 4-quinolones, and flavone \(C\)-glycosides.[1] We have previously reported the isolation of triterpenoids, acridone, 2-quinolone, and fluoroquinoline alkaloids, and a new tetrahydrouquinoline alkaloid from _A. coerulea_ and _A. rubra_[2] besides steroids, one sesquiterpene, one cromone, and one flavone.[3]

Chagas' disease (American Trypanosomiasis) is caused by the flagellate protozoan _Trypanosoma cruzi_, affecting more than 18 million people in Latin America.[4] Its treatment is still a challenge and new less toxic and more effective drugs are necessary.

As a part of our search for new trypanocidal compounds and our studies on the chemistry of Rutaceae, a new specimen of _Almeidea rubra_ A. St.-Hil. was investigated. Thus, here we report the isolation, identification and characterization of two new substances (**1** and **2a**) and seven known compounds (**3-9**) from methanol extract of leaves of this plant, in addition to their trypanocidal activities.

## Results and Discussion

The investigation of the ethyl acetate fraction of

## Page 2

methanol extract from leaves of _A. rubra_ afforded two new compounds (**1** and **2a**) and known compounds (Figure 1) arborinine (**3**), _N_-methyl-1-hydroxy-3-methoxyacridone (**4**),5 skimmianine (**5**),6 kokusagine (**6**),7 isodotudaprine (**7**),8 isoskimminanine (**8**), and isokkusagine (**9**), which were identified through comparison of their NMR spectral data with the literature.

Compound **1** was isolated as a yellow powder and its structure was determined by analysis of NMR and LRMS.

The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** showed aromatic protons at \(d\) 7.33 (2H, m), and 6.70 (2H, m), assigned to H-4', H-6', and H-3', H5', respectively. Two olefinic protons (H-3 and H-5) appeared at \(d\) 5.49, and 6.23 (d, \(J\) 2.2 Hz) assigned to an 2-pyrone by comparison with a styryl-2-pyrone described by Pizzolatti _et al._,9 besides broad _N_-H and _N_-CH3 signals at \(d\) 5.36, and 2.87. Furthermore, a singlet at \(d\) 3.85 (3H) revealed the presence of the methoxyl group in the molecule.

The 13C NMR spectrum of **1** showed 13 carbons, distinguished as 5 quaternaries (_d_ 171.7, 164.0, 162.8, 147.6, 116.0), 4 aromatics (_d_ 132.3, 129.2, 116.4, 111.2), 2 ofelines (_d_ 100.1, 87.3), 1 methoxyl (_d_ 55.9), and 1 _N_-methyl carbon (_d_ 30.4). The analysis of 13C NMR and HSQC spectrum allowed us to attribute undoubtedly all chemical shifts to methyl, vinyl, and aromatic carbons/hydrogens of **1** (Table 1).

The assignments of quaternary carbons were possible from observed correlations in the HMBC spectrum. The chemical shift of C-2' was deduced from 3\(J\) correlation between _N_-CH3 hydrogens (_d_ 2.87) and one carbon at \(d\) 147.6. C-4 (_d_ 171.7) was assigned through 3\(J\) correlation between the lowerfield carbon and methoxyl hydrogens (_d_ 3.85). Furthermore, C-6 (_d_ 162.8) and C-1' (_d_ 116.0) were determined through 2_J_-_J_ correlation to H-5 (_d_ 6.23). Finally, through the 2\(J\) correlation between H-3 (_d_ 5.49) and a carbonyl carbon at \(d\) 164.0 was attributed C-2.

All these results allowed us to propose the structure 4-methoxy-6-[2-(methylamino)phenyl]-2_H_-pyran-2-one for compound **1**, which is described for the first time in the literature and represents a new class of compounds formed by the reaction of anthranilic acid and two acetyl/malonyl-CoA units.

Single crystal X-ray diffraction established undoubtedly the structure of **1** as a derivative of anthranilic acid (Figure 2).

The crystal structure of compound **1** shows the presence of two independent molecules per asymmetric unit (Figure 2). The main conformational difference between both independent molecules is centered in the dihedral angle between the least square planes that pass through the aromatic rings in each molecule. The value of this angle in molecule 1 is 33.58(8)deg and in molecule 2 is 34.79(8)deg. The crystal structure also shows the presence of one intramolecular interaction in each molecule. These interactions are slightly different due to the conformation

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c}  & HSQC & & HMBC \\ Carbon & _δ_c & _δ_H (_J_Ca) & _χ_Ca & _χ_Ca \\
2 & 164.0 & & & \\
3 & 87.3 & 5.49 d (_J_ 2.2 Hz) & 171.7, 164.0 & 100.1 \\
4 & 171.7 & & & \\
5 & 100.1 & 6.23 d (_J_ 2.2 Hz) & 171.7, 162.8 & 116.0, 87.3 \\
6 & 162.8 & & & \\
1’ & 116.0 & & & \\
2’ & 147.6 & & & \\
3’ and 5’ & 116.4, 111.2 & 6.70 m & 147.6, 132.3, 129.2 & 116.0 \\
4’ and 6’ & 132.3, 129.2 & 7.33 m & & 162.8, 147.6 \\
4-OCHi & 55.9 & 3.85 s & & 171.7 \\
2’-/NCH3 & 30.4 & 2.87 s & & 147.6 \\
2’-/NH & - & 5.36 br s & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: NMR spectral data (CDCl_γ_, 9.8 T) of substance **1** isolated from _Almeida rubra_

Figure 1: Compounds isolated from _Almeida rubra_.



## Page 3

changes. The analyses of the crystal packing show the presence of four intermolecular interactions of the type C-H...O that give rise to the formation of chains along the (101) direction. These chains are connected with the chain just above and below it through three intermolecular interactions of the N-H...O type.

The quinoline and acridine alkaloids, which are widely distributed in Rutaceae, arise from combination of anthranilic acid and acetate/malonate.10 In these cases, the ciclization takes place by nucleophilic attack of nitrogen atom to the carboxyl carbon. However, compound **1** should be formed by the nucleophilic attack of the oxygen atom to the carboxyl carbon, giving rise an _a_-pyrone.

We have previously reported the isolation of the new tetrahydrofuroquinoline alkaloid **2b** (Figure 1) from _A. coerulea.2_ Reinvestigation of _A. rubra_ afforded an alkaloid **2a** whose spectral data seem to be very similar to those of **2b**. This alkaloid was isolated as a white powder and identified by NMR and LRMS. The molecular formula C20H25NO6 of **2a** was defined by elemental analysis.

In the 1H NMR spectrum of **2a** were observed a pair of doublets (_J_ 2.6 Hz) at \(d\) 7.58 and 6.97, and a singlet at \(d\) 4.30, which indicate that **2a** was a tetrahydrofuroquinoline alkaloid. The signals at \(d\) 2.78, 2.20, and 2.01, assigned to H-5, and H-6, respectively, confirmed that **2a** had a reduced fluoroquinoline ring.

1H NMR spectrum of **2a** also showed two singlets at \(d\) 3.14, and 2.03, and a group of signals at \(d\) 6.06 (d, \(J\) 16.1 Hz), 5.69 (d, \(J\) 16.1 Hz), 1.34 (s), and 1.31 (s), which indicated the presence of the 3-hydroxy-2-isopentenyl substituent. Through the spectral data comparison, it was established that **2a** distinguished from **2b** by the presence of 3-hydroxy-2-isopentenyl substituent instead of \(g\),_g_-dimethylallyl moiety.

Analysis of HSQC correlations and literature data2 allowed us to attribute undoubtedly chemical shifts to methyl, methylene, vinyl, furanyl hydrogen/carbon of **2a** (Table 2).

The assignments of quaternary carbons of **2a** were made from observed correlations in the HMBC spectrum. The chemical shift of C-4 was deduced from 3\(J\) correlation between methoxyl hydrogens at C-4 (_d_ 4.30) and one carbon at \(d\) 158.2. The correlation of the other methoxyl hydrogens (_d_ 3.14) and one carbon at \(d\) 79.7 determined

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Carbon & \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) & HSQC & HMBC \\
4 & 162.7 & & & \\
3 & 105.2 & & & \\
4 & 158.2 & & & \\
4a & 117.6 & & & \\
5 & 19.5 & 2.78 m & 117.6, 23.5 & 158.2, 150.0, 72.6 \\
6 & 23.5 & 2.20, 2.01 m & 72.6, 19.5 & 117.6, 79.7 \\
7 & 72.6 & 5.43 dd (_J_ 8.5, 2

## Page 4

C-8. C-4a was assigned through correlation between the carbon at d 117.6 and H-5, and H-6 (d 2.78, and 2.01). H-5 also correlated to C-8a (d 150.0). Furthermore, methyl hydrogens at d 1.34, and 1.31, correlated with an oxygenated carbon at d 70.8, establishing C-3". Finally, the correlation between furanyl hydrogens (d 7.58, and 6.97) and quaternary carbons at d 162.7, and 105.2 determined C-2, and C-3, respectively.

The close similarity between the chemical shifts observed for carbons of reduced fluoroquinoline ring when compared with the model compound 7-_O_-acetylha-plophyllidine (**2b**)2 led us to suggest a _trans_ relationship between the 7-acetoxy and 8-methoxy groups. Alkaloid **2a**, _rel_-(7\(R\),8_R_)-8-[(_E_)-3-hydroxy-3-methyl-1-butenyl]-4,8-dimethoxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofuro [2,3-_b_]quinoline-7-yl acetate, is described for the first time in the literature, and the occurrence of tetrahydrouroquinoline alkaloid such as **2a** and **2b** seems to be restricted to the genera _Almeidea_ and _Haplophyllum_ of Rutaceae family.2,11

In order to improve the therapy of Chagas disease, we have been studying species of the order Rutales (Rutaceae, Meliaceae, Simaroubaceae, Burseraceae, and Cheoraceae) aiming to isolate hit compounds that could be used in the development of new antichagasic drugs.

Compounds described in this paper were isolated from an active fraction of _A. rubra_ (62.9% lysis - percent reduction of the parasite number) on the tripomastigote forms of _T. cruzi_.12 Their _in vitro_ trypanocidal actions are shown on Table 3. Three of them (**7**-**9**) could not be assayed due to their instability.

The results showed that all of compounds had moderate trypanocidal actions and kokusagine (**6**) was the most active one. Probably, they are responsible by the activity of the _A. rubra_ fraction.12 However, they could not be considered good prototype for the development of new antichagasic drugs, mainly when their activities are compared with crystal violet and some lignans also isolated from other Rutaceae.13

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

The 1H NMR, 13C NMR and 2D correlation spectra were obtained in CDCl3 using either Bruker DRX-200 and ARX-400 NMR spectrometers, and using tetramethylsilane (TMS) as internal standard.

Low resolution EIMS were recorded on GC-17A, GCMS-QP5000 Shimadzu.

### Plant material

The leaves of _Almeidea rubra_ A. St.-Hil. were collected in May 2000 in Espirito Santo State, southeast of Brazil. The plant material was identified by Dr. Jose Rubens Pirani from the Department of Botany, University of Sao Paulo (Brazil) and the voucher herbarium specimen (Pirani _et al_. 4746) was deposited at the Herbarium of that Department.

### Extraction and isolation

Dried leaves (313.5 g) were extracted first with hexane and then with MeOH at room temp. Part of the methanol extract (15.9 g) was submitted to VLC on silica gel 60 (70-230 mesh) using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, to yield the corresponding fractions (ALFMH, ALFMD, ALFMA, ALFMM). The fraction ALFMA (3.3208 g) was submitted to column chromatography over silica (silica gel 230-400 mesh, 410 x 43 mm i.d., stepwise with a hexane-EtOAc-MeOH gradient) to give eleven fractions.

The second fraction (ALFMA2; 0.6302 g) was chromatographed on silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 358 x 31 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (hexane:AcOEt 8:2-MeOH) to afford ten fractions. Through column chromatography over sephadex LH-20 (492 x 32 mm i.d., eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH 1:1) from the fraction five (ALFMA2,5; 103.6 mg) was obtained four fractions. Then, the second fraction (ALFMA2,5,2; 68.0 mg) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 394 x 32 mm i.d., stepwise with a CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient) to give four fractions. The third fraction (ALFMA2,5,2,3; 36.0 mg) was chromatographed on sephadex LH-20 column (492 x 32 mm i.d.) and eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH (1:1) to afford six fractions. Through column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 394 x 32 mm i.d., stepwise with a CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient) of the fraction five (ALFMA2,5,2,3,5; 14.3 mg) was isolated the alkaloid **2a** (2.6 mg).

Fraction four (ALFMA4; 178.1 mg) was chromatographed on sephadex LH-20 column (492 x 32 mm i.d.)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compound & Concentration (μg/mL) & x Lysis \% & IC50 \\
500 & 250 & 100 & (mmol/L) \\
**1** & 74.10 & 45.08 & 27.23 & 1.271 \\
**2a** & 58.93 & 44.20 & 28.12 & 0.977 \\
**3** & 57.99 & 42.39 & 24.00 & 1.231 \\
**4** & 45.60 & 43.20 & 31.20 & 2.600 \\
**5** & 65.17 & 30.35 & 25.44 & 1.455 \\
**6** & 58.38 & 57.13 & 46.58 & 0.5596 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Trypanocidal activity of compounds isolated from _Almeidea rubra_

## Page 5

and eluted with MeOH to afford five fractions. Through column chromatography over sephadex LH-20 (492 x 32 mm i.d., eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH 1:1) of the third fraction (ALFMA4,3; 59.9 mg) was obtained the alkaloid **5** (ALFMA4,3,7; 2.5 mg) and eight fractions. Then, the fourth fraction (ALFMA4,3,4; 2.3 mg) was subjected to column chromatography over sephadex LH-20 (332 x 25 mm i.d., eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH 1:1) to give three fractions. Further purification of the fraction two (ALFMA4,3,4,2; 2.0 mg) on preparative planar silica plate with hexane:EtOAc (8:2) afforded alkaloid **6** (1.6 mg). Through column chromatography over sephadex LH-20 (492 x 32 mm i.d., eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH) of the fraction five (ALFMA4,3,5; 21.5 mg) was isolated the compound **1** (14.7 mg).

The alkaloids arborinine (**3**) (43.2 mg), isodotudaprine (**7**) (25.6 mg), and isoskimminanine (**8**) (28.8 mg) were crystallized in MeOH from fraction six (ALFMA6; 104.5 mg), seven (ALFMA7; 317.3 mg) and nine (ALFMA9; 120.5 mg), respectively.

The other alkaloid isokokusagine (**9**) (32.1 mg) was purified on sephadex LH-20 (492 x 32 mm i.d., eluted with MeOH) from fraction eight (ALFMA8; 90.3 mg), and the alkaloid **4** (3.2 mg) was obtained from fraction three (148.8 mg).

#### 4-methoxy-6-[2-(methylamino)phenyl]-2H-pyran-2-one (1)

Yellow powder; elemental analysis (Found: C, 68.0432; H, 5.565904; N, 6.11885. Calc. for C13H13NO3; C, 67.53; H, 5.63; N, 6.06%); UV \(\lambda_{\max}\)/nm (CH2Cl2): 240, 250, 283, 303, 332, 371; IR \(\nu_{\max}\)/cm-1: 2920, 2855, 1719, 1630, 1557, 1401, 1010 (film); 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): Table 1; 1C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): Table 1; EIMS _m_/_z_: 231, 200, 199, 104, 77.

Rel-(7R,8R)-8-[(E)-3-hydroxy-3-methyl-1-butenyl]-4,8-dimethoxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofluoro[2,3-b]quinoline-7-yl acetate (2a)

White powder; [\(\alpha\)]25 = - 8.7deg (c 0.15, CH2Cl2); elemental analysis (Found: C, 61.76958; H, 7.457999; N, 4.316954. Calc. for C20H23NO6: C, 64.00; H, 6.67; N, 3.73%); IR \(\nu_{\max}\)/cm-1: 2922, 2855, 1741, 1579, 1371, 1327, 1244, 1093, 1017 (film); 1H NMR (CDCl4, 400 MHz): Table 2; 13C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): Table 2; EIMS _m_/_z_: 226, 266, 326.

#### Single crystal X-ray analysis

Low temperature X-ray diffraction data collection was performed at 120(2) K, on an Enraf-Nonius Kappa-CCD diffractometer equipped with an Oxford Cryosystem liquid N2 device, using graphite-monochromated MoK\(\alpha\) radiation (0.71073 A). Data were collected up to 50deg in 2_th_, with a redundancy of 4. The final unit cell parameters were based on all reflections. Data collections were made using the COLLECT program;14 integration and scaling of the reflections were performed with the HKL Denzo-Scalepack system of programs.15 No absorption corrections were applied.

The structure was solved by direct methods with SHELXS-97.16 The model was refined by full-matrix least squares on F2 with SHELXL-97.17 All the hydrogen atoms were set isotropic and freely refined. The programs SHELXL-97,17 and ORTEP-318 were used within WinGX19 to prepare materials for publication. Atomic coordinates, bond lengths and angles, and thermal parameters have been deposited at the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre.

The supplementary crystallographic data have been sent in electronic format to the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre, as CIF file No. CCDC 242119. These can be obtained obtained obtained free of charge by contacting the CCDC (12 Union Road, Cambridge CB2 1EZ, UK; fax: +44 1223 336033; www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/conts/retrieving.html; deposit@ccdc.cam.ac.uk).

#### Trypanocidal activity in vitro

As described by Ambrozin _et al._,12 the bioassays were carried out using blood of infected Swiss albino mice, which was collected by cardiac puncture at the peak of parasitemic infection (7th day of infection for Y strain of _T. cruzi_). The infected blood was diluted with healthy mice blood to achieve a concentration of 2.106 forms/mL. Solutions of the compounds were prepared by dissolving in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). The activities of substances were evaluated at 500, 250, and 100 _m_g/mL.

The bioassays were performed in triplicate on titration microplates (96 wells) which contained 400 _m_L mixture/well. The plates were incubated at 4 degC, and the number of parasites counted after 24 h, following the method described by Brener.20

Infected blood with the same volume of DMSO was used as control, and gentian violet to a concentration of 250 _m_g/mL was used as positive control.

The activity is expressed as percent reduction of the parasite number (lysis) and IC50 values were calculated using the program GraphPad Prims v.3.0.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to FAPESP and CNPq for the 

## Page 6

financial support and to Dr Jose Rubens Pirani for collecting and identifying the _Almeidea rubra_ specimen.

## References

* [1] Jay, M.; Gleye, J.; Bouillant, M.L.; Stanislas, E.; Moretti, C.; _Phytochemistry_**1979**, _18_, 184 ; Moulis, C.; Wirasutisna, K.R.; Gleye, J.; Loiseau, P.; Stanislas, E.; Moretti, C.; _Pytochemistry_**1983**, _22_, 2095; Wirasutisna, K.R.; Gleye, J.; Moulis, C.; Stanislas, E.; Moretti, C.; _Pytochemistry_**1986**, _25_, 558.
* [2] Santos, C.S.; Januario, A.H.; Vieira, P.C.; Fernandes, J.B.; Da Silva, M.F.G.F.; Pirani, J.R.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**1998**, \(9\), 39.
* [3] Januario, A.H.; _PhD. Thesis_, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, 1995; Mafezoli, J.; _Ph D. Thesis_, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, 2001.
* [4][http://www.who.int/ctd/chagas/disease.htm](http://www.who.int/ctd/chagas/disease.htm), accessed in May 2004.
* [5] Bergeenthal, D.; Mester, I.; Rosza, Zs.; Reisch, J.; _Pytochemistry_**1979**, _18_, 161.
* [6] Ahond, A.; Picot, F.; Potier, P.; Poupat, C.; Sevenet, T.; _Pytochemistry_**1978**, _17_, 166.
* [7] Yajima, T.; Kato, N.; Munakata, K.; _Agric. Biol. Chem._**1977**, _41_, 1263.
* [8] Baudouin, G.; Tillequin, F.; Koch, M.; Pusset, J.; Sevenet, T.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1981**, _44_, 546.
* [9] Pizzolatti, M.G.; Luciano, C.; Monache, F.D.; _Pytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 819.
* [10] Dewick, P.M.; _Medicinal Natural Products: A Biosynthetic Approach_, John Wiley & Sons: England, 1997; Waterman, P.G.; _Pytochemistry_**1999**, _27_, 395.
* [11] Rozsa, Zs.; Rabik, M.; Szendrei, K.; Kalman, A.; Argay, Gy.; Pelczer, I.; Aynechi, M.; Mester, I.; Reisch, J.; _Pytochemistry_**1986**, _25_, 2005.
* [12] Ambrozin, A.R.P.; Vieira, P.C.; Fernandes, J.B.; da Silva, M.F.G.F.; de Albuquerque, S.; _Mem. Inst. Oswaldo Cruz_**2004**, _99_, 227.
* [13] Bastos, J.K.; de Albuquerque, S.; Silva, M.L.A; _Planta Med._**1999**, _65_, 541.
* [14] Enraf-Nonius, 1997-2000. _COLLECT_. Nonius BV, Delft, The Netherlands.
* [15] Otwinowski, Z.; Minor, W. In _Methods in Enzymology_; Carter-Jr., C.W.; Sweet, R.M.; eds., Academic Press: New York, 1997, p. 276, 307.
* [16] Sheldrick, G. M.; _SHELXS-97_; _Program for Crystal Structure Resolution_; University of Gottingen, Germany, 1997.
* [17] Sheldrick, G. M.; _SHELXL-97_; _Program for Crystal Structures Analysis_; University of Gottingen, Germany, 1997.
* [18] Farrugia, L.J.; _J. Appl. Cryst._**1997**, _30_, 565.
* [19] Farrugia, L.J.; _WinGX_; _An Integrate System of Windows Programs for the Solution, Refinement and Analysis of Single Crystal X-Ray Diffraction Data_; University of Glasgow, 1997-2003.
* [20] Brener, Z.; _Rev. Inst. Med. Trop. S. Paulo_**1962**, \(4\), 389.

_Received: December 2, 2004_

_Published on the web: April 12, 2005_

