# 10.1002@chir.20676.pdf

## Page 1

Resolution and Absolute Configuration Assignment of a Natural Racemic Chromane from _Peperomia obtusifolia_ (Pieraceae)

Joao Marcos Batista Jr

SILVIA NOELI LOPEZ

JONAS da SILVA MOTA

KENIA LOURENCO VANZOLINI

QUEZIA BEZERA CASS

DANIEL RINALDO

WAGNER VILEGAS

VANDERLAN da SILVA BOIZAN

MASSUO JORGE KATO

MAYSA FURIAN

NuBBE - Nucleus for Bioasos, Biosynthesis and Exophilogy of Natural Products, Organic Chemistry Department, Institute of Chemistry, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Ararauara, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

The resolution of the natural racemic chromane 3,4-dihydro-5-hydroxy-2,7-dimethyl-8-(3\({}^{\prime}\)-methyl2\({}^{\prime}\)-butenyl)-2-(4\({}^{\prime}\)-methyl1\({}^{\prime}\),3\({}^{\prime}\)-pentadienyl)-2H-I-benzopyran-6-carboxylic acid (**1**) isolated from the leaves of _Peperomia obtusifolia_ has been accomplished using stereoselective HPLC. The absolute configuration of the resolved enantiomers was determined by the analysis of optical rotations and CD spectra. The finding of a racemic mixture instead of an enantiomerically pure metabolite raises questions about the final steps in the biosynthesis of this class of natural products, suggesting that the intramolecular chromane ring formation step may not be enzymatically controlled at all in _P. obtusifolia_. _Chirality 21:799-801, 2009._

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

+
Footnote †: Published online 20 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

## Introduction

The Piperaceae family comprises \(\sim\)3800 species distributed in four genera: _Piber_ L., _Peperomia_ Ruiz and Pavon, _Manekia_ Trel., and _Zippelia_ Blume.1 The _Peperomia_ species accumulate several bioactive secondary metabolites such as lignans, secoligans, prevalylated phenolic compounds, and chromanes. Among these, chromanes possess significant antiparasitic activity and have been shown to be important chemical markers in this genus.2,3 Despite their well-known bioactivity, there are no reports concerning the stereochemistry of these natural products.4,5 In this work, we report for the first time the isolation as a racemic mixture of the known bioactive metabolite 3,4-dihydro-5-hydroxy-2,7-dimethyl-8-(3\({}^{\prime}\)-methyl2\({}^{\prime}\)-butenyl)-2-(4\({}^{\prime}\)-methyl1\({}^{\prime}\),3\({}^{\prime}\)-pentadienyl)-2H-benzopyran-6-carboxylic acid (**1**) from leaves of _Peperomia obtusifolia_, its resolution using chiral chromatography, and the assignment of its absolute configuration at C\(\cdot\)2 in the benzopyran skeleton, by analyzing its optical rotation and circular dichroism (CD) spectra.

Footnote 1: NuBBE - Nucleus for Bioasos, Biosynthesis and Exophilogy of Natural Products, Organic Chemistry Department, Institute of Chemistry, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Ararauara, SP, Brazil

## Materials and Methods

### General

Analytical and semipreparative HPLC enantioseparations were performed using stainless-steel Chiralcel OD-H columns (250 mm \(\times\) 4.6 mm and 250 mm \(\times\) 10 mm I.D., 5 mm; Daiecl Chemical Industries, Tokyo, Japan). Mobile phases for chromatography were prepared from HPLC grade solvents. Ethanol and _n_-hexane were obtained by J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ) and Tedia (Fairfield, OH), respectively. HPLC enantioseparations were carried out by using a Shimadzu LC-10 pump equipped with a Rheodyne (Cotati, CA) injector with a 20-ul or 1-ml sample loop and a Shimadzu SPD-10 UV-vis detector. Specific rotations of the single enantiomers dissolved in chloroform were measured on a Perkin Elmer 241 polarimeter equipped with a Na lamp operating at 589 nm. The volume of the cell was 1 ml and the length of the optical path was 10 cm. Spectra were recorded at 25\({}^{\circ}\)C. The CD spectra of the resolved enantiomers dissolved in chloroform (concentration about 1.0 mg/mL) in a quartz cell (1.0 cm path length) were recorded by direct injection using a Jasco CD-2095 detector (Japan Spectroscopic, Tokyo, Japan). The spectra are average computed over three instrumental scans and the intensities are presented in terms of ellipticity values (mdeg).



## Page 2



### Plant Material

Leaves from _Peperomia obtusifolia_ A. Dieter were collected in Pocos de Caldas, MG, Brazil, and identified by Dr. Ines Cordeiro (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil). The voucher specimen (KATO 070) has been deposited at the Herbario do Estado "Maria Eneyda P. Kaufmann Fidalgo" (Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil). Specimens were cultivated under greenhouse conditions at the Institute of Chemistry-UNESP-Aarraquara, SP, Brazil.

### Isolation of Compound 1

Fresh leaves from _P. obtusifolia_ were frozen in liquid N2 and subsequently extracted with hexane at room temperature. The organic extract was evaporated to dryness under vacuum and then submitted to prep. TLC over silica gel using hexane/ethyl acetate (70:30%, v/v) as eluent, affording compound **1** (Rf = 0.3; [a]25 = 0deg, \(c\) = 0.25, CHCl2). The spectral data (NMR and MS) were compared with literature values and were consistent with the structure described.5

### HPLC Analysis

The hexane extract and compound **1** were submitted to analytical chiral HPLC under the following conditions: isocratic elution using hexane/ethanol (99.5:0.5%, v/v), flow rate of 0.7 mL/min, and UV detection at 254 nm. Before injection, the hexane extract was cleaned up using a silica Sep-Pak(r) cartridge (part no. 51900) Waters (Milford, MA), employing hexane and hexane/acetone (50:50%, v/v) as mobile phases. The hexane/acetone fraction was analyzed.

### Racemic Resolution

The HPLC enantioseparation of **1** was carried out under isocratic elution using hexane/ethanol (99.5:0.5%, v/v), flow rate of 3.5 ml/min, and UV detection at 254 nm.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The absolute configurations at C-2 have been established using Snatzke's helicity rule for chromane derivatives, which belongs to the benzene chromophores with a chiral second sphere.6 The _M_-helicity of the chromane ring gave a positive Cotton effect (l = 270-290 nm) for the enantiomer assigned as \(R\) (solid line) and the _P_-helicity a negative Cotton effect, considering the same band for the enantiomer assigned as \(S\) (dashed line) (Fig. 1). The \(R\) enantiomer (6.0 mg, Rt = 33.0 min) showed [a]25 = -6.0deg (_c_ = 0.3, CHCl2) and the \(S\) enantiomer (10.0 mg, Rt = 37.0 min) presented [a]25 = +6.0deg (_c_ = 0.3, CHCl2).

The hexane extract, when analyzed by chiral chromatography, corroborated the presence of the racemic mixture of **1** (Fig. 2) from the initial extract step. This result confirms that the racemic mixture of **1** was not produced by extraction and/or purification conditions.

Although there are some reports of chromanes isolated as racemic mixtures ([a]25 = 0deg) from plants and marine organisms,4,7 these results are opposite to the majority of reports concerning natural benzopyranes which have been isolated as enantiomerically pure compounds, e.g., tocopherols, chromemes from _Rhododendrom dauricum_,8_ Piper gaudichaudiatum_,9 and _Peperemia blanda_,10 besides chromanols from _Psammonia_ sp.7 The final ring closure step in these compounds is believed to be enzymatically controlled. The most well-characterized enzyme is tocopherol cyclase, which plays a key role in the biosynthesis of the chromanol substructure of the vitamin E family of compounds.11

The finding of a racemic mixture instead of an enantiomerically pure metabolite raises questions about the final steps in the biosynthesis of this class of natural products, suggesting that the intramolecular chromane ring formation step may not be enzymatically controlled at all in _P. obtusifolia_. Further studies are required to determine the biosynthetic pathways involved in the chromane ring formation and the relevance of the stereochemistry for the antiparasitic activity.

## Acknowledgments

MF, MJK, and VSB are grateful to National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for research fellowships. SNL thanks FAPESP for providing

Fig. 1: Chemical structures and CD spectra of the enantiomers of **1** assigned as \(R\) (solid line) and \(S\) (dashed line).

Fig. 2: Chromatogram of the hexanic extract (dashed line) and **1** (solid line); isocratic elution using hexane/ethanol (99.5:0.5%, v/v), flow rate: 0.7 ml/min, and UV detection at 254 nm.



## Page 3

fellowship and JMBJ thanks FAPESP for providing scholarship.

## Literature Cited

* [1]W. S. Wanke, A. Jaramillo, T. Borsch, M. Samain, D. Quandt, C. Neinhuis, and G. Piperale (2007) Evolution of Piperales-mafK gene and _trm_K intron sequence data reveal lineage specific resolution contrast. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007;42:477-497.
* [2]B. J. J. Jr, L. A. Ambrosio, D. Regasini, L. Kato, M. J. Bolzani, V. S. Cicarelli, R. R.



