# 10.1016@0031-9422(80)83082-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Flavonoids from _Iryanthera_ Laevis*

Raimundo Braz Filho, Marcelo S. Da Silva, Otto R. Gottlieb

Part 14 in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Myristicaceae". For Part 13 see ref. [1]. Based on the M.S. Thesis submitted by M. S. da S. to Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro (1979). Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, 23460 Seropedica, RJ, Brazil;+ Laboratorio de Tecnologia Farmaceutica, Universidade Federal da Paraiba, 58000 Joao Pessoa, PB, Brazil; +Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05508 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

# Abstract

Trunk wood of _Iryanthera_ _laevis_ Markgr. (Myristicaceae) contains 2',4'-dihydroxy-4,6'-dimethoxydihydrochalcone, three 2'-hydroxy-4',5'-methylenedioxyflavans with differently substituted A-rings (7-OH-6,8-diMe; 7-OH-5,8-diMe; 5-OH-7-OMe-6,8-diMe) and 1-(2'-hydroxy-4'-methoxy-5'-methylphenyl)-3-(2"-hydroxy-4",5"-methylenedioxyphenyl)-propane, as well as three additional known diarypropanes.

## Introduction

_Iryanthera_ _laevis_ Markgr. (Myristicaceae), a tree which may attain a height of 25 m, occurs in central Amazonia [2]. A sample of trunk wood of a specimen, collected in the vicinity of Manaus, yielded besides istosterol, 7 flavonoids which were classified by trivial 1H NMR assignments into dihydrochalcone [3], flavan [4] and 1,3-diarylpropane [5] types.

## Results

Determination of the MW by MS, allied to hydrogen, carbon, hydroxyl and methoxyl counts by NMR, revealed the formula C13H10O(OH)2(OMe)2 for the dihydrochalcone. The 6 aromatic protons form AA'BB' and AB (\(J = 2\) Hz) systems consistent only with the oxygenation pattern shown in **1a**. The relative placement of the hydroxyls and the metchoxyls relied on the MS and the fact that only one hydroxyl is easily methylated. The other hydroxyl in **1a** and in the methyl ether (**1c**) is chelated (AlCl3 UV shifts). Its acetylation leads to unsymmetrical acetates (**1b**, **1d**), a fact which confirms structure **1a** for the natural compound.

All three flavans, C13H10O(OH)2O3CH2. Me2, (**2a**, **2b**) and C13H7O(OH)2O2CH2:OMe2 (**2c**), possess identically substituted B-rings, as shown in **2**. Indeed, not only does the base peak at _m_/_e_ 164 of all three MS reveal OH-O2CH2-substitution of the retro Diesl-Alder styryl fragment, but the presence only of singlets in the 1H NMR spectra excludes any but the 2'-OH-4',5'-O2CH2-arrangement. As a further common feature of **2a** and **2b**, the presence of the additional hydroxyl at C-7 was assumed on biogeochemical grounds. Only constitutions **2a** and **2b** can thus be written for these isomers. A third alternative, with the C-methyls at C-5 and C-6 need not be considered, since allylic coupling of the lone A-ring protons to one of these methyls can be demonstrated for both compounds from 1H NMR experiments. In order to assign formulae to these compounds, **2d** is a suitable model. Its three A-ring H signals occur at \(t\) 3.05 (H-5), 3.48 (H-6) and 3.60 (H-8) in CDCl3[4], evidence that the 3.25 signal (also in CDCl3) of **2a** refers to H-5, slightly shielded by the _ortho_- and _para_-related C-methyls. The 3.34 signal of **2b** thus must refer to H-6 by default. Here comparison is not as valid since the spectrum was taken in (CD3)2CO.

With respect to the third flavan, it is again reasonable to assume the presence of an oxy-function at C-7 and, since here the acetate derived ring is fully substituted, also at C-5. Acetylation of the hydroxyl affects

## Page 2

the two C-methyls differently. Their originally superimposed signals at \(t\) = 8.00 shift to 8.04 and 7.95. A symmetrical arrangement of the methyls with respect to the hydroxyl thus becomes improbable, and formula **2c** is proposed for the natural compound.

Among the four 1,3-diarylpropanes, **3a-c** are known compounds, having been isolated respectively from _Iryanthera conizaea_ Ducke [5] and _I. polyunura_ Ducke [3]. The substitution pattern of the fourth 1,3-diarylpropane C15H10(OH)2OMe-O2CH2-Me was again elucidated initially by MS. This, through an outstandingly intense tropylum peak at _m_/_e_ 151 (100%) [accompanied by a quinone methidic peak of moderate intensity at _m_/_e_ 150 (8%)], indicated the generation of ions of equal masses by both benzylic cleavages, thus assigning OH-O2CH2 functions to one ring and OH-OMeMe-Me groups to the other. Chemical shifts and multiplicities (all singlets) of the NMR signals due to the aromatic protons locate these substituents unequivocally as shown in **3d** or **3e**. The compound represented by **3d** bears 2'- and 2"-hydroxys and its MS should contain, besides the tropylium peak, a strong quinone methidic peak (cf. intensity relation for _m_/_e_ 151/150 peaks of model **3f**: 100/30 [5]). In view of the intensity ratio stated above, formula **3e** becomes thus somewhat more plausible as representation of the natural compound (cf. intensity relation for _m_/_e_ 151/150 peaks of model **3g**: 100/12 [5]).

## DISCUSSION

_Iryanthera laevis_, like the other six species of the genus so far examined [6], proved to be a rich source of flavans and 1,3-diarylpropanes, compound types whose biosynthetic connection has been postulated [7]. No neoligans were so far isolated from any _Iryanthera_ species. By contrast, in the geographically and morphologically related genus _Virola_, flavans have not yet been found and 1,3-diarylpropanes show comparatively slight structural variation, while neoligans are widespread [6].

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of the constituents._ Trunk wood of _Iryanthera laevis_ was collected near Manaus, Amazonas State, and identified by the botanist Dr. William A. Rodrigues. An EtOH extract (2%, 100 g) was adsorbed on Si gel (450 g). The resulting dry powder, washed successively with petrol, C6H4, and CHCl3 gave respectively euates A, B and C. A (15 g) was cryst. to situosterol (4 g). B (20 g) was chromatographed on Si gel (500 g). Elution with C6H6-MeOH 100:0, 99:1, 98:2, 95:5, 92:8 and 90:10 gave 6 fractions which were recthromatographed giving in order stiosterol and **1a**; **1a** and **2a**; **2a**; **2a** and **2b**; **2b**; **2b** and **2e**. C (30 g) was chromatographed on Si gel (900 g). Elution with CHCl3-Me2CO 100:0, 99:1, 97:3, 95:5 and 90:10 gave 5 fractions which were recthromatographed giving in order **1a**, **2a**, **2b**, **2c** and **3c**; no pure material; **3d** and **3b**; **3b** and **3a**. Approximate quantities obtained: stiosterol 5. **1a** 90 mg, **2a** 15 mg, **2b** 40 mg, **2c** 30 mg, **3a** 18 mg, **3b** 25 mg, **3c** 190 mg, **3c** 30 mg.

_Identifications of the known_ **3a** [5], **3b** [3], **3c** [5] were performed by direct comparison with authentic samples.

2,4'-Dihydroxy-4.6'-dimethyldioctadecane (**1a**). Mp 182-1843 (C6H6), \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm HM}\) cm-1; 2400-3100, 3300, 1630, 1620, 1570, 1520, 1470, 800. \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm EtOH}\) nm-22; 24, 290 (_e_ 27 800, 23 850): \(\nu_{\rm min}^{\rm EtOH}\)-NaOH nm-210; 245, 332 (_e_ 36 000, 9950, 43 200): \(\nu_{\rm min}



## Page 3

(_m_, 2 H-3), 7.86, 7.80 (2 s, 2 ArMe), 7.3-7.0 (_m_, 2 H-4), 4.82 (_dd_, \(J\) = 9, 3 Hz, H-2), 4.1 (s, O2CH2), 3.54, 3.22 (_z_, H-3), 7.65 (2 s, 2 OAc), 7.3-7.0 (_m_, 2 H-4), 4.98 (_dd_, \(J\) = 9, 3

