# 10.1590@S0102-695X2007000300003.pdf

## Page 1



# Bioactive flavone dimers from _Ouratea multiflora_ (Ochnaceae)

Carlos Alberto Carbonezi\({}^{1}\), Lidilhone Hamerski\({}^{1}\), A. A. Leslie Gunatilaka\({}^{2}\), Alberto Cavalheiro\({}^{1}\), Ian Castro-Gamboa\({}^{1}\), Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva\({}^{1}\), Mayas Furlan\({}^{1}\), Maria Claudia Marx Young\({}^{3}\), Marcia Nasser Lopes\({}^{1}\), Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani\({}^{1}\)

\({}^{1}\)Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, UNESP, CP 355, 14801-970, Aaraquara, SP, Brazil.

\({}^{2}\)Artid Land Research Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85706-6800, USA.

\({}^{3}\)Secao de Fisitologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, 01061-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Chromatographic fractionation of the organic extract from leaves of _Ouratea multiflora_ afforded the flavone dimers heveaflavone, amentoflavone-77,4"-dimethyl ter, podocarpusflavone-A and amentoflavone. Their structures were elucidated from spectral data, including 2D-NMR experiments of the natural substances. Biological activities of all isolates were evaluated, using antimicrobial assay against Gram-positive bacteria _Staphylococcus aureus_ and _Bacillus subtilis_, cytotoxicity assay against mouse lymphoma (L5178) and KB cell lines, TLC screening for acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and antioxidant activity measured by DPPH test.

Ochnaceae, _Ouratea multiflora_, biflavonoids, antibacterial activity. +
Footnote †: _E-mail: bolzani@jg.unesp.br, Tel. +55-16-33016660_

+
Footnote †: _E-mail: bolzani@jg.unesp.br, Tel. +55-16-33016660_

+
Footnote †: _E-mail: bolzani@jg.unesp.br, Tel. +55-16-33016660_

+
Footnote †: _E-mail: bolzani@jg.unesp.br, Tel. +55-16-33016660_

+
Footnote †: _E-mail: bolzani@jg.unesp.br, Tel. +55-16-33016660_

+
Footnote †: _E-mail: bolzani@jg.unesp.br, Tel. +55-16-33016660_

## Introduction

Species of the Ochnaceae family are distributed in tropical and subtropical zones throughout the World (Hegnauer, 1969; Carvalho et al., 2000) This family is characterized by the presence of flavonoids and biflavonoids and terpenoids as main secondary metabolites (Oliveira et al., 2002; Estevan et al, 2005). Several members of the _Ouratea_ genus are employed for the extraction of edible oil, and are used as medicinal plants (Moreira et al., 1994; Agra et al., 2007). As part of our research program on the bioactive constituents of Atlantic Forest plant species, we have investigated _Ouratea multiflora_ collected in Juretic Reserve, Sao Paulo State. As result, four flavonoid dimers: heveaflavone (Geiger, 1986) amentoflavone-77,4"-dimethyl-ether (Geiger, 1986), podocarpusflavone-A (Geiger, 1986; Markham et al., 1987) and amentoflavone (Geiger, 1986; Markham et al., 1987), Felicio et al., 2001), were isolated from the ethanolic extract of the leaves. Additionally, the biological activity of the isolates was also evaluated.

## Material and Methods

### General procedure

1H and 1C NMR, inverse heteronuclear HMQC and HMBC as well as COSY experiments were performed on a Varian Inova 500 MHz instrument operating at 500 MHz for hydrogen, and 125 MHz for carbon, respectively. Pyridine-\(d_{i}\) or DMSO-\(d_{d}\) were used as solvents and TMS as internal standard. TLC was performed on precoated aluminum sheets (silica F254P 0.25 mm, Merck, Parmtadt, Germany) with detection provided by UV light (254 and 366 nm) and by spraying with anisaldeley reagent followed by heating (120 deg C). Silica gel (230-400 mesh ASTM, particle size 0.040-0.063 \(\mu\)M, Merck) or Sephaex LH-20 (Pharmacia) were used in the CC fractionations.

### Plant material

_Ouratea multiflora_ was collected at the Botanical reserve of Jureia, Sao Paulo, Brazil and a

## Page 2

voucher was placed at the Botanical Institute, Sao Paulo State, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation

Dried powdered leaves of _Ouratea multifora_ (118.0 g) were extracted by maceration using ethanol at room temperature. The extract was filtered and the solvent was removed under vacuum. The crude extract (3.44 g) was dissolved in _n_-BuOH. Subsequent addition of water afforded two phases which were evaporated to dryness under reduced pressure. The _n_-BuOH fraction (2.10 g) was solubilized with methanol/water (8:2 v/v) and partitioned with _n_-hexane, chloroform and ethyl acetate, successively. The ethyl acetate phase after concentration of the solvent (980.0 mg), was chromatographed on a Sephadex LH-20 column with a gradient elution of MeOH/H,O. The separation was monitored by TLC, and eluted fractions exhibiting similar appearances were combined, yielding 20 fractions. Fractions 7 and 8 showed a solid precipitation. The solid was washed with cold methanol to afford heveaflavone (Geiger, 1986) (**1**) (21.2 mg). Fraction 13 was chromatographed on silica gel yielding amentoflavone 7", 4"-dimethyl ether (**2**) (10.8 mg). Fraction 15 gave a powder after precipitation. This powder was washed with cold methanol to afford podocarpusflavone-A **3** (Markam et al., 1987) (8.9 mg). Fraction 17 was chromatographed on silica gel using CHCl1; MeOH (4:6) yielding amentoflavone **4** (Geiger, 1986; Markham et al., 1987) (15.0 mg).

### Antimicrobial assay

Sterile filter paper disks were impregnated with 20 mg of samples using DMSO as carrier solvent. The impregnated disks were then placed on agar plates previously inoculated with _Staphylococcus aureus_ (ATCC 2592) and _Bacillus subtilis_ (DSM 2105). Solvent controls were incubated at 37 degC for each organism, and after incubate time of 24 h at 37 degC, antimicrobial activity was recorded as clear zones (in mm) of inhibition surrounding the disk. The sample was considered active when the inhibition surrounding the disk was greater than 7 mm.

### Cytotoxicity assay

Antiproliferative activity was examined against two cell lines and was determined through an MTT assay as described earlier (Edrada et al., 1996).

### TLC screening for acetylcholinesterase inhibitors

The protocol adopted for this _in vitro_ assay is described by Ellman and co-workers (Ellman et al., 1961).

### Determination of the radical-scavenging activity

The determination of the antioxidant activity was tested according to a protocol described elsewhere (Cardoso et al., 2004; So; Lewis, 2002).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline H & **1** (\(\delta_{\text{1H}}\), \(J\) in Hz) & **2** (\(\delta_{\text{1H}}\), \(J\) in Hz) & **3** (\(\delta_{\text{1H}}\), \(J\) in Hz) & **4** (\(\delta_{\text{1H}}\), \(J\) in Hz) \\ \hline
3 & 6.63 (s) & 6.82 (s) & 6.81 (s) & 6.82 (s) \\
6 & 6.23 (d,

## Page 3



## Results and Discussion

The chromatographic fractionation of the ethanol extract from the leaves of _O. multifora_ afforded heveaflavone (**1**), anentoflavone-7'',_A''_-dimethyl-ether (**2**), podocarpusflavone-A (**3**), and anentoflavone (**4**).

The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of compound **1** showed 31 signals, which were attributed to twelve sp\({}^{2}\) CH, including signals at \(\delta_{{}_{\rm CH}}\) 114.1 and 127.6, each representing two carbon atoms, three sp\({}^{1}\) carbons (\(\delta_{{}_{\rm CH}}\) 55.1, 55.5 and 55.9), sixteen sp\({}^{2}\) quaternary carbons and two carbonyl groups (\(\delta_{{}_{\rm C}}\) 181.6 and 182.2) (Table 2).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline C & **1** (\(\delta\)) & **2** (\(\delta\)) & **3** (\(\delta\)) & **4** (\(\delta\)) \\ \hline
2 & 163.9 & 163.6 & 163.8 & 163.9 \\
3 & 103.1 &

## Page 4

The 'H NMR spectrum showed signals for two chelated hydroxyls at d113.19 and 12.93 (OH-5 and OH-5"), three aromatic methods) groups, a 1,3,4'-trubstituted aromatic ring (B ring) and a 1,4'-disubstituted (B' ring). The 'H NMR spectra [1D and 2D ('H-'H-COSY)] showed a _para_-substituted aromatic ring at d87.75 (d, \(J\) 9.0 Hz, H-2"", H-6""), d86.82 (d, \(J\) 9.0 Hz, H-3"", H-5""), two _meta_ aromatic hydrogens at d16.23 (d, \(J\) 2.5 Hz, H-6), 6.49 (d, \(J\) 2.5 Hz, H-8), commonly observed in a flavone nucleus. The structure of 1 was established on the basis of HMBC spectra, which showed heteronuclear long-range couplings of quaternary carbons C-7" (d5 161.2), C-7 (d5 164.8) and C-4" (d6 162.4) with the hydrogens of methoxyl groups at d87.72 (OR-7"), 3.77 (OR-7"), and 3.81 (OMe-4"), respectively, and by comparison of their spectral data with those reported for hevealfavone (Geiger, 1986).

Compound **2** also showed spectral features of a flavonoid dimer derivative (Table 2). The 'H MNR spectrum (Table 1) of **2** showed the presence of to chelated hydroxyl and at d87.83 and d87.75 two methoxyl groups. The 'H-'H-COSY spectrum of compound 2 showed a set of doublets at d87.766 (d, \(J\) 9.5 Hz, H-2"", H-6"") and d89.61 (d, \(J\) 9.5 Hz, H-3"", H-5"") of an AA*BB' system, besides the signals at d87.798 (d, \(J\) 2.5 Hz, H-2"), 7.14 (d, \(J\) 8.5, H-5") and 8.01 (dd, \(J\) 8.5; 2.5, H-6') attributed to a 1,3,4'-trubstituted aromatic ring. Furthermore, the 'H-'H-COSY spectrum showed signals with a _meta_ coupling pattern at d87.617 (d, \(J\) 2.5 Hz, H-6) and d.45 (d, \(J\) 2.5 Hz, H-8) corresponding to an A ring of a flavone. The HMBC spectrum of **2** revealed correlations of the hydrogen-bonded OH-5 (d112.94) with C-5 (d6, 161.4), C-6 (d8, 98.8) and C-10 (d87.73), while OH-5" (d87.813 (d87.73), 132.0) correlated with C-5" (d5 161.4), C-6" (d5, 9.65) and C-10 (d6, 104.2). From the long range coupling of H-6 (d87.71) and H-3 (d88.628 (d87.73) with C-10 (d87.73); H-3"" and H-5"" (d87.619 (d, \(J\) 1_

## Page 5



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c|c|c|c|c|c} \hline \hline compound & \multicolumn{2}{c|}{zone inhibition (mm) for the agar plate diffusion assay} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{scavenging activity assay for the DPPH radical} \\ \hline  & \multicolumn{2}{c|}{_S. aureus_} & \multicolumn{2}{c|}{_B. subtilis_} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{IC\({}_{50}\) (μM)\({}^{b}\)} \\ \cline{2-6}  & 5 ug/mL & 10 μg/mL & 5 μg/mL & 10 μg/mL & \\ \hline
1 & 7 & 10 & 7 & 12 & 50.0 \\
2 & n.a & 10 & 7 & 10 & 40.7 \\
3 & 7 & 9 & 7 & 12 & 35.4 \\
4 & n.a\({}^{a}\) & 9 & 9 & 12 & 18.5 \\ streptomycin\({}^{c}\) & 30 & 32 & 22 & 35 & - \\ rutin\({}^{c}\) & - & - & - & - & 12 \\ \hline \multicolumn{6}{l}{\({}^{a}\)n.a (not active). \({}^{c}\)Concentration in μM required to scavenge 50\% DPPH free radical. \({}^{c}\)Streptomycin sulfate and rutin} \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Biological activity of compounds **1**-**4**.



## Page 6

acetylcholinesterase (AchE) inhibitors (Ellman et al., 1961), in which none inhibited the enzyme at 0.1 and 1.0 \(\mu\)M concentrations. The antioxidant activities of bizivaroues **1**-**4** were tested toward DPPH radical (Table 3) (Cardoso et al. 2004). Compound **4** showed moderate scavenging activity (ICo 18.5 mg/mL) in this test (So; Lewis, 2002), while **1**-**3** showed weak scavenging activity which confirms the dependence of antioxidant activity with the number of free aromatic hydroxyl groups of tested compounds.

## Acknowledgment

This work was funded by grants of the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) as part of the Biota-FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br), grant n\({}^{\circ}\) 03/02176-7 awarded to V. da S. Bolzani, Principal Investigator. V. da S. B., M.F. and C.A.C acknowledge CNPq and CAPES for researcher and Ph.D. fellowships. The authors wish to thank Arid Land Research Institute _University of Arizona_ (Tucson, USA) by complementation of the fellowship awarded to C.A.C..

## References

* (1)
* (2) Agra MF, Franca PF, Barbosa-Filho JM 2007, Synopsis of the plants known as medicinal and poisonous in Northeast of Brazil. _Rev Bras Farmacogen 17_: 114-140.
* (3)
* (4) Cardoso CL, Castro-Gamboa I, Silva DIIS, Furlan M, Epiflano RA, Pinto AC, Rezende CM, Lima JAL, Bolzani VS 2004. Indole glucoalkaloids from _Chimarrish tribunata_ and their evaluation as antioxidant agents and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. _J Nat Prod 67_: 1882-1885.
* (5)
* (6) Carvalho MG, Carvalho GJA, Braz-Filho R 2000. Chemical constituents from _Ouratena formulaibus_: complete \({}^{\rm H}\) and \({}^{\rm 1}\)C RNN assignments of atranoria and its new acetylated derivative. _J Braz Chem Soc 11_: 143-147.
* (7)
* (8) Edrada RA, Proksch P, Wray V, Witte L, Muller WEG, Van Soest RWM 1996. Four new bioactive manamine-type alkaloids from the Philippine marine sponge _Xestospongia asamonica. J Nat Prod 59_: 1056-1060.
* (9)
* (10) Ellman GL, Courtney KD, Andres V, Featherstone RM 1961. A new and rapid colorimetric determination of acetylcholinesterase activity. _Biochem Pharmacol 7_: 88-90.
* (11)
* (12) Estevan CS, Oliveira FM, Conserva LM, Lima LF, Barros ECP, Barros SCP, Rocha EMM, Andrade EHA 2005. Constituites quinicoes e avaliaao preliminar in _vivo_ da atividade antimalaria de _Ouratena atilida_ Aubl (Ochnaceae). _Rev Bras Farmacogen 15_: 195-198.
* (13)
* (14) Felicio JD, Rossi MH, Park HR, Gonzalez E, Braggio MM, David JM, Cordeiro I 2001. Biflavonoids from _Ouratena milliatoa. Filoterapia 72_: 453-455.
* (15)
* (16) Geiger H 1986, _The Flavonoids: Advances in Research since 1986_. London Chapman and Hall.
* (17)
* (18) Hegnauer R 1969, _Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen_, Vol. V. Basel: Stuttgart.
* (19)
* (20) Markham KR, Ternai B, Stanley R, Geiger H, Mahpy TR 1978. \({}^{\rm 1}\)C NMR studies of flavonoids 3 naturally occurring flavonoid glycosides and their acetylated derivatives. _Tetrahedron 34_: 1389-1397.
* (21)
* (22) Markham KR, Sheppard C, Geiger H 1987, \({}^{\rm 1}\)C NMR of flavonoids 4 \({}^{\rm 1}\)C NMR studies of some naturally occurringamethafovane and inhoikiflavonoids. _Mycotochemistry 26_: 3335-3337.
* (23)
* (24) Moreira IC, Sovhino DC, Carvalho MG, Braz-Filho R 1994. Isoflavone dimers hexaspermome-A, hexaspermome-B and hexaspermome-C from _Ouratena hexaspermome-C, Phytochemistry 35_: 1567-1572.
* (25)
* (26) Oliveira MCC, Carvalho MG, Silva CJ, Werle AA 2002. New biflavonoid and other constituents from _Lacemburgia noblis_ EICHL. _J Braz Chem Soc 13_: 119-123.
* (27)
* (28) So S, Lewis BA 2002. Free radical scavenging and antioxidative of caffeic acid amide and ester analogues: Structure-activity relationship. _J Agric Food Chem 50_: 468-472.



