# 10.1021@np900644x.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

correlations with H-2'-H-6' and H-8'-H-12', respectively. HO-MODE experiments were carried out decoupling H-2' (\(\delta\) 1.64), which enabled the loss of multiplicity from the neighboring H-1' and H-3' (overlapped with H-4'). When H-5' was decoupled, loss of multiplicity was observed for H-6' and H-4' (overlapped with H-3'), supporting the same chemical shift for H-3' and H-4'. The same pattern was observed with H-10' and H-11' when H-9' and H-12' were decoupled. The interpretation of these gHMRC sequence cross-peaks led to the establishment of the oxo function at the C-7' position in the side chain. Furthermore, the gHMRC correlations of H-5 with C-3 (\({}^{3}\)_J_) and C-1' (\({}^{3}\)_J_), together with that from H-7 to C-2 (\({}^{3}\)_J_) and C-3 (\({}^{3}\)_J_), allowed the hydroxy group to be located at C-3, which was consistent with a previous study on bioactive piperidine alkaloids from _Senna_ (_Cassia_) species, with features similar to **1.3** Additionally, the gHMRC (\({}^{1}\)H\({}^{-15}\)N) spectrum showed a correlation between the nitrogen signal at \(\delta\) 308.8 and signals at \(\delta\) 2.67 (H-1'), 6.84 (H-5), and 2.47 (H-7). All this evidence agreed with the hydroxy group being located at C-3 and confirmed the assumption made on the substitution pattern in pyridine alkaloid **1**, which must be 2-methyl-3-hydroxy-6-_n_-(7'-oxodocyl) pyridine, similar to those found for piperidine alkaloids from other _Senna_ (_Cassia_) species, except for the ketone group position in the side chain. These results suggested that the hydroxy group of this pyridine alkaloid is at C-3, which is not in agreement with those previously reported for a similar pyridine alkaloid from this species, with no hydroxy group being located at C-5.5

Compound **2** was obtained as a white solid, mp 71\(-\)73 \({}^{\circ}\)C, and gave a positive test with Dragonoff reagent. This compound showed spectroscopic features very similar to those of **1**. The HRESITOFMS for **2** exhibited a pseudomolecular ion peak at _m/z_ 308.2226 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (called for C18H30NO3, 308.2220), appropriate for the molecular formula C18H29NO3, with a hydrogen deficiency index of 5 and being 16 mass units more than that of 1. The IR spectrum revealed the carbonyl absorption band at 1703 cm\({}^{-1}\), a pyridine ring at 1584, 1489, and 1464 cm\({}^{-1}\), and a hydroxy group band at 3392 cm\({}^{-1}\). The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra of compound **2** showed signals very close to those of **1** (Table 1), as in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR system, which demonstrates the presence of a substituted pyridine ring system at \(\delta\) 7.02 (1H, \(d\) = 8.0 Hz, H-4) and 6.85 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5). Additionally, the methyl hydrogens of CH3-7 at \(\delta\) 2.48, analyzed together with \({}^{13}\)C NMR data, confirmed that the pyridine moiety is similar to that of **1**. However, differences were evident between these compounds since the methyl group (CH3-12') located in the side chain of **1** was replaced with a hydroxy methylene group in **2** at \(\delta\) 3.67 (2H, t, \(J\) = 6.5, H-12', \(\delta\)\({}_{C}\) 62.5). These data, supported by the \({}^{13}\)C NMR, DEPT, gCOSY, gHMQC, gHMBC, TOCSY, and HOMODEC spectra, were in agreement with a pyridine system bearing one hydroxy group, one methyl, and one long-chain substituent. According to these data, the structure of **2** was determined as 2-methyl-3-hydroxy-6-_n_-(7'-oxo-12'-hydroxy-dodecyl)pyridine. All compounds isolated were screened for their AChE inhibitory activity, using bioautography and microplate tests, and the results are shown in Table 2. The preliminary TLC assay suggested moderate activity for compounds **1** and **2**, which showed the minimum amounts of these alkaloids required for AChE inhibition of 0.75 and 0.18 \(\mu\)g, respectively, when compared with physostigmine (positive control, 0.05 \(\mu\)g). Rutin proved to be inactive, since the minimum amount required to show activity was over 100 \(\mu\)g. In addition, the microplate test confirmed activity of the compounds **1** and **2**, which exhibited weak AChE inhibition of 13% and 30% at 350 mM.

### Experimental Section

**General Experimental Procedures.** Melting points were recorded on a digital Microquimica MQAPF-302 apparatus and are uncorrected. UV data were acquired using an Amersham Ultrospec 2100 pro UV/viv spectrophotometer. IR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet SiO10 FT-IR spectrometer coupled with an ATR accessory (the samples were pressed against a crystal of Ge). The 1D ('H, \({}^{13}\)C, DEPT, NOESY, TOSSY, and fMMODEC) and 2D ('H\({}^{-14}\) gCOSY, gHMQC, gHMBC, and H\({}^{-15}\)N gHMRC) NMR experiments were recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer (11.7) at 500 MHz ('H) and 125 MHz ('IC) at 30 \({}^{\circ}\)C and referenced using TMS (\(\Omega_{\rm{TBS}}\) = 0.00) as internal standard or residual solvent resonances of CDCl3 at 7.26 and 77.0 ppm, respectively, for 'H and 'C. High-resolution mass spectra with electrospray ionization were measured on an altrOTOFO (Bruker Daltonics) operating in positive mode. MeOH\(-\)H2O (4:1) was used as solvent system.

TLC was performed on silica gel F5x4 plates (0.20 mm, Fluka), and spots were visualized under UV light (254 and 366 nm) and spraying with Dragonoff's reagent or anisiodded\(-\)H2SO4. followed by charring for 5 min. Preparative TLC was carried out with Anatech 500 \(\mu\)m thick silica gel GF plates (20 x 20 cm, Uniplate) and visualized under UV light at 366 nm. Analytical HPLC separation was performed on a Varian (Palo Alto, CA) ProStar system equipped with a ternary pump model 340, a photodiode array detector model 330, and an autosampler model 410, controlled by Star chromatography workstation version 5.52 software. Preparative HPLC separation was performed on a Varian PrepStar system equipped with a UV\(-\)vis detector model 320 and a binary pump model SD-1 manual injector, controlled by Star chromatography workstation version 5.51 software. The columns used were a Phenomenex Luna C18 (250 x 4.60 mm, 5 mm) and a preparative Phenomenex Luna C18 (250 x 21.20 mm, 10 \(\mu\)m) protected by corresponding guard columns. All solvents used in the experimental procedures were distilled previously. For chromatographic analysis, HPLC-grade solvents (J. T. Baker, Xalostoc, Mexico) were employed. Water was purified immediately prior to use with a Milli Q plus system (Millipore, Milford, MA).

**Plant Material.** Leaves of _S. multigas_ were collected in Araraquara (Sao Paulo, Brazil) in July 2008 by one of the authors (M.P.). The plant was identified by Jnss Cordeiro from the Institute of Botany in Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil. A voucher specimen (SP 384103) has been deposited in the herbarium of this institute.

**Extraction and Isolation.** The dried and powdered leaves (2.7 kg) were extracted with ethanol (8 L x 4) for five days at room temperature.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c}  & AChE inhibitory activity \\ compound & bioautography\({}^{a}\) & microplate\({}^{b}\) \\
**1** & 0.75 & 13 ± 2.0 \\
**2** & 0.18 & 30 ± 1.3 \\ rutin & \textgreater{}100 & not tested \\ physostigmine\({}^{c}\) & 0.05 & 87 ± 0.1 \\ \hline \({}^{a}\) Minimum amount required for inhibition of AChE on TLC plates (in \(\mu\)g). \({}^{b}\) Percentage of AChE inhibition at 350 mM. \({}^{c}\) Positive control. \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: AChE Inhibitory Activity of Compounds **1** and **2** and **Rutin**

Figure 1: Key gHMRC correlations for **1** and **2**.



## Page 3

The solvent was removed under reduced pressure by rotary evaporation, yielding a thick syrup (210 g). The crude ethanol extract (100 g) was further reconstituted in MeOH\(-\)H\({}_{2}\)O (4:1), filtered, and then partitioned with _n_-hexane (250 mL \(\times\) 5), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (250 mL \(\times\) 4), EtOAc (250 mL \(\times\) 4), and _n_-BuOH (250 mL \(\times\) 2), successively. All phases were concentrated under reduced pressure. The CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) fraction (15.9 g) was dissolved in 500 mL of 5% HCl aqueous solution (ca. pH 2), filtered, and partitioned with EtOAc (50 mL \(\times\) 3) to remove nonbasic components. Then, NH\({}_{4}\)OH (30%) was added to the aqueous phase until ca. pH 8.5 and partitioned with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (50 mL \(\times\) 5). The latter organic layer was washed with H\({}_{2}\)O (100 mL \(\times\) 3) and concentrated in order to give a neutral alkaloid fraction (457 mg), which was purified by using preparative TLC with _n_-hexane\(-\)CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)\(-\)EtOAc (1.5: 2.0:6.5) as developing solvent (\(\times\)2). The bands with _Rf_ values of 0.50 and 0.18 were scraped and eluted with MeOH, affording pure compounds **1** (49.1 mg) and **2** (60.5 mg). Fraction EtOAc (2.20 g) was subjected to column chromatography on RP-Cl\({}_{8}\) and eluted with MeOH\(-\)H\({}_{2}\)O (5:95 to 100:0) to yield six fractions (EtOAc-F1 to EtOAc-F6). Fractions EtOAc-F2 and EtOAc-F3 (527 mg) were further purified by preparative HPLC on RP-Cl\({}_{8}\) and eluted with MeOH\(-\)H\({}_{2}\)O (40:60, flow rate 19 mL/min, UV 254 nm), affording compound **3** (\(\mathrm{{}_{R}}\) 17.4 min, 42.0 mg).

**Bioautographic Assay.** The AChE inhibitory activity of pure compounds was determined using a TLC bioautographic assay as previously described.12 The TLC layers were spotted with **1** and **2** in a range from 0.09 to 6.00 _mg_ developed with _n_-hexane\(-\)EtOAc (1:4, v/v) and subsequently dried. The plates were then sprayed with the enzyme solution (6.66 U/mL), thoroughly dried, and incubated at 37 degC for 20 min (moist atmosphere). Enzyme activity was detected by spraying with a solution consisting of 0.25% of 1-naphthyl acetate in EtOH plus 0.25% aqueous solution of Fast Blue B salt. Potential acetylcholinesterase inhibitors appeared as clear zones on a purple-colored background. Electric eel AChE type V (product no. C 2888, 1000 U) and the other reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

**Microphatic Assay.** The AChE inhibitory activity of compounds **1**-**3 was evaluated using the modified methods of Ellman et al. and Rhee et al. in a 96-well microplate, as previously described.13 Using this method, the enzyme hydrolyzes the substrate acetylcholinesterase electrophitocholine, resulting in the production of thotocholine, which reacts with 5,5'-ditibiohs(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) to produce 2-nitrobenzoate\(\rightarrow\)5-mercaptoethanolcholine and 5-thio-2-nitrobenzoate and can be detected at 405 nm. To the 96-well plates were added 25 \(\mu\)L of an aqueous solution of acetylthiocholine iodide (15 mM), 125 \(\mu\)L of DTNB (3 mM) in buffer C, 50 \(\mu\)L of buffer B, and 25 \(\mu\)L of sample diluted in buffer A, to give a range of concentrations from 0.78 to 100 \(\mu\)g/mL. The absorbance was measured at 405 nm every 30 s three times. Furthermore, 25 \(\mu\)L of 0.22 U/mL of the enzyme was added and the absorbance was again read every 10 min two times. Any increase in absorbance due to the spontaneous hydrolysis of the substrate was corrected by subtracting the rate of the reaction before the addition of the enzyme from the rate of the enzyme reaction. The percentage of inhibition was calculated in comparison to a blank (10% MeOH in buffer A), and a positive control of physposition was used in the same range of concentrations. The following buffers were used: buffer A, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8); buffer B, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin V fraction; buffer C, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 0.10 M NaCl and 0.02 M MgCl\({}_{2}\)-6H\({}_{2}\)O. All of the reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

**7***Multigluinone (1):** white solid; mp 103\(-\)105 degC; UV (MeOH) \(\lambda_{\mathrm{max}}\) (log _e_) 222 (3.83), 287 (3.63) nm; IR _vmax_ 3401, 2919, 2849, 1701, 1578, 1498, 1464, 1285, 1164, 1130, 832, 725 cm\({}^{-1}\); \(\mathrm{{}^{1}}\)H and \(\mathrm{{}^{13}C}\) NMR data see Table 1; HRESITOFNS _m_/_z_ 292.2271; TLC _Rf_ 0.50 (1.5:2.0:6.5 _n_-hexane\(-\)CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc).

**12**-**Hydroxy-**7***multijuguinone (2):** white solid; mp 71\(-\)73 degC; UV (MeOH) \(\lambda_{\mathrm{max}}\) (log _e_) 222 (3.83), 287 (3.63) nm; IR (film) _vmax_ 3392, 2931, 2851, 1703, 1584, 1489, 1464, 1290, 1248, 1160, 1128, 1048, 827, 725 cm\({}^{-1}\); \(\mathrm{{}^{1}}\)H and \(\mathrm{{}^{13}C}\) NMR data see Table 1; HRESITOFNS _m_/_z_ 308.2226 [M + \(\mathrm{H}\)]\({}^{+}\) (caled for C\({}_{8}\)H\({}_{3}\)NO\({}_{3}\), 308.2220); TLC _Rf_ 0.18 (1.5:2:6.5 _n_-hexane\(-\)CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc).

**Rutin:** yellow solid: spectroscopic data were in agreement with those previously published.10

Footnote 10: email: martson.kissling.i@.Hostettmann.K.P._

**Acknowledgment.** This research was supported by grants from the FAPESP as part of Biota-FAPESP, The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br) grant no. 03/02176-7, awarded to V.S.B. The researchers also acknowledge FAPESP, CAPES and CNPq, for fellowships. The authors thank Dr. N. P. Lopes (USP in Riberiao Preto-SP, Brazil) for high-resolution mass spectra and Dr. I. Cordeiro (IbR in Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil) for authentication of plant material.

**Supporting Information Available:** Copies of high-resolution mass, \(\mathrm{{}^{1}H}\) and \(\mathrm{{}^{13}C}\) NMR, and selected 2D spectra of 7'-multijuguinone (**1**) and 12'-hydroxy-7'-multijuguinone (**2**). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org).

## References

* (1) Lorenzi, H. _Arvores Brasileiras: Manual de Identificacao e Cultivo de Plantas Arboreas Nativas do Brasil_; Plantarum: Nova Odessa, 1998; p 166.
* (2) Dubey, P.; Gupta, P. C. _Planta Med._**1980**, _38_, 165-168.
* (3) Singh, J. _Planta Med._**1981**, _41_, 397-399.
* (4) Tiwari, R. D.; Singh, J. _Z. Naturforsch._**1983**, _38b_, 1136-1137.
* (5) Rechia, C. G. V.; Sierakowski, M. R.; Gantner, J. L. M. S.; Reicher, F. _Int. J. Biol. Macromol._**1995**, _17_, 409-412.
* (6) Singh, J. _Photochemistry_**1982**, _21_, 1177-1179.
* (7) Di Stasi, L. C.; Hiruma-Lima, C. A. _Plantas Medicina na Anzonia e na Matalina_; UNESP: Sao Paulo, 2002; p 281.
* (8) Viegas, C., Jr.; Rezende, A.; Silva, D. H. S.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J.; Miranda, A. L. P.; Alexandre-Moreira, M. S.; Young, M. C. M. _Quim. Nova_**2006**, _29_, 1279-1286.
* (9) (a) Bolzani, V. S.; Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Kingston, D. G. I. _Terrohedron_**1995**, _51_, 5929-5934. (b) Bolzani, V. S.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Cavalheiro, A. J.; Araujo, A. R.; Silva, D. H. S.; Lopes, M. N. _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**1999**, _71_, 181-187. (c) Alexandre-Moreira, M. S.; Viegas, C. Jr.; Miranda, A. L. P.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J.; Young, M. C. M.; Tomazola, D.; Everdin, M. N. _J. Nat. Prod._**2003**, _69_, 795-799. (d) Viegas, C., Jr.; Bolzani, V. S.; Paritan, M.; Barreiro, E. J.; Young, M. C. M.; Tomazola, D.; Everdin, M. N. _J. Nat. Prod._**2004**, _67_, 908-910. (e) Viegas, C., Jr.; Bolzani, V. S.; Pimentel, L. S. B.; Castro, N. G.; Cabral, R. F.; Costa, R. S.; Floyd, C.; Rocha, M. S.; Young, M. C. M.; Barreiro, E. J.; Fraga, C. A. _Biocy. Med. Biol._**2005**, _13_, 4184-14910. (f) Viegas, C., Jr.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J.; Fraga, C. A. M.; Bolzani, V. S.; Pereira, C. A. M. _Mini-Rec. Med. Chem._**2005**, \(5\), 915-926. (g) Pivatto, M.; Crotti, A. E. M.; Lopes, N. P.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; Rezende, A. Viegas, C.; T.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Bolzani, V. S. _J. Eng. Chem. Soc._**2005**, _16_, 1431-1438. (h) Viegas, C., Jr.; Silva, D. H. S.; Pivatto, M.; Rezende, A.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; Bolzani, V. S.; Nair, G. M. _J. Nat. Prod._**2007**, 0206-0228. (i) Viegas, C., Jr.; Alexandre-Moreira, M. S.; Firaga, C. A. M.; Barreiro, E. J.; Bolzani, V. S.; Miranda, A. L. P. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**2008**, _56_, 407-412. (j) Castro, N. G.; Costa, R. S.; Pimentel, L. S. B.; Danuelo, A.; Romeiro, N. C.; Viegas, C., Jr.; Bareriro, E. J.; Fraga, C. A. M.; Bolzani, V. S.; Rocha, M. S. _Eur. J. Pharmacol._**2008**, _580_, 339-349.
* (10) Markham, K. R.; Terrah, B.; Stanley, R.; Geiger, H.; Mabry, T. J. _Terrohedron_**1978**, _34_, 1389-1397.
* (11) Stiphong

