# 10.1016@0305-1978(78)90024-8.pdf

## Page 1



# Chemosystematic Implications of Flavonoids in _Aniba riparia_

Joao B. FERNANDES, OTTO R. GOTTLIEB, LUCIA M. XAVIER

Centro de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, c.p. 676, 13560 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

The trunk wood of _Aniba riparia_ (Nees) Mez (Lauraceae) contains flavokawin-B, (2S)-pinostrombin, (2S)-5, 7-di-_O_-methylpinochemrin, (2R, 3R)-5, 7-di-_O_-methylpinobanksin, izalpinin and 3, 5, 7-tri-_O_-methyl-galangin. Structural comparison of these flavonoids with the pyrones and neolignans, which characterize all previously examined _Aniba_ spp., leads to a chemical classification of the genus.

## Introduction

The production of secondary metabolites in _Aniba_ species is based mainly either on un-, mono- and di-oxygenated benzoic and cinnamic acids or on di- and tri-oxygenated cinnamic acids. The former group of precursors (+2 acetate units) leads to the pyrones (1) typical of Group 1 of _Aniba_ species, and the latter group of precursors (via reduction to properly- and allylphenols) leads to the benzofuranoid neolignans (2) typical of Group 2 of _Aniba_ species (Table 1) [1-14].

So far neither pyrones nor neolignans have been isolated from _A. riparia_ (Nees) Mez [15]. While the presence of benzyl benzoate, a nearly ubiquitous _Aniba_ constituent [2], is consistent with the inclusion of this species in the genus, the isolation of 3, 5, 7-tri-_O_-methylgalangin (4d), based on an unsubstituted cinnamic acid (even if +3 acetate units) seems to point to the affinity of _A. riparia_ to Group 1. Indeed, in _A. rosaeodora_, which belongs to this group, pyrones are associated with pinocembrin (5a) [16] and rubranine (6), the sole additional flavonoids known to occur in the genus. The suspicion that rubranine is an artifact [17] can be dismissed, it is extractable by washing a wood sample with

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Group 1 & pyrones (1) & \\
1.1 & 1a & _n=0_ & _A. duck_ Kostern., _A. raggans_ Ducke, _A. rosaeodora_ Ducke [2], _A. santelodora_ Ducke [3] \\ _n=1_ & _A. firmula_ (Nees at Mart), Mez, _A. gardneri_ (Meissn.) Mez, _A. heningerii_ \\ _Vattina_, _A. canelida_ (H.B.K) Mez [2], _A. mas_ Kostern. [2, 4] \\ _n=1†_ & _A. hostmanniana_ (Nees) Mez [5] \\
1.2 & 1b & _n=0_ & _A. coto_ (Rusby) Kostern., _A. pseudoconto_ (Rusby) Kostern. [2] \\ _n=1_ & _A. cylindriflora_ Kostern. [4], _A. parafilora_ (Meissn.) Mez [2] \\ Group 2 & neolignans (2) & \\
2.1 & 2, _A_–_dioxyphenyl & _A. affinis_ (Meissn.) Mez [6], _A. burechili_ Kostern. [7, 8, 9]** \\
2.2 & 2, _A_–_trioxyphenyl & _A. simulans_ Allen [11, 12, 13]††††††††††††††††††††† †

## Page 2

hexane for a few seconds at room temperature [18]. Are pyrones associated with tri-_O_-methylgalangin in _A. riparia?_ This question, which is relevant to define the precise chemosystematic position of the species, cannot be answered on the basis of the data presented in the previous study [15], which concerned only the structure of the most abundant compound **(4d)** of the extract. The mother liquor from the isolation of **4d** has now been examined in detail.

## Results

No trace of pyrones was encountered in the extract examined. Instead, not surprisingly in view of their biosynthetic relation with **4d**, **5b**, **5d**, **8c**, ORD curves [23, 24], and had m.p.s. indicated in the literature. The dihydroflavonol **8c** was previously only known as the synthetic 5, 7-dimethyl ether of pinobanksin **(8a)**[25] and its spectral data are given in the Experimental.

## Discussion

From the results, _A. riparia_ cannot be directly included in any of the chemical subgroups 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 and 2.2 of the genus (Table 1). Clearly, however, the metabolites of _A. riparia_ and of the species of subgroup 1.1 are formed by closely related biosynthetic routes, and it

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c} Compound type & POLYPODIO- & PINO- & M & A & G & N & O & L & I & O & P & S & I & D & A & LILIOPSIDA \\ PSIDA & PSIDA & PSIDA & Magnoliidae & Rosidae & Asteridae & Hamamelidae & Dillenidae & & & \\
**7**[26a] & _Phyrogramma_ & _Pinus_ & _Aniba_ & & & & & & & \\  & & _Lindera_ & & & & & & & & \\  & & _Piper_ & & & & & & & & \\
**5**[26b] & & _Pinus_ & _Aniba_ & _Prunus_ & & _Airus_ & & & & \\  & & _Piper_ & _Clurs_ & & & & & & & \\  & & & _Eucalyptus_ & & & & & & & \\
**8**[26b] & & _Pinus_ & _Aniba_ & _Prunus_ & & & & & & & \\
**4**[27] & _Phyrogramma_ & _Pinus_ & _Aniba_ & & & & & & & \\  & & _Aniba_ & & & & & & & \\  & & _Piper_ & & & & & & & \\  & & _Ranunculus_ & & & & & & & \\
**1b**[2, 4, 34, 35] & & _Aniba_ & & & & & & & & \\  & & _Cryptocarya_ & & & & & & & \\  & & & _Gonitoalamus_ & & & & & & \\
**2**[36] & & _Aniba_ & & & & & & & & \\  & & _Lixeira_ & & & & & & & \\  & & _Nectandra_ & & & & & & & \\  & & _Opetes_ & & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & &

## Page 3

seems reasonable to divide the subgroup into two parts: the species given in Table 1 being assigned to the subgroup as part 1.1.2 and _A. riparia_ being placed into part 1.1.1.

The compounds represented by the formulae **4**, **5**, **7** and **8** represent all known natural members of these flavonoid types. Their occurrence is rather restricted. Members of all types were reported only for _Pinus. Aniba_ and _Alpinia_ (Table 2), thus indicating the proximity of Magnoliidae-Liliidae with respect to typical, primitive Pinopsida flavonoids. Pyrones again occur in _Aniba_ and _Alpinia_ (Table 2).

An exceptionally strong chemical relation exists between _Aniba_ and _Pipper_ species with respect to flavonoids (**5a**: _A._ [16]: **5c**: _P._ [22]: **7c**: _A._ _G._ _P._ [22]), pyrones (**1a**, \(n\) = 1:_A._ [28] d _P._ [22]: **1a**, \(n\) = 1, 5, 6, 7, 8-tetrahydro: _A._ [5] d _P._ [28]), neolignans (**2**: _A._ [37]: **9**: _P._ [38]) and even cinnamamides (**3**: _A._ [14]: **10**: _P._ [39]).

## Experimental

_Isolation of the Constituents of Aniba_ riaria.

The crystallization liquor (40 g) of **4d**[14] was extracted with 3% aq. NaOH and the aq. soln. separated from an oil (19 g). The aq. soln. was taken with HCl to pH 8 and extracted with Et2O. The Et2O soln. was evap. and a portion (1.4 g) of the residue (12.8 g) separated into light petrol soluble and insoluble parts. The soluble part (1.1 g) was crystallized from MeOH to give **4c** (1 g). The insoluble part (0.3 g) was separated by fractional crystallization from MeOH into **5b** (200 mg) and **7c** (50 mg). A portion of the oil (4.3 g) was separated into light petrol soluble and insoluble parts. The soluble part (3 g) was chromatographed on a dry column (115 g silica, C4H4) to give fatty material (1 g). benzyl benzoate (500 mg), distosterol (250 mg) and a mixture separated by fractional crystallization from MeOH into additional quantities of **5b** (200 mg) and **7c** (20 mg). The insoluble part (1.3 g) was separated by fractional crystallization from MeOH into an additional quantity of **4d** (1 g) and a mixture (250 mg). The mixture was separated by TLC (silica, C4H4=EtOH 97:3) into Pd (200 mg) and **8c** (9 mg).

(2R, 3R)-3-_Hydroxy_-5, _7-dimethoxyflavanone_ (**8c**), m.p. and lit. [21] m.p. 133-134deg (MeOH) [Found: C, 68.20; H, 5.41, C1H4.0s requires: C, 67.99; H, 5.37%] vKCl max (cm-1): 3478,1675,1600,1565,1450,1210,1100,972,808,3 EtOHmax (nm-2): 3410 info (log 4.45, 3.80). H1NMR (CDCl2, 60 MHz, 1:2.52 (m, 5H ring) b, 3.85 (s, H-8, d), 4.94 (d, J 12 Hz, H-2), 5.57 (dd, J 12 g 2 Hz, H-3), 5.94 (d, J 2 Hz, OH-3), 6.06 d 6.15 (singlets, 2 OMe), MS (_m/e_): 300 (10%) M, 274, (8), 261 (37), 207 (22), 182 (10), 181 (100), 180 (37), 167 (10), 152 (19), 149 (19), 137 (11), 91 (12), 71 (12), 57 (15). ORD (c 26.0 mg/100 ml, EtOH, 230-360 nm): [0]230 + 18450, [0]r282 + 8100, [0] pk277 + 11550, [0] 281 0, [0]r323 - 9250, [0] 344 0, [0] 389 + 5750.

## Acknowledgements

are due to Dr. Adelaide F. Alario for the ORD curves.

## References

- Diaz _et al._ (1977) Diaz, A. M. P. de, Diaz D., P. P., Ferreira, Z. S., Gottlieb, O. R., Lima, R. A. de and Cavalcante, S. de H. (1977) _Acta Amazonica_**7** (in press).
- Gottlieb (1972) Gottlieb, O. R. (1972) _Phytochemistry_**11**, 1537; and literature cited therein.
- Gottlieb _et al._ (1975) Gottlieb, O. R., Mesquita, A. A. L. and Neiva, R. M. T. (1975) unpublished results.
- Gottlieb _et al._ (1977) Gottlieb, O. R., Magalhaes, A. F., Magalhaes, E. G. and Maia, J. G. S. (1977) _Acta Amazonica_**7**, 41.
- Franca _et al._ (1973) Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R. and Puentes S., A. M. (1973) _Phytochemistry_**12**, 1182.
- Fernandes _et al._ (1976) Fernandes, J. B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1033.
- Lima _et al._ (1972) Lima, O. A., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes, M. T. (1972) _Phytochemistry_**11**, 2031.
- Bulow _et al._ (1973) Bulow, M. V. von, Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R. and Puentes, S., A. M. (1973) _Phytochemistry_**12**, 1805.
- Alvarenga _et al._ (1977) Alvarenga, M. A. de, Brocksom, U., Castro C., O., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes, M. T. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 1797.
- Gottlieb _et al._ (1975) Gottlieb, O. R., Silva, M. L. de and Ferreira, Z. S. (1975) _Phytochemistry_**14**, 1825.
- Aiba _et al._ (1975) Aiba, C. J., Fernandes, J. B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1975) _Phytochemistry_**14**, 1597.
- Aiba _et al._ (1977) Aiba, C. J., Alvarenga, M. A. de, Castro C., O., Giesbrecht, A. M., Gottlieb, O. R. and Pagliosa, F. M. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 741.
- Alvarenga _et al._ (1977) Alvarenga, M. A. de, Castro C., Giesbrecht, A. M. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16** (in press).
- Gottlieb _et al._ (1972) Gottlieb, O. R. and Rocha, A. l. da (1972) _Phytochemistry_**11**, 1861.
- Franca _et al._ (1976) Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R., Magalhaes, M. T., Mendes, P. H., Maia, J. G. S., Silva, M. L. da and Gottlieb, H. E. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 572.
- Gottlieb _et al._ (1958) Gottlieb, O. R. and Mors, W. B. (1958) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**80**, 2263.
- Montero _et al._ (1973) Montero, J. L. and Winternitz, F. (1973) _Tetrahedron_**29**, 1243.
- Alleluia _et al._ (1977) Alleluia, I. B., Braz Fo. R., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes, E. G. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16** (in press).
- Egger & Tissut (1968) Egger, K. and Tissut, M. (1968) _Compt. rend. D_**267**, 1329.
- Mongkolsuk & Dean (1964) Mongkolsuk, S. and Dean, F. M. (1964) _J. Chem. Soc._**4654.
- Bick _et al._ (1972) Bick, I. R. C., Brown, R. B. and Hills, W. E. (1972) _Austral. J. Chem._**25**, 449.
- Hansel & Sauer (1967) Hansel, R. and Sauer, H. (1967) _Planta Medica_**15**, 443.
- Gaffield & Waiss Jr. (1968) _Chem. Commun._**29**.
- Markham & Mabry (1967) Markham, K. R. and Mabry, T. J. (1967) _Tetrahedron_**24**, 823.
- Lindstedt (1950) Lindstedt, G. (1950) _Acta Chem. Scand._**4**, 772.
- Bohm & B (1976) Bohm, B. A. (1976) in _The Flavonoids_ (Harborne, J. B., Mabry, T. J. and Mabry, H., eds.), (a) p. 442, (b) p. 560, Chapman & Hall (1967) Chapman & Hall, London; and literature cited therein.


## Page 4

* [27] Gottlieb, O. R. (1975) in _The Flavonoids_ (Harborne, J. B., Mabry, T. J. and Mabry, H., eds.), p. 296, Chapman & Hall, London; and literature cited therein.
* [28] Mors, W. B., Magalhaes, M. T. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1962) _Progr. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod._**20**, 131.
* [29] Achenbach, H., Karl, W. and Smith, S. (1971) _Chem. Ber._**104**, 2688.
* [30] Shibata, S., Shibuya, T. and Doi, K. (1972) _Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan_**45**, 930.
* [31] Romo, J., Mundo, H., Carino, M. A. (1972) _Rev. Latinoamer. Quim._**3**, 46.
* [32] Paulino Fo., H., Muradian, J. and Mors, W. B. (1977) _Rev. Latinoamer. Quim._**8**, 79.
* [33] Kimura, Y., Takido, M., Nakamo, K. and Takishita, M. (1966) _Yakugaku Zasshi_**86**, 1184.
* [34] Hilbubueek, J. R. and Robertson, A. V. (1967) _Austral. J. Chem._**20**, 2199.
* [35] Jewers, K., Davis, J. B., Dougan, J., Manchanda, A. H., Bluden, G., Kyi, A. and Wetchaplian, S. (1972) _Phytochemistry_**11**, 2025.
* [36] Gottlieb, O. R. (1978) _Progr. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod._**36** (in press).
* [37] Gottlieb, O. R., Mourao, J. C., Yoshida, M., Mascarenhas, Y. P., Rodrigues, M., Rosenstein, R. D. and Tomita, K. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 1003.
* [38] Matsui, K. and Munakata, K. (1975) _Tetrahedron Lett._**1905**.
* [39] Chatterjee, A. and Dutta, C. P. (1967) _Tetrahedron_**23**, 1769.



