# 10.1016@0031-9422(82)83121-X.pdf

## Page 1

gave an oil (1 kg) which was distilled under vacuum in order to remove volatile compounds. The residue (332 g) was submitted to column and prep. TLC to yield 102 mg of **4** (system 1, \(R_{f}\) 0.55; system 2, \(R_{f}\) 0.46) and 0.7 mg of **5** (system 1, \(R_{f}\) 0.61; system 2, \(R_{f}\) 0.52), identified by comparison with authentic samples (TLC. IR. mmp). **4** was also found in the EtOH extract (4 mg).

_Aristoclonic acid Ia methyl ester methyl ether_ (4). The fraction containing the aristoclonic acids from 13.3 kg dried roots was fractionated in phenolic and nonphenolic acids by countercurrent distribution as previously reported [1]. A portion of the phenolic acid mixture, after the removal of the main components by crystallization (dioxane), was treated with CH3N; and submitted to prep. TLC (system 1, \(R_{f}\) 0.55; system 2, \(R_{f}\) 0.46) yielding the methyl ester of O-methylaristolochic acid Ia, 2.4 mg, identical to aristoclic acid I methyl ester (**4**).

_Aristoclonic acid Ia ethyl ester ethyl ether_ (6). Methylation of the remaining portion of phenolic acids with CHN; and separation of the products by prep. TLC (system 1, \(R_{f}\) 0.60; system 2, 0.51) afforded the ethyl ester of O-ethylaristoclonic acid Ia (6), 7.6 mg, mp 266. \(\text{U}\text{V}\text{V}\text{

## Page 2



## Page 3

should suffer the \(\gamma\)-effect. This also does not happen. The chemical shifts for C-7' of all three compounds are practically identical (\(\delta\) 39.4 \(\pm\) 0.4). Thus in comparison with **3a** and **3b**, in **1a** methyl and aryl must be interchanged. The carbon of position 1 of the aryl not substituted by hydrogen, is not expected to protect significantly either C-6' or C-7'. Indeed, the presence of the aryl group in close proximity of the allyl protons is the sole reasonable explanation for their absorption at relatively high fields.

The location of the aryl-methyl substituents at interchanged positions is confirmed by further observations. Double irradiation of H-8, clearly a carbonilole proton (\(\delta\) 5.05), in **1a** causes the collapse of the methyl-doublet (\(\delta\) 1.48) to a singlet; and vice-versa, irradiation of H-9 causes the change of the H-8 multiplet to a doublet of \(J \doteq\) 10.5 Hz. This coupling constant, much larger than \(J_{{\rm H}^{-1}\)-7,H-8 ( = 5 Hz) in the porosins (**3a**, **3b**), as well as the chemical shift of the methyl protons (\(\delta\) 1.48), which are more shielded (\(\delta_{\rm Me}\) = 0.5) in the porosins, points to a _trans_-aryl-methyl relationship in **1a**. All other possible decoupling experiments were performed and led to the expected results.

The presence of a small amount of chrysophyllin B **(1b)** in the extract was detected by 'H NMR spectral means.

The biosynthesis of the porosin type neolignans (**3**) was postulated to involve coupling of the propenyl-phenol and the allylphenol derived radicals **4** and **5**[6]. By analogy, the biosynthesis of the chrysophyllin type neolignans would require the coupling of **4** with the 2,4-dihydroxy-5-methoxyallybenzene derived radical, **6**. A biomimetic synthesis of a bicyclo (3.2.1) octanol neolignan with the aryl and methyl substituents at analogously abnormal positions as in the chrysophyllins has been achieved by the concerted [2 + 4] cycloaddition of (_F_)-isosafrole to a 2,3-dimethoxy-6-hydroxyallybenzene derived molecular species [7].

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of constituents._ A sample of trunk wood of _L. chrysophylla_ (Meissn.) Kosterm. (voucher Xyl. 7265, Herb 92081, INPA. Manaus) from the Negro-Marie Rivers, Amazonas, was reduced to powder (15 g) and percolated with petrol. Partial evaporation of the solvent and cooling to room temp. gave a ppt (0.1 g). This was purified by TLC (Si gel, C_nH_-EtOAc. 1: 1) to **1a** (66 mg) and a mixture of **1a** and **1b** (19 mg).

Rel-(7S,8R,1'S,5'S)-D_x_-3', 3', 5'-_trimethoxy-4,5-_methylene-dioxy_-1', 4', 5', 6'-_tetrahydrofuranhydro_-4'-_oxo_-7.1', 8.0.2'-_neolignan (_chrysophyllin A_, **1a**). Mp 183-185deg (C_nH_). (Found: 402.1683; C_2H_xO; requires: 402.1679.) UV A min. 258 inf., 273 (_e_ 14 250, 20 100). IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm

