# 10.1016@S0031-9422(82)85050-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Neolignans from an _Aniba_ species*

Silvia M. C. Dias, Joao B. Fernandes, Jose G. S. Maia, Otto R. Gottlieb

Hugo E. Gottlieb

# Abstract

The trunk wood of an Amazonian _Aniba_ (Lauraceae) species contains, besides dillapiol and the benzodiazepane-type neolignan eusiderin, four bicyclo(3.2.1)octainol neoplasms. These comprise representatives of the cancelling-type: the known thermodynamicellin-A and the novel compounds characterized as (1R, 3S, 4S, 5S, 6S, 7R)-1-allyl-4-hydroxy-3, 5-dimethoxy-7-methyl-6-(3'-methoxy-4', 5'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-8-oxo-bicyclo(3.2.1)octane; (1R, 3S, 4S, 5S, 6S, 7R)-1-allyl-4-hydroxy-3, 5-dimethoxy-7-methyl-6-(3', 4', 5'-trifluoromethyl-6-(3'-methoxy-4', 5'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-8-oxo-bicyclo(3.2.1)octane and (1R, 4R, 5R, 6S, 7R, 8S)-1-allyl-4, 8-dihydroxy-5-methoxy-7-methyl-6-(3'-methoxy-4', 5'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-3-oxbicyclo(3.2.1)octane.

## Introduction

The trunk wood of a lauraceous tree was collected at Ducke Forest Reserve, Manaus. According to the botanist William A. Rodrigues, the specimen, voucher Herbarium INPA, Manaus, no. 42183, belongs to an unclassified _Aniba_ species. The benzene extract of trunk wood yielded the simple allylbenzene diligul (1), the benzodiazepane-type neolignan eusiderin (2) [2] and four cancellin-type neolignan: methoxycancellin-A (3a) and the novel compounds 4a, 4b and 5a.

For reasons stated in a previous paper in this series [3], nomenclature and numbering of neolignan s follow the rules outlined in a recent review [2].

## Results and discussion

Spectral analysis ('H NMR, IR, UV and MS) showed 3a to be a methoxy-derivative of 3b (canellin-A) [4]. The compound had already been isolated previously from _Aniba ferrea_. Its description, however, lacked definition of the chirality at C-5' [5]. The following evidence elucidates this point and indicates 3a and canellin-A (3b) to possess identical absolute configurations. Acetylation of 3a at room temperature led to the monoacetate 3c. The steric

## Page 2

hindrance of the hydroxyl at _C_-2' is best explained by its _cis_-relation with the aryl group, precisely as in the case of canellin-A [2]. The aryl being thus exo-oriented, the benzylic proton (H-7) and the methyl (Me-8) must be endo-oriented. Since the signals of both undergo significant paramagnetic shifts (D  respectively 0.44 and 0.09) upon acetylation of OH-4', this hydroxyl must be equally endo-oriented. In consequence H-4' can only be axial. Being represented by a doublet of \(J\) = 6.5 Hz it is probably vicinal to another axial proton (H-5') and OMe-5' should be equatorial. Indeed, as would be expected for the OH-4'/H-5' _cis_-relation, acetylation of OH-4' produces a significant paramagnetic shift (D 0.28) of the H-5' signal. With respect to its relative configuration methoxycanellin-A (**3a**) is thus identical with canellin-A (**3b**) [4]. Both compounds also share the absolute configuration since their ORD curves are comparable.

Spectral comparison ('H NMR including consideration of all relevant decouplings at 270 MHz, IR, UV and MS) indicated **4a** to differ from **3a** solely by the presence of an oxo-group (instead of a hydroxyl) on the five-membered ring (IR _n_max 1757 cm-1) and of an exo-hydroxyl (instead of an endo-oriented one) at C-4'. Indeed H-8 and the aromatic protons resonated at higher field in **4a** (_t_ respectively _ca_ 8.2 and 3.7), where they are shielded by the C-2' carbonyl, than in **3a** (_t_ respectively _ca_ 7.6 and 3.4). Furthermore H-4' showed two small couplings (_J_ = 2 and < 0.5 Hz), due to equatorial-axial and equatorial-equatorial (_W_) relationships, respectively, with H-5' and one H-6', in **4a**; against one relatively large coupling (_J_ = 6.5 Hz), due to the axial-axial relationship with H-5', in **3a**. As was expected, in contrast to the situation prevailing in **3a** (OMe-3', + 6.80), in **4a** OH-4' on one hand does not affect paramagnetically the signals of H-7, Me-8 and H-5' upon acetylation, and on the other hand affects sterically the now _cis_-related OMe-3' forcing it towards the shielding region of the aromatic ring (OMe-3', + 7.18) (Table 1).

Compounds **4a** and **4b** differ only with respect to the substituents of the aromatic ring: the methylenedioxy group of **4a** is replaced by two methoxyls in **4b** (Table 1).

The constitution of **5a** was assigned on the basis of spectral comparisons with **5b**, a known canellin-type neolignan [6]. The spectral differences can be rationalized by analogy with the pair **4a**/**3a**, i.e. again OH-4' occupies either an exo- (in **5a**, OMe-3', + 7.17) or an endo- (in **5b**, OMe-3', + 6.67) position (Table 1). With respect to its relative configuration **5a** is thus identical to **5c**, a neolignan of known absolute configuration [7]. The ORD curves of both compounds being similar, **5a** and **5c** also share the absolute configuration shown in the formulae.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of constituents._ Trunk wood of an _Aniba_ species (voucher Herbarium INPA, no. 42183) was reduced to powder (2 kg) and percolated with C**4H**6. Evaporation of solvent yielded an oily residue (6 g). This was chromatographed on a dry column (250 g Si gel deactivated by 10% H2O, Et2O). Eluates of ten equal portions of the extruded material were treated as follows. Eluate 1 (1 g) was separated by TLC (Si gel, C**4H**6) into fatty material (0.7 g) and 1 (0.3 g). Eluates 2 (1.2 g) and 3 (0.2 g), purified by repeated Si gel TLC (C**HCl**1, and CHCl**2-Et**O**, 49:1, respectively), yielded 2 (0.6 g) and **3a** (50 mg), respectively. Eluate 4 (1.1 g) yielded, by re-crystallizations from MeOH, sitosterol (0.7 g) and by Si gel TLC (C**4H**6-Me**2CO, 4:1) of the mother liquor, sitosterol (50 mg) and **3a** (0.1 g). Eluates 5 (0.3 g) and 6 (0.5 g), purified by repeated Si gel TLC (C**6H**6-Me**2CO, 4:1 and **C**6, respectively), yielded **4a** (0.1 g) and **4b** (15 mg), respectively. Eluate 7 (0.5 g), by Si gel TLC (C**HCl**7-EtOH**, 9:1), was separated into **5a** (20 mg) and polar material. Eluates 8-10 were complex mixtures of polar compounds.

_Identification of dilapid_ (**1**) [4] _and eusielin_ (**2**) [8] relied on direct comparison with authentic samples.

_Rel_-(7S, **8R, 1**R, 2'S, 3'R, 4'R, 5'S)-D**4'-2', _4'-dihydroxy-3, _3', 5'-trimethoxy-4, 5'-methylenedioxy-1', 2', 3', 4', 5', 6'-hexa-hydro-7-3', 8.1'-neolignan (methoxycascanellin-A, **3a**), identical to compound **5a** of ref. [5]. ORD (_c_ 10.84 mg/100 ml MeOH): [6]hex_250 (_b_ [4]hex_5 = 1600, [6]hex_0, [6]hex_0, [6]hex_0, [6]hex_0, [6]hex_5 + 8700, [6]hex_0

## Page 3



## Page 4



