# 10.1002@elps.201000658.pdf

## Page 1

Capillary electrophoresis and hollow fiber liquid-phase microextraction for the enantioselective determination of albendazole sulfoxide after biotransformation of albendazole by an endophytic fungus

Hollow fiber liquid-phase microextraction and CE were applied for the determination of albendazole sulfoxide (ASOX) enantiomers in liquid culture medium after a fungal biotransformation study. The analytes were extracted from 1 mL of liquid culture medium spiked with the internal standard (_rac_-hydroxychloroquine) and buffered with 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10. The analytes were extracted into 1-octanol impregnated in the pores of the hollow fiber, and into an acid acceptor solution inside the polypropylene hollow fiber. The electrophoretic separations were carried out in 0.05 mol/L _tris_(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer, pH 9.3, containing 3.0% w/v sulfated-b-CD (S-b-CD) with a constant voltage of +15 kV and detection at 220 nm. The method was linear over the concentration range of 250-5000 ng/mL for each ASOX enantiomer. Within-day and between-day assay precision and accuracy for the analytes were studied at three concentration levels and the values of RSD% and relative error % were lower than 15%. The developed method was applied for the determination of ASOX after a biotransformation study employing the endophytic fungus _Penicillium crustosum_ (VR4). This study showed that the endophytic fungus was able to metabolize the albendazole to ASOX enantioselectivity. In addition, it was demonstrated that hollow fiber liquid-phase microextraction coupled to CE can be an excellent and environmentally friendly technique for the analysis of samples obtained in biotransformation studies.

## Introduction

Microbial transformation is an efficient and economical access to synthetic intermediates, active metabolites, and novel drugs possessing useful biological activity for pharmaceutical industry due to its high chemo-, regio-, and stereoselectivity [1]. Biotransformation methods are distinct from biosynthesis, in which relatively complex products are assembled essentially by whole cells, tissues, organs, or organisms. Biotransformation encompasses the field of microbial transformations of organic or inorganic compounds that result in a change in chemical structure [2].

Drug metabolism studies and toxicity of its metabolites are important in the process of drug discovery. Microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi have been used as in vitro models for the simulation of mammalian drug metabolism [3]. Fungi are often used as whole-cell biocatalysts because of their ability to mediate many different reactions, including oxidative, reductive, and hydrolytic transformations of a wide range of substrates [1, 3]. In special, endophytic fungi are prolific producers of natural products, since they live inside the health plant tissues without causing any apparent disease [4]. These microorganisms have also been successfully used in the biotransformation of several compounds [5, 6, 7].

Albendazole (ABZ) is a large-spectrum anthelmintic agent used to treat the most important animal and human gastrointestinal helminth diseases [8, 9]. In addition, the 

## Page 2

treatment of parenchymal brain neurosticercosis has been successfully performed using ABZ, whose effectiveness is related to the presence of the active metabolite albendazole sulfoxide (ASOX) [10, 11]. ABZ is extensively metabolized to its active chiral metabolite ASOX that is further metabolized to the inactive albendazole sulfone (ASON), and in minor proportion to albendazole amine-sulfone (ASONH2) (Fig. 1) [12-14]. ASOX is the main active metabolite present in blood after ABZ treatment [12, 13], and nowadays this metabolite has been marked as a racemic drug under the generic name ricobendazole. ASOX contains a chiral center at the sulfur atom, and therefore two enantiomers, (+)-ASOX and (-)-ASOX are possible [15]. Due to this extensive metabolism, plasma concentrations of ABZ are usually low and pharmacokinetic studies are developed using ASOX and, sometimes, ASON concentrations [11]. In all species except rats and mice, the plasma concentrations of (+)-ASOX are higher compared with the (-)-ASOX enantiomer.

Hollow fiber liquid-phase microextraction (HF-LPME) was developed as a novel sample pretreatment method, which is fast, simple, and inexpensive. Furthermore, it requires little consume of organic solvents and therefore produces little waste [16]. It has been standing out in the last years over the classical methods of sample preparation due to its versatility, high efficiency, and high selectivity [17]. Since only a few microliters of solvent are used, there is minimal exposure to toxic organic solvents. HF-LPME based on polypropylene hollow fiber was introduced by Pedersen-Bjergaard and Rasmussen in 1999 [18]. Briefly, in HF-LPME the analytes are extracted from the matrices through an organic solvent immobilized in the pores of a porous hollow fiber into a very small volume of acceptor phase inside the hollow fiber [18]. Based on the composition of the acceptor phase, this technique can be performed either in two-phase mode or three-phase mode [17]. Using two-phase mode, the solvent impregnated in the porous is the same solvent used as acceptor solution. In three-phase mode, the acceptor solution is commonly an aqueous solution. This mode is suitable for more polar and hydrophilic analytes and it may be an ideal mode to be directly coupled with CE [19]. Some works have been using HF-LPME coupled to CE in order to minimize organic solvent consume of the whole analytical process (extraction and analysis) [20, 21], and there are formats that propose the coupling of HF-LPME with CE to perform the extraction at line, on line, and in line [22].

Enantioselective analysis of ASOX in biological matrices has been performed mainly by high-performance liquid chromatography [23-25] or CE [26, 27]. All the methods use a classical sample preparation to extract the analytes from the matrices, mainly liquid-liquid extraction [23-26] or direct injection [25]. There are no reports of ABZ metabolite analysis using a microextraction technique for sample preparation.

In order to demonstrate the potential for HF-LPME-CE in a biotransformation study, an enantioselective method to analyze ASOX, the chiral active metabolite of ABZ was developed. The developed method was applied in an enantioselective fungal biotransformation study in order to investigate the potential of an endophytic fungus to perform the enantioselective metabolism of the proposed drug and also to evaluate a new way to obtain active drugs.

## 2 Materials and methods

### Chemicals and reagents

Standard stock solutions of ABZ, ASOX, ASON, and ASONH2 (purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA and from Toronto Research Chemicals, Toronto, Canada) were prepared at the concentration of 400.0 mg/mL in methanol. Working solutions of _rac_-ASOX at concentrations of 400.0, 200.0, 100.0, 60.0, 40.0, and 20.0 mg/mL and ASON at concentrations of 200.0, 100.0, 40.0, 30.0, 20.0, and 10.0 mg/mL were obtained by dilutions in the same solvent. A solution of hydroxychloroquine (kindly supplied by Sanofi/Winthropi Pharmaceuticals, New York, NY, USA) at concentration of 200.0 mg/mL was used as internal standard. All these solutions were stored at -20degC, in amber glass tube and protected from direct light.

Figure 1: Biotransformation route of albendazole.



## Page 3

The solvents (analytical grade) used in HF-LPME procedure and in the biotransformation procedure were as follows: di-butyl ether, hexyl acetate, dodecyl acetate, 1-octanol (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), _n_-hexyl ether (Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, MA, USA), butyl acetate and \(N\),_N_-dimethylformamide (Mundial Quimica, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil).

The reagents (analytical grade) were sodium chloride, potassium chloride monosodium phosphate 1-hydrated, disodium phosphate 2-hydrated, magnesium sulfate 7-hydrated and iron sulfate 7-hydrated from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), sodium hydroxide from Nuclear (Diadema, Sao Paulo, Brazil), hydrochloric acid and acetic acid from Zilquimica (Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil), _tris_(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane from J. T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ), USA) and phosphoric acid from Babsynth (Diadema). Potato dextrose agar (PDA), sucrose, malt extract, dextrose, triptone, and yeast extract were obtained from Acumedia (Lansing, MI, USA). Sulfated-b-CD (S-b-CD, substitution degree DS, 7-10) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Germany).

All solutions used as CE background electrolyte and in CE rinse cycle procedure were filtered through a Millex-HA 0.45-mm disk filter from Millipore (Bedford, MA, USA) and degassed by ultrasound for 5 min. Water was purified with a Milli-Q plus system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA).

### Ce

Analyses were conducted in a CE system from Beckman Coulter Instruments, model P/ACE MDQ (Fullerton, CA, USA) consisting of an analyzer, an automatic sampler with controlled temperature, a diode array detector (wavelength set at 220 nm for the detection of the analytes), and a 32 Karat(r) software for data acquisition. A fused silica uncoated capillary (Beckman Coulter Instruments, Full-erton, CA, USA) 75 mm id, 60.2 cm in total length, and 50.0 cm in effective length was used. Before the first use, the capillary was conditioned by rinsing with 1.0 mol/L NaOH for 10 min at 20degC, followed by 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 10 min at 20degC, and water for 10 min at 20degC. At the beginning of each working day, the capillary was rinsed with NaOH 0.1 mol/L for 10 min followed by water for 10 min. Between consecutive analyses, the capillary was rinsed with 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 2 min, water for 2 min, and background electrolyte for 3 min. After daily use, the capillary was washed with 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 10 min followed by water for 10 min. When not in use, the capillary was filled with water and its tips were stored immersed in water. The electrophoretic separations were carried out in 0.05 mol/L _tris_(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer (pH adjusted to 9.3 with hydrochloric acid) containing sulfated-b-cyclodextrin 3% w/v. All experiments were carried out in the normal mode. Sample injections were performed hydrodynamically at a pressure of 0.5 psi for 10 s. The capillary and sample temperature was set at 20degC. A constant voltage of +15 kV was applied during analyses.

### Hf-Lpme

The sample solution was transferred to a 4-mL conic sample vial. The format of the HF-LPME system was based on that developed by Magalhaes and Bonato [28]. Briefly, each extraction device consisted of two gel-loading round tips (Sorenson Bioscience, Salt Lake City, UT, USA) connected to a 15 cm piece of an Accurel PP Q3/2 porous polypropylene hollow fiber (Membrana, Wuppertal, Germany) and assembled in a polyurethane snap cap to avoid leakage during the agitation. The id of the fiber was 600 mm, the thickness of the wall was 200 mm, and the pore size was 0.2 mm. Prior to the extraction, the conic sample vial was filled with 1 mL liquid culture medium, 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10, 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite, and 10% NaCl w/v. A new polypropylene hollow fiber was placed between the two gel-loading round tips and dipped for 10 s in the organic solvent to immobilize the solvent in the porous of the fiber. After that, the excess of solvent was removed by ultrasonification for 10 s. After impregnation, 60 mL of acceptor solution (HCl, 1.0 mol/L) was injected into the hollow fiber and then the fiber was placed in the sample solution. The extraction was performed for 50 min at room temperature (22 +- 2degC) using a Vibrax VXR agitator (IKA, Staufen, Germany) at 1500 rpm. After extraction, 50 mL of the acceptor solution was withdrawn using a microsyringe, transferred to a conic vial, and mixed with water-background electrolyte-methanol (6.0:3.9:0.1 v/v/v). This dilution was performed to prevent the antistacking effect that may happen when the ionic strength of the sample plug is higher or similar to the background electrolyte (which was the case of the acceptor solution), leading to a peak broadening and loss of the resolution. This final solution was directly injected into the CE system for further analysis.

### Validation of the method

Analytical curves were obtained by spiking aliquots of 1 mL liquid culture medium with standard solutions of ASOX in the concentrations of 250.0, 500.0, 750.0, 1250.0, 2500.0, and 5000.0 ng/mL for each enantiomer. The internal standard used was hydroxychloroquine in the concentration of 2.5 mg/mL.

The absolute recovery of each analyte extracted from the liquid culture medium spiked in the concentrations of 500.0, 1250.0, and 2500.0 ng/mL for each ASOX enantiomer (_n_ = 3, for each concentration) was determined by comparing the areas obtained for these samples (i) with the areas achieved by analyzing extracted blank liquid culture medium spiked with the same amount of the metabolites (ii). The procedures were compared and the amount of the extracted analyte obtained in the fist procedure (i) was related to the second procedure (ii). Once in the second procedure (ii), the amount of the metabolites that are injected is 100% because they were added to the blank 

## Page 4

sample, which had been extracted by HF-LPME, the results obtained in the first procedure (i) will be the absolute recovery achieved by the HF-LPME. Absolute recovery was evaluated by calculating the RSD% between the extracted analytes and it was expressed as the percentage of the amount extracted.

The detectability of the method was evaluated by determining the LOQ. The LOQ was defined as the lowest concentration that could be determined with accuracy and precision below 20% (Guidance for Industry: Bioanalytical Method Validation, Center for Drug Evaluation And Research, US Food and Drug Administration; [http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm](http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm)) over five analytical runs and it was obtained using liquid culture medium samples (1 mL) spiked with 250.0 ng/mL of each analyte. Precision was expressed as RSD% and accuracy as percent of deviation between the true (nominal concentration) and the measured value (obtained concentration), i.e. relative error (RE%). To assess within-day precision and accuracy, replicate analyses (_n_ = 5) of 1 mL of liquid culture medium spiked at concentrations of 500.0, 1250.0, and 5000.0 ng/mL of each ASOX enantiomer were performed. For between-day assays, fivefold liquid culture medium samples of each concentration were analyzed for three consecutive days ([http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm](http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm)).

The selectivity of the method was assured by analyzing liquid culture medium drug-free samples. In addition, control samples (described in Section 2.7) were evaluated by analyzing the formation of any peak during the biotransformation process that could interfere in the analysis of the analytes.

Stability tests were performed in three different ways evaluating two different concentrations, a low concentration (250.0 ng/mL) and a high concentration (2500.0 ng/mL) of each analyte (each concentration was evaluated in six-fold, \(n\) = 6). (i) Long-term controlled temperature stability at 30degC, (ii) freeze-thaw cycle stability, and (iii) short-term room temperature stability. Long-term controlled temperature stability at 30degC was determined after 6 days. Aliquots of liquid culture medium spiked with the analytes were prepared and kept at 30degC during six consecutive days. To perform the freeze-thaw cycle stability test, the samples were stored at -20degC for 24 h and thawed at room temperature. When completely thawed, the samples were refrozen for 12 h under the same conditions. The freeze-thaw cycle was repeated twice more, and then the samples were analyzed on the third cycle. For the determination of short-term room temperature stability, the samples were prepared and kept at room temperature (22 +- 2degC) for 12 h and then analyzed. The analytes' peak areas obtained from stability tests were compared with the peak areas obtained with freshly prepared samples. One-way ANOVA _t_-test was applied, with the level of significance set at \(p\) <= 0.05.

Inversion of the configuration of chiral compounds may occur. In order to verify the occurrence of racemization in the incubation conditions, in the extraction procedure and in the CE auto-injector, ASOX enantiomers were separated under normal phase conditions using the procedure described by Lanchote and coworkers [23] and collected in the chromatographic system. After mobile-phase evaporation, the residues were dissolved in methanol. Next, 1 mL liquid culture medium samples (_n_ = 3) were spiked with 50 mL of each enantiomer solution and kept under 30degC during 144 h in the incubation shaker. After this period, these samples were submitted to the HF-LPME process and subsequent electrophoretic analysis. In addition, the racemization of this extract was evaluated in the CE sample auto-injector over 12 h.

### _Endophytic fungus isolation and maintenance_

The selected strain of the endophytic fungus was the _Penicillium crustosum_ (VR4) isolated from _Viguera robusta_. The fungus studied was isolated and identified by rDNA sequences as described previously [29]. The fungus has been maintained as agar plugs in sterile water and in silica gel (6-12 mesh, grade 40, desiccant activated) at 10degC. The strain has been deposited in the Academic Laboratory of Chemistry of Microorganisms, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirao Preto (University de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil).

### _Biotransformation conditions_

The biotransformation study was performed according to the procedure described by Borges et al [5, 7]: (i) Three disks of 0.5 cm of diameter containing the fungal mycelia were aseptically transferred to 9.0 cm diameter Petri dishes containing potato dextrose agar and allowed to grow for 6 days at 25degC; (ii) three uniform disks of 0.5 cm diameter of the endophytic fungus mycelia were cut with a transfer tube (Fischer Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and then inoculated in 50 mL Falcon tubes containing 10 mL of prefermetative medium (10.0 g malt extract, 10.0 g dextrose, 5.0 g triplone, and 3.0 g yeast extract and deionized water to 1 L and pH adjusted to 6.2 +- 0.2 with a solution of 0.50 mol/L HCl) that was used for the appropriate growth of the microorganism for 96 h, 120 rpm at 30degC; (iii) the mycelium was completely transferred to 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 80 mL of modified Czapek medium (25.0 g sucrose, 2.0 g NaNO3, 1.0 g KH2PO4, 0.5 g MgSO4.7H2O, 0.5 g KCl, 0.01 g FeSO4.7H2O, and deionized water to 1.0 L pH adjusted to 5.0 with a solution of 1.0 mol/L HCl). At this point, ABZ (2 mg) was dissolved in 300 mL of _N,N_-dimethylformamide and added to modified Czapek medium. The cultures were incubated for 120 h at 30degC, with shaking at 120 rpm. Control tubes consisted of culture broth without ABZ and the fungus, sterile medium with ABZ without the fungus and fungal mycelium of the studied endophytic fungus without ABZ.

The results obtained in the biotransformation process were expressed as enantiomeric excess (ee), determined by the equation: \(\text{ee} = \left( {A - B/A + B} \right) \times 100\); where: \(A\) is the 

## Page 5

enantiomer with higher concentration and \(B\) is the enantiomer with lower concentration.

## 3 Results and discussion

### Electrophoretic separation

At the beginning of this study, we were interested in evaluating the biotransformation of ABZ to ASOX and also to ASON and ASONH2 metabolites. Hence, the analytical method should be selective enough to resolve all these compounds. The chiral separation of the ASOX metabolite was based on a slightly changed version of a published method developed by Paias et al. [26]. In order to obtain the simultaneous separation of ASON and the ASONH2 metabolites, some changes were done. The first change was in the concentration and in the pH of the background electrolyte, 0.050 mol/L tris buffer, pH 9.3, instead of 0.02 mol/L tris buffer, pH 7.0. This change resulted in an improvement in the resolution of the chiral separation of the ASOX with a resolution between the peaks of 3.4. The UV detection was performed at 220 nm instead of 290 nm, resulting in an increase in the detectability of this intended method. The samples were injected for 10 s at a pressure of 0.5 psi (instead of 2.5 s at 0.8 psi), also resulting in an increase in the method detectability. The voltage was decreased from +18 kV to +15 kV, resulting in a current of approximately 90 mA. The decrease in the voltage was necessary to avoid any Joule heating [30] caused by the use of a more concentrated buffer electrolyte. The rinse cycles between the runs were also modified to improve the reproducibility in the migration time of the analytes between the analyses. With these modifications, the migration times of the ASOX enantiomers were decreased and it was possible to analyze the ASON and the ASONH2 under 16 min.

The reproducibility of the migration times was evaluated by injection of ten samples consecutively using the same background electrolyte. Under this condition, the RSD% for the migration time of all analytes was under 1.2% (data not shown); however, after the sixth injection there was a loss of resolution between the analytes. It can be explained by the system buffer depletion yielding a loss in the ability of the buffer to control the pH and, therefore, loss of the resolution [30]. Therefore, after the fifth injection the background electrolyte vial was changed by a new one. The RSD% for the migration time of the analytes after the fifth injection was under 0.70%. All these modifications were performed in order to reach a better resolution value of the ASOX enantioselective separation and also to separate all ABZ metabolites in a same run.

### HF-LPME optimization

The optimization of HF-LPME procedure was performed in three-phase mode using liquid culture medium (1 mL) spiked with known amounts of ABZ (5000.0 ng/mL) and its metabolites (2500.0 ng/mL). Although the ABZ analysis was not possible due to its low water solubility, preventing to be analyzed in the CE conditions described by this method, it was added during the extraction procedure to prevent any influence that this drug might cause during the HF-LPME. This is necessary because ABZ will be present in the real biotransformation samples. The presence of ABZ could influence in the extraction procedure of the metabolites due to a competition process for the organic solvent since both of them have similar physic-chemistry characteristics. In addition, the amount of ABZ is much higher than the amount of the metabolites present in the biotransformation samples. These factors could lead to bias in the extraction procedure of the real samples and, therefore, compromise the reliability of the results. Several important parameters that can influence HF-LPME extraction such as type of organic solvent, extraction time, ionic strength, and composition of acceptor and donor phases were evaluated. The extraction efficiency was related to the recovery of the analytes according to their absolute area obtained with the parameter evaluated. Thus, the obtained area was plotted on a graph of peak area versus evaluated parameter and the best relationship analyzed. All optimization procedures were carried out in triplicate using a piece of polypropylene fiber of 15 cm at a temperature of 22 (+-2degC) and a stir rate of 1500 rpm.

#### Type of organic solvent

The kind of organic solvent used in HF-LPME is very important in order to achieve efficient analyte extraction. To evaluate this parameter, the donor phase was composed of 1 mL liquid culture medium, 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10, and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite (used to prevent ASOX oxidation). The acceptor solution was 60 mL of 0.10 mol/L HCl. The extraction was done for 40 min. The solvent must have some properties such as: to be insoluble in aqueous solution, to have high boiling point preventing its evaporation during extraction, to be compatible with the hydrophobic fiber, and to have similar polarity of the analytes. Low viscous solvents are not used due to their high volatility and possible loss during the extraction process [31]. However, high viscous solvents can influence in the analyte mass transfer from the donor solution to the acceptor solution, decreasing the analyte transference velocity. The organic solvent used must attain moderate volatility and viscosity. Based on the properties described above, the following solvents were evaluated: hexyl acetate, dodecyl acetate, 1-octanol, butyl ether, and _n_-hexyl ether. It was observed that only the hexyl acetate and 1-octanol were efficient in the extraction of metabolites. In addition, 1-octanol showed better recovery values than hexyl acetate (Fig. 2). Dodecyl acetate, butyl ether, and _n_-hexyl ether proved not to be able to extract the analytes, possibly due to the low partition coefficient of the analytes in these solvents.



## Page 6



#### 3.2.2 Extraction time

To evaluate this parameter, the donor phase was composed of 1 mL liquid culture medium, 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10, and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite. The acceptor solution was 60 mL of 0.10 mol/L HCl and 1-octanol was used as extraction solvent. The HF-LPME is based on the equilibrium between the analyte in the sample matrix and in the acceptor phase present in the lumen of the capillary hollow fiber membrane. Consequently, the evaluation of different extraction times is essential to assess the kinetics of the mass transfer process [32]. In this experiment, the behavior of the extraction was evaluated after 10, 20, 30, 50, 80, and 100 min (Fig. 3). It was observed that by increasing the extraction time, best analyte recovery values were obtained, and it can be seen that at 80 min the system reaches equilibrium for most analytes, except for ASON metabolite. For this metabolite, it was not possible to reach the equilibrium up to 100 min. Moreover, studies involving microtechnique extractions which are equilibrium process-based do not need to be performed in equilibrium conditions [18] since the experimental conditions are strictly controlled. Thus, it was used 50 min of extraction time for further studies. At first, 50 min seems to be a long time of extraction; however, the system developed allows the extraction of 36 samples at the same time, thereby offsetting the long extraction time employed.

#### 3.2.3 Ionic strength

Usually, the addition of NaCl in the samples has been used to improve the extraction efficiency in microextraction techniques [33]. It can be attributed to the "salting-out effect" which decreases the solubility of the polar analytes in the aqueous samples, improving their migration to the extraction phase. Based on this, experiments were performed varying the NaCl concentrations from 0 to 20% w/v (data not shown). To evaluate this parameter, the donor phase was composed of 1 mL liquid culture medium, 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10, and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite. The acceptor solution was 60 mL of 0.10 mol/L HCl and 1-octanol was used as extraction solvent. The extraction was done for 50 min. The results showed that the extraction recovery increased varying from 0 to 10% only for ASONH2 metabolite. This result can be attributed to the higher polarity of this metabolite when compared with others. Therefore, it would be more susceptible to the salting out effect. For the other analytes, the recovery was not influenced by the salt, probably due to their low polarity. The ionic strength was set at 10% of NaCl for the subsequent experiments.

#### 3.2.4 Compositions of acceptor phase and donor phase in three-phase HF-LPME mode

The compositions of acceptor and donor phases affect greatly the extraction efficiency in HF-LPME. In three-phase HF-LPME mode, the pH of the donor solution is adjusted to keep the analytes in nondissociated form and the pH of the acceptor phase is adjusted to keep them in the ionized form. The optimization of acceptor phase was performed using three types of acid solution: hydrochloric acid, trifluoroacetic acid, and acetic acid in three different concentrations (Fig. 4). To evaluate this parameter, the donor phase was composed of 1 mL liquid culture medium, NaCl 10% w/v, 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10, and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite. 1-Octanol was used as extraction solvent.

Figure 3: Effect of extraction time on HF-LPME efficiency. All extractions were performed at a temperature of 22 (+-2 °C) and with a stir rate of 1500 rpm. Donor phase: 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer pH 10 and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite. Acceptor phase: 0.10 mol/L HCl. Extraction solvent: 1-octanol. (–)-ASOX and (+)-ASOX concentration: 2.5 mg/mL; ASON and ASONH2 concentration: 5.0 μg/mL, \(n\) = 3. Electrophoretic conditions described in Section 2.2.

Figure 2: Effect of extraction solvent on HF-LPME efficiency. All extractions were performed for 40 minutes at a temperature of 22 (+- 2 °C) and with a stir rate of 1500 rpm. Donor phase: 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer pH 10 and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metabisulfite. Acceptor phase: 0.10 mol/L HCl. (–)-ASOX and (+)-ASOX concentration: 2.5 μg/mL; ASON and ASONH2 concentration: 5.0 μg/mL, \(n\) = 3. Electrophoretic conditions described in Section 2.2.



## Page 7

The extraction was done for 50 min. The HCl solutions provided an acceptor phase with a very low pH and the best extraction efficiency was accomplished with this phase. This acid was previously found to extract efficiently basic drugs from biological matrices [34]. The low extraction efficiency showed by the acetic acid solution may be related to the pH of the acceptor phase since this weak acid led to the values of pH higher than the strong acid did. In addition, the use of weak acids has been previously shown to result in reduced extraction recoveries compared with strong acids [33]. Trifluoroacetic acid showed to be efficient in the recovery only of ASON; however, the results are less than those obtained using HCl. The donor phase was optimized by the variation of the pH with phosphate buffer 0.50 mol/L at different pHs (Fig. 5). As shown in Fig. 5, the best extraction efficiency (with minimal RSD% values) was accomplished keeping the pH of the donor phase at 10.0. At pH 7.0, the extraction efficiency was similar to the results obtained at pH 10.0; however, the RSD% was too high. Therefore, the acceptor and donor solutions chosen for the subsequent experiments were, respectively, 1.0 mol/L HCl and 0.5 mol/L phosphate buffer, pH 10.0.

### 3.3 Optimized HF-LPME conditions and method validation

Figure 6A shows the electropherogram of a liquid culture medium spiked with 2500.0 ng/mL of each ASOX enantiomer and 5000.0 ng/mL of ASON and ASONH2 metabolites

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline Analytes & Range (ng/mL) & Linear equation & r & ANOVA lack of fit & \\  & & & & _F_-value & _p_-Value \\ (−)-ASOX & 250–5000 & \(y\) = 0.000526x-0.0734 & 0.9944 & 1.770 & 0.177 \\ (+)-ASOX & 250–5000 & \(y\) = 0.000528x-0.0713 & 0.9942 & 2.481 & 0.079 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2.: Linearity of the developed method

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline Analytes & \multicolumn{2}{c}{500 ng/mL} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{1250 ng/mL} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{2500 ng/mL} \\  & Recovery (\%) & Precision RSD (\%) & Recovery (\%) & Precision RSD (\%) & Recovery (\%) & Precision RSD (\%) \\ (−)-ASOX & 28.8 & 2.9 & 28.1 & 9.6 & 28.5 & 3.1 \\ (+)-ASOX & 29.6 & 2.0 & 27.1 & 6.5 & 29.6 & 8.3 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1.: Recovery (_n_ = 3) of the developed method

Figure 4.: Effect of acceptor phase on HF-LPME efficiency. All extractions were performed for 50 min at a temperature of 22 (± 2 °C) and with a stir rate of 1500 rpm. Donor phase: 2.8 mL of 0.50 mol/L phosphate buffer pH 10 and 0.20 mL of a 4 mg/mL sodium metalisulphite. Extraction solvent 1-octanol. (−)-ASOX and (+)-ASOX concentration: 2.5 μg/mL; ASON and ASZamine-sulfone concentration: 5.0 μg/mL, \(n\) = 3. Electrophoretic conditions described in Section 2.2.

Figure 5.: Effect of donor phase pH on HF-LPME efficiency. All extractions were performed for 50 minutes at a temperature of 22 (± 2 °C) and with a stir rate of 1500 rpm. Acceptor phase: 0.10 mol/L HCl. Extraction solvent: 1-octanol. (−)-ASOX and (+)-ASOX concentration: 2.5 μg/mL; ASON and ASZamine-sulfone concentration: 5.0 μg/mL, \(n\) = 3. Electrophoretic conditions described in Section 2.2.



## Page 8

and submitted to HF-LPME. The migration order of the ASOX enantiomers was established based on a work previously described by Paias et al. [26], being the first one (-)-ASOX and the second one the (+)-ASOX.

After HF-LPME optimization, a pilot bitotransformation study was performed. It showed that ASON and ASONH2 metabolites were not produced by the evaluated fungus, and hence the validation procedure for these metabolites was not included. Under the optimized conditions, HF-LPME recoveries were close to 30%, with RSD values lower than 10.0% for (-)-ASOX and (+)-ASOX metabolites (Table 1). These recovery values are in agreement with other micro-extraction techniques [35, 36]. The method proved to be linear over the concentration range of 250.0-5000.0 ng/mL for each ASOX enantiomer with correlation coefficient higher than 0.994. In addition, the linearity was evaluated by ANOVA lack of fit test (Table 2) with _p_-value higher than 0.079. The precision and accuracy of the method were assessed for both within-day (five spiked liquid culture medium for each concentration on the same day) and between-day (five spiked liquid culture medium samples for each concentration for three consecutive days) determinations. Tables 3 and 4 summarize the results for within-day and between-day precision, respectively. Neither RSDs nor RE exceeded a value of 15%, in agreement with the literature recommendations ([http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm](http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm)). The lowest concentration quantified by the validated method (LOQ) was 250.0 ng/mL for each analyte with RSD% and RE% lower than 8.0% (Table 5). The method developed here proved to be selective since the blank liquid culture medium neither showed interferences in the migration times of the analytes nor in the internal standard (at 220 nm) (Fig. 6B). The stability test showed no statistically significant difference for _p_-values for free-ze-thaw cycles, for short-term room temperature stability tests and for long-term controlled temperature stability (Table 6), indicating that the analytes keep stable under the conditions of analysis, storage, and biotransformation. In addition, the analysis of liquid culture samples spiked with pure ASOX enantiomers did not demonstrate any

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Analytes & Nominal concentrations (ng/mL) & Obtained concentrations (ng/mL) & Accuracy RE (\%) & Precision RSD (\%) \\ (—)-ASOX & 500.0/1250.0/2500.0 & 508.2/1205.0/2297.4 & +1.8/–3.6/−8.1 & 2.4/3.3/4.1 \\ (+)-ASOX & 500.0/1250.0/2500.0 & 509.9/1208.0/2294.8 & +2.0/−3.4/−8.2 & 2.1/3.2/4.2 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Between-day(a) precision and accuracy (_n_ = 5 for each concentration) of the developed method

Figure 6: Electropherograms for the analysis of ABZ metabolites in liquid culture medium after HF-LPME extraction at optimum conditions. (A) Liquid culture medium spiked with (1) (–)-ASOX, (2) (+)-ASOX (2.5 μs) mL−1), (3) ASON (4) and ASONH2 (5.0 μs/mL); (B) Drug-free liquid culture medium. Electrophoretic and HF-LPME conditions are described in Section 2.2. and 2.3, respectively.



## Page 9

racemization during the incubation period, the extraction procedure or after 12 h in the sample autoinjector.

### Method application and enantioselective biotransformation studies

The endophytic fungus _P. crustosum_ (VR4) promoted the biotransformation of ABZ to ASOX, the human active metabolite, by a sulfoxidation reaction (Fig. 7A). In addition, this biotransformation process showed to be enantioselective. ASOX enantiomers, which were not present in the controls, were detected in the extracts of the endophytic fungus culture medium of ABZ incubation (Fig. 7B and C). The identification of ASOX enantiomers was performed by comparing their migration time and diode array detection spectra with those of the reference substances.

The ABZ biotransformation employing the endophytic fungus was monitored for 120 h. Aliquots were collected every 24 h and analyzed by the HF-LPME-CE method against an analytical curve extracted and analyzed simultaneously. After extraction and analyses, the analyte' concentrations were obtained and graphs of concentration (mg/mL) versus time of incubation (hours) were plotted (Fig. 8).

The profile obtained using the fungus _P. crustosum_ (VR4) in the biotransformation process of ABZ to its active metabolite also showed an enantiomeric excess of 50.4% for the formation of the metabolite (-)-ASOX after incubation for 96 h. The highest concentration observed for the (-)-ASOX was 1294.2 mg/mL after 96 h and, in the same period, the (+)-ASOX presented a concentration of 641.6 mg/mL.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} Analytes & Freeze–thaw cycles & 30 °C During 6days & Room temperature & \\
500.0 ng/mL & 2500.0 ng/mL & 500.0 ng/mL & 2500.0 ng/mL & 500.0 ng/mL & 2500.0 ng/mL \\ (−)-ASOX & 0.53 & 0.35 & 0.26 & 0.39 & 0.66 & 0.28 \\ (+)-ASOX & 0.54 & 0.51 & 0.32 & 0.41 & 0.75 & 0.33 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 6: Stability test (_n_ = 6) of the developed method

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Analytes & Nominal concentrations (ng/mL) & Obtained concentrations (ng/mL) & Accuracy RE (\%) & Precision RSD (\%) \\ (−)-ASOX & 250.0 & 266.8 & +6.7 & 6.4 \\ (+)-ASOX & 250.0 & 269.7 & +7.8 & 5.7 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 5: LOQ (_n_ = 5) of the developed method

Figure 7: Electropherogram for the analysis of ASOX enantiomers in liquid culture medium after biotransformation procedure employing the endophytic fungus _Penicillium crustosum_ (VR4). (A) Analysis collected 96 hours after incubation; (B) Fungal mycelium of the studied endophytic fungus control sample; (C) Sterile medium with ABZ without the fungus control sample. (1) (−)-ASOX, (2) (+)-ASOX, (3) hydroxychloroquine enantiomers (internal standard). Electrophoretic and HF-LPME conditions are described in Section 2.2. and 2.3, respectively.



## Page 10



## 4 Concluding remarks

This article describes for the first time the use of HF-LPME and CE for enantioselective determination of ASOX after ABZ biotransformation employing the endophytic fungus _P. crustosum_ (VR4). The method shows the possibility to analyze all ABZ metabolites in a single run under 16 min. In addition, it presents an excellent resolution value between the enantiomer peaks. The developed method is simple, highly selective, and with negligible organic solvent consumption. The great advantage of the developed method over other methods described in the literature is the use of HF-LPME. HF-LPME and CE showed to be useful and eco friendly techniques to be used in enantioselective biotransformation studies. In addition, the biotransformation study showed the enantioselective biotransformation of ABZ to (-)-ASOX by the evaluated fungus.

_The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico) and CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior) for financial support and for granting research fellowships._

_The authors have declared no conflict of interest._

## References

* [1] Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Duran-Patron, R., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., Collado, I. G., _Tetrahedron. Asymm._ 2009, _20_, 385-397.
* [2] Pupo, M. T., Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Bonato, P. S., in: Saikai, R., Bezbaru, R. L., Bora, T. Ch. (Eds.), _Microbial Biotechnology_, New India Publishing Agency, New Delhi, India 2008, pp. 47-66.
* [3] Azerad, R., in: Scheper, T. (Ed.), _Advances in Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology_, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, New York 1999, pp. 169-218.
* [4] Borges, W. S., Borges, K. B., Bonato, P. S., Said, S., Pupo, M. T., _Curr. Org. Chem._ 2009, _13_, 1137-1163.
* [5] Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., _J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal._ 2008, _46_, 945-952.
* [6] Barth, T., Pupo, M. T., Borges, K. B., Okano, L. T., Bonato, P. S., _Electrophoresis_ 2010, _31_, 1521-1528.
* [7] Borges, K. B., de Oliveira, A. R. M., Barth, T., Jabor, V. A. P., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., _Anal. Bioanal. Chem._ 2010, _39_, 915-925.
* [8] Steiger, U., Cotting, J., Reichen, J., _Clin. Pharmacol. Ther._ 1990, _47_, 347-353.
* [9] Bonato, P. S., de Oliveira, A. R. M., de Santana, F. J. M., Fernandes, B. J. D., Lanchote, V. L., Gonzalez, A. E., Garcia, H. H., Takayanagi, O. M., _J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal._ 2007, _44_, 228-563.
* [10] Takayanagi, O. M., Jardim, E., _Arch. Neurol._ 1992, _49_, 290-294.
* [11] Takayanagi, O. M., Bonato, P. S., Dreossi, S. A. C., Lanchote, V. L., _Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol._ 2002, _54_, 125-130.
* [12] Lacey, E., _Parasitol. Today_ 1990, \(6\), 112-115.
* [13] Gotschall, D. W., Theorides, V. J., Wang, R., _Parasitol. Today_ 1990, \(6\), 115-124.
* [14] Lanusse, C. E., Nare, B., Gason, L. H., Prichard, R. K., _Xenobiotica_ 1992, _22_, 419-426.
* [15] Delatoru, P., Benoit, E., Besse, S., Boukraa, A., _Xenobiotica_ 1991, _21_, 217-221.
* [16] de Oliveira, A. R. M., Magalhaes, I. R. S., Santana, F. J. M., Bonato, P. S., _Quim. Nova_ 2008, _31_, 637-644.
* [17] Pedersen-Bjergaard, S., Rasmussen, K. E., _J. Chromatogr. A_ 2010, _1184_, 132-142.
* [18] Pedersen-Bjergaard, S., Rasmussen, K. E., _Anal. Chem._ 1999, _71_, 2650-2656.
* [19] Nozal, L., Arce, L., Simonet, B. M., Rios, A., Valcarcel, M., _Electrophoresis_ 2007, _28_, 3284-3289.
* [20] Xie, H. Y., He, Y. Z., _Trends Anal. Chem._ 2010, _29_, 629-635.
* [21] Azzam, K. M., Makahleah, A., Saad, B., Mansor, S. M., _J. Chromatogr. A_ 2010, _1217_, 3654-3659.
* [22] Arce, L., Noza, L., Simonet, B. M., Rios, A., Valcarcel, M., _Trends Anal. Chem._ 2009, _28_, 842-853.
* [23] Marques, M. P. C., Takayanagi, O. M., Bonato, P. S., Santos, S. R. C. J., Lanchote, V. L., _Chirality_ 1999, _11_, 218-223.
* [24] Lanchote, V. L., Takayanagi, O. M., Mateus, F. H., _Chirality_ 2004, _16_, 520-525.
* [25] Belaz, K. R. A., Cass, O. B., Oliveira, R. V., _Talanta_ 2008, _76_, 146-153.
* [26] Paias, F. O., Lanchote, V. L., Takayanagi, O. M., Bonato, P. S., _Electrophoresis_ 2001, _22_, 3263-3269.
* [27] Prost, F., Caslavska, J., Thormann, W., _J. Sep. Sci._ 2002, _25_, 1043-1054.
* [28] Magalhaes, I. R. S., Bonato, P. S., _Anal. Bioanal. Chem._ 2009, _393_, 1805-1813.
* [29] Guimaraes, D. O., Borges, W. S., Kawano, C. Y., Ribeiro, P. H., Goldman, G. H., Nomizo,A., Thiemann, O. H.,

Figure 8: Concentration-time graph referring to the biotransformation process of ABZ to ASOX by endophytic fungus _Penicillium crustosum_ (VR4).



## Page 11

Oliva,G., Lopes, N. P., Pupo, M. T., _FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol._ 2008, _52_, 134-144.
* [30] Weinberger, R., Capillary zone electrophoresis, in: Weiberger, R. (Ed.) _Practical Capillary Electrophoresis_, Academic Press, San Diego, 2000, Chapter 2, pp. 25-72.
* [31] Al Azzam, K. M., Makahleah, A., Saad, B., Mansor, S. M., _J. Chromatogr. A_ 2010, _23_, 3654-3659.
* [32] Magahhaes, I. R. S., Jabor,V. A. P., Faria, A. M., Collins, C. H., Jardim, I. C. S. F., Bonato, P. S., _Talanta_ 2010, _81_, 941-947.
* [33] De Oliveira, A. R. M., Cardoso, C. D., Bonato, P. S., _Electrophoresis_ 2007, _28_, 1081-1091.
* [34] Halvorsen, T. G., Pedersen-Bjergaard, S., Reubsaet, J. L. E., Rasmussen, K. E., _J. Sep. Sci._ 2001, _24_, 615-622.
* [35] Da Fonseca, P., Bonato, P. S., _Anal. Bioanal. Chem._ 2010, _396_, 817-824.
* [36] Calixto, L. A., Bonato, P. S., _J. Sep. Sci._ 2010, _33_, 2872-2880.



