# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89656-9.pdf

## Page 1



# PROTOLIMONOID AND LIGNANS FROM _ZANTHOXYLUM PETIOLARE_+
Footnote †: Based in part on the Ph.D. Thesis presented by M.S.P.A. to Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de São Carlos.

Mara S. P. Arruda

Joao B. Fernandes

E-mail: 1

Paulo C. Vieira

E-mail: 1

M. Fatima Das G. F. da Silva

E-mail: 1

Jose R. Piranis

E-mail: 1

###### Abstract

Seven previously characterized, and two new compounds, have been isolated from the stems and leaves of _Zanthoxylum petiolare_, which was previously misidentified as _Z. acutifolium_. The two new compounds have been identified on the basis of spectroscopic evidence as a protolimonoid and a furofuran lignan.

Zanthoxylum petiolare Z. acutifolium Rutaceae; lignans; protolimonoid. 20031-9422(94)E-mail: 1

## Introduction

As a part of our continuing investigation into the chemical composition of Brazilian Rutales, we have recently reported the isolation of a quinolone alkaloid series from _Zanthoxylum petiolare_ St. Hil. [1]. Further studies with this plant have led to the isolation of eight compounds, including a new protolimonoid and a furofuran lignan.

## Results and discussion

Solvent extraction of the leaves of _Z. petiolare_ followed by column chromatography of the lipid as described previously [1], led to the isolation of five known compounds: (+)-sesamin (3) [2, 3], (+)-piperitol (4) [2, 3], (+)-piperitol-g,g-dimethylylether (5) [4], (_E,E,Z_)-_N_-(2-methylpropyl)-2,4,8-tetradecatriamide (6) [5, 6], lionrisonol-3-a-O-b-glucopyranoside (7) [7, 8, 9], as well as the new compounds 1 and 2. Similar isolation procedures carried out with the stems of the same plant afforded compounds 3, 6, 7, sitosterol, (_E,E_)-_N_-(2-methylpropyl)-2,4-tetradecadienamide and lupeol [10].

Compound 1 exhibited similar spectral characteristics to skimmiarepin A (8), previously isolated and identified from _Skimmia japonica_ Thumb. var. _internedia_ Komatsu [11], which allowed us to propose that both compounds had the same pentacyclic skeleton and identical side chain at C-17. The IR spectrum of 1 showed a ketone carbonyl (1700 cm 1), which was also confirmed by 13C NMR (6217.9) [12]. The 1H NMR spectrum for 1 (Table 1) did not, however, have the signals for carbonic protons as found in 8. The comparison of all spectral data for both 1 and 8 showed that the only difference between them is in the ring A, where a carbonyl is located at C-3 in 1, as opposed to an ester in 8. The comparison of 13C NMR spectral data (Table 2) obtained for 1 with those for 8 are in agreement with the structure proposed, including the presence of an epimeric mixture at C-21 as also found for 8 (13C NMR: \(\delta\)98.1, 101.9) due to the two possible configurations, a and b, of the hydroxyl group.

Additional confirmation of the structure 1 was obtained through comparison of its IR and 1H NMR, as well as by TLC of its acetylated derivative (9) which co-chromatographed with an authentic sample of the 21-acetyl-3-oxo-glabretral (10). On the basis of these results the compound was identified as 3-oxo-skimmiarepin.

The spectral data observed for 2 were very similar to those for the lignan 7,7-dimethylallylpiperitol (5). The presence of the -CH2CH(OH)CH(Me)-CH2 side chain was deduced from the 1H NMR (Table 3) signals. The signals, \(\delta\)4.96, 5.10 \(b\)\(x\), 1H each, were attributed to the _exo_-double bond, that at \(\delta\)1.77 \(x\), 3H, to the vinyl methyl group and those at \(\delta\)4.09 \(dd\), 1H, to the carbonic proton. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 4) confirmed the presence of the 5-carbon side chain where two olefinic carbons (\(\delta\)143.1, 109.7) were observed, together with 2 carbonicole carbons (\(\delta\)73.4, 74.2), as well as a tertiary methyl group (\(\delta\)18.9). The mass spectrum displayed the parent peak _m_/_z_ 440 (100%), and the fragment _m_/_z_ 71 (C4H,O). This information allowed us to propose the given structure for this compound, which is the oxidation product of 5, which has previously been isolated from this plant species.

## Experimental

_Collection._ The aerial parts of _Z. petiolare_ were collected in the Jatai reserve, Sao Paulo State, Brazil (December, 1987), and a voucher number SPF 499977 is deposited at Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo.



## Page 2



## Page 3

under vacuum on silica gel 60 column and was eluted with hexane, followed by mixts of CH2Cl2 and EtOAc of increasing polarity. Frs 4 and 5 eluted by CH2Cl2-EtOAc 9:1 mixt., after prep. TLC (CH2Cl2-MeOH, 49:1) yielded 3(86 mg) and 6(39 mg) in mixt. with (_E_,_E_)-_N_(2-methylpropyl)-2,4-tetracadeni-amide, and sitosterol). Fr. 2, after recrystallization, afforded lupoal (31 mg). The MeOH extract was screened for alkaloids, but no pure alkalioid was obtained. The only compound isolated from this extract was the glycoside 7 (298 mg).

3-oxo-Skinmiarepin (1). Amorphous solid, mp 117-120deg, [a]20 + 40 (CHCl2; \(c\) 0.0006). IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}^{\text{min}}\) cm-1; 3390, 2950, 2860, 1700, 1380, 1020. 1H NMR: Table 1. 3C NMR: Table 2. MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 468 [M - H2O]* (2), 329 (3), 311 (6), 185 (60), 173 (24), 157 (25), 147 (43), 43 (100).

_Lignan_ (2). Viscous oil, [a]20 + 80.9 (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.00037), UV _J_max nm (log _x_): 209 (4.06), 232 (3.82), 285 (3.44). IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}^{\text{min}}\) cm-1; 3440, 3000, 1590, 1480, 1440, 1240, 1030, 920. 1H NMR: Table 3. 1C NMR: Table 4. MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 440 [M]* (100), 356 (11), 236 (3), 235 (34), 121 (13), 71 (35).



## Page 4



## References

* [1] Arruda, M. S. P., Fernandes, J. B., da Silva, M. F. das G. F., Vieira, P. C. and Pirani, J. R. (1992) _Phytochemistry_**31**, 3617.
* [2] Pelter, A., Ward, R. S., Rao, E. V. and Sastry, K. V. (1976) _Tetrahedron_**32**, 2783.
* [3] Abe, F., Yahara, S., Kubo, K., Nonaka, G., Okabe, H. and Nishioka, I. (1974) _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**22**, 2650.
* [4] Vaquette, J., Cave, A. and Waterman, P. G. (1979) _Planta Med._**35**, 42.
* [5] Greger, H., Grenz, M. and Bohlman, F. (1981) _Phytochemistry_**20**, 2579.
* [6] Greger, H., Zdero, C. and Bohlmann, F. (1984) _Phytochemistry_**23**, 1503.
* [7] Miyamura, M., Nohara, T., Tomimatsu, T. and Nishioka, I. (1983) _Phytochemistry_**22**, 215.
* [8] Sakakibara, J., Ina, H. and Yasue, M. (1974) _Yaku-gaku Zasshi_**94**, 1377.
* [9] Vecchietti, V., Ferrari, G., Orsini, F. and Pelizzoni, F. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18**, 1847.
* [10] Wenkert, E., Baddeley, G. V., Burfitti, I. R. and Moreno, L. N. (1978) _Org. Mag. Res._**11**, 337.
* [11] Ochi, M., Tatsukawa, A., Seki, N., Kotsuki, H. and Shibata. K. (1988) _Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn_**61**, 3225.
* [12] Polonski, J., Varon, Z., Rabanal, R. M. and Jacquemin, H. (1987) _Israel J. Chem._**16**, 16.



