# 10.1590@S0103-50532000000600012.pdf

## Page 1



# Essential Oils of _Toona_ and _Cedrela_ Species (Meliaceae):

Taxonomic and Ecological Implications

Beartiz H. L. N. S. Maia, Jose R. de Paula, Jose Sant'Anaa, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silvaa, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieiraa, Merilene do S. S. Costab, Orlando S. Ohashib and Jose Natalino M. Silvac

###### Abstract

Os oleos essenciais de _Toona ciliata, Cedrela odorata_ e _C. fissilis_ foram analisados por CGEM. _Cedrela_ apresentou em maior percentagem sesquiterpenos formados a partir do precursor pirofosfato de _cis_- e _trans_-famesila. _Ja Toona_ mostra una tendencia em produzir principalmente sesquiterpenos derivados do pirofosfato de _trans_-famesila. Estes resultados confirmam que a classificacao destes dosi generos em uma mesma tribo, Cedreleae, continua problematica. As respostas em eletroantenogramas medios (EAGs) dos oleos essenciais de _T. ciliata_ e _C. odorata_, em flemeas de _Hypsipyla grandella_, foram significativamente maiores que aquelas obtidas em machos, sugerindo que as flemeas utilizariam os odores destes oleos para a selecao da planta hospedeira (generos de Switetenioidea) en ascolha de locais para oviposicao.

The essential oils of _Toona ciliata, Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ have been analysed by GC-MS. _Cedrela_ contains the main sesquiterpenes formed from the _cis_- and _trans_-famesyl pyrophosphate. In contrast, _Toona_ tend to produce mainly sesquiterpenes formed from the _trans_-precursor. These results show that the affiliation of _Toona_ in the tribe Cedreleae together with _Cedrela_ is still rather problematic. Mean electroantennogram responses (EAGs) to the essential oils from _T. ciliata_ and _C. odorata_, in _Hypsipyla grandella_ females were significantly greater than those obtained for males, suggesting that females would use attractant odours messages from the host-plant (genera of Switetenioideae) as search strategy behaviour for habitat location and oviposition.

## Introduction

The family Meliaceae provides the most valuable timbers, such as mahogany (_Swietenia_) and cedar (_Cedrela_), which have been illegally exported from Brazil. At present they are scarce and efforts to establish large scale homogeneous plantations have almost invariably failed due to larval attacks by the shoot borer _Hypsipyla_. Main damage is caused by the larvae, which destroy the succulent terminal shoots by boring into the tip and tunnelling in the juvenile stems of saplings and seedlings. Re-sprouting of the plants, followed by repeated attacks of the insect, generally results in the development of numerous side branches and consequently in badly formed trees, unsuitable for timber production. _Hypsipyla grandella_ is considered to be the most harmful species in Latin America, and _H. robusta_ in Asia and Africa1. _Toona ciliata_, the Australian red cedar, introduced to Brazil shows excellent growth and an absence of attacks by _H. grandella_, in contrast to the native _Cedrela odorata_2,3. However, eggs of _H. grandella_ have been found on the Australian cedar in field survey (Belem, Para, Brazil).

_Toona_ was originally described by Endlicher (1840) as a section of _Cedrela_. Later Roemer (1846) recognized that it could be separated by a number of sound morphological characters, raising _Toona_ to generic rank4. Thus, the old world species of _Cedrela_ were transferred to _Toona_ (Endlicher) M. J. Roemer. The two genera were placed by Harms (1940) in the tribe Cedreleae under Cedreloideae5. Pennington and Styles (1975), in their more recent monograph, include Cedreleae into the Switetenioideae6. As reported in previous

## Page 2

papers the known limonoids from _Cedrela_ are typical of the Swietenioideae [7-9]. On the other hand, _Toona_ differs from other genera of this subfamily, notably by the absence of limonoids of the mexicanolide group. Our earlier phytochemical studies on _T. ciliata_, showed the presence of limonoids with intact carbon skeleton 21-hydroxycedrelonolide, 23-hydroxycedrelonolide, 6 -acetoxy-14,15 -epoxyazadirone and rings-A,C,D-intact-ring-B-_seco_-limonoids 12-deacetoxytoonacilin, 5,6,8 -trihydroxy-28-norisotonafolin and 5,6,8,12 -tetrahydroxy-28-norisotonafolin indicating that the genus is thus indeed akin to the Melioideae [10, 11]. Rings-A,C,D-intact-ring-B-_seco_-limonoids are features that are largely confined to the latter. We have now examined the essential oils of _T.ciliata_, _C.odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ in order to determine if the above differences still remain also in other classes of secondary metabolites. There is strong evidence that volatile principles of the host play a crucial role in the attraction of the females to oviposit. The electroantennograms (EAGs) were recorded from both sexes of _H. grandella_ antennae to determine the stimulating capacity of the essential oils obtained.

## Experimental

### Isolation and analysis of volatile oil

_Cedrela odorara_ and _Toona ciliata_ were collected in Vicosa, MG, while _C. fissilis_ in Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil; voucher specimens are deposited in the herbarium of Universidade Federal de Vicosa.

The fresh aerial parts of each species were submitted to steam distillation for 4 h, using a Clevenger apparatus. The essential oils obtained were dried over anhydrous Na2SO4 and kept in the freezer. The analyses of the oils were carried out on a Shimadzu GC-17A gas chromatograph fitted with a fused silica DB-5 (30 m x 0.25 mm ID, 0.25 mm film thickness) capillary column with helium as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.6 ml.min-1. The temperature was programmed initially at 60degC for 2min, then increased with a rate of 3degC.min-1 to 240degC. The injection was split and its temperature was 225degC. The interface temperature was 250degC. The chromatograph was coupled to a Shimadzu QP5000 mass selective detector at 70 eV; EIMS and CIMS (methane) for globulol (RI = 1583) and caryophyllene oxide (RI = 1581). Identification of the components was made by determination of their retention indices relative to those of an homologous series of _n_-alkanes [12], by comparison with a) co-injection with authentic samples, b) fragmentation patterns in mass spectra with those stored on the spectrometer database and bibliography [13].

### Insects

Larvae of _Hypsipyla grandella_ were collected in the fields of EIDAI, a Japanese timber company based in Belem, PA, Brazil. They were reared in a growth room at 26 +- 2degC, 60 +- 10 relative humidity and 16:8 hr light-dark photoperiod, at Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil. Pape were separated by sex and in advanced age they were transported to Universidade Federal de Vicosa, MG, Brazil, where the electrophysiological analyses were conducted.

### Electroantenograms (EAGs)

Antennae from 3-4-day-old males and females were used in the EAG (Syntech Laboratories) measurements. The antennae were cut off at the base. The tip of the terminal segment was removed to enable electric contact with the recording electrode. The tip and the base part were connected to an Ag-AgCl capillary electrodes filled with 0.1 N KCl with a small amount (5% by volume) of Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP).

Stimulus were delivered from glass odor cartridges (80mm long X 5mm ID) as 5 ml aliquots on Whatman no.1 filter paper pieces (7mm x 18mm). These odor cartridges were oriented towards the antenna and placed 1 cm away from the preparation. Odor molecules evaporating from the filter paper were carried over the preparation by humidifier air. Stimulus duration was 1 sec. Interstimulus time intervals of 1 min. was allowed for recovery of the sensory cells. Control stimulations using air and filter paper impregnated with 10 +- d of hexane solvent were made at the beginning of each preparation. Maximal depolarization of the EAG during the stimulation period was used as a measure of antennal stimulation by the odorous stimulus.

The signal was amplified by a Data Acquisition Interface Board, Type IADC-02, developed by Syntech Laboratories and viewed on a EAG software package for WINDOWS.

### Coupled gas chromatography-electroantennographic detection (GC-EAD)

The GC-EAD measurements were performed in a Shimadzu 17 A. GC with helium as carrier (50cm/s), equipped with an Supelcowax 10 column (0.25 film, 30m x 0.25 mm ID). Chromatographic parameters were as follows: initial oven 100degC for 2 minutes, followed by a ramp of 5degC/min. to a final temperature of 240degC. Injections were done with split mode only. The sample was equally split between a flame ionization detector (FID) and the EAG detector. The EAG recorder, software, IADC (Intelligent Data Acquisition Controller) interface board for the AT486 PC and other peripheral equipment were also manufactured by Syntech Laboratories.

### Experimental protocol

Two sets of experiments were performed in order to elucidate the selectivity of the antennal receptors of _H.



## Page 3

grandella._ In the first series of experiments, the general responsiveness of antennal receptors to individual oils (from _T. ciliata_ and _C. odorata_) was measured by recording EAGs to volatile emanating from 10 \(d\) stimulus load of each volatile. Four replicates were obtained for each sex. In the second series of experiments, one of the two most effective oil (leaves of _T. ciliata_) were tested. The GC-EAD equipment was used in order to identify some individual compounds in the oil mixture capable to elicit an EAG response. Two replicates were obtained only for females.

### Statistical analyses

EAGs were compared statistically using analysis of mean and standard deviation. The EAG software calculates the values automatically.

## Results and Discussion

### Essential oils

The composition of the essential oils is given in Table 1. Component concentrations were calculated from GC peak areas and they were arranged in order of GC (DB-5) elution. Inspection of Table 1 clearly shows that all the oils consist largely of sesquiterpenes. The oils from the leaves (0.05%, V/W) and stems (0.05%, V/W) of _T. ciliata_ contained 36 and 31 components, of which 96% and 92% were identified, respectively. The major compounds in both samples were -caryophyllene, germacrene-D and bicyclocglomeracrene. Globulol was present in both oil, but in substantial amounts (12.50%) in the stems. Examination of the oils from the leaves (0.23%, V/W) and stems (0.03%, V/W) of _C. odorata_ indicated the presence of 32 and 47 components, of which 95% and 78% were identified, respectively. The main constituents in the latter were -caryophyllene and caryophyllene oxide, while in the former were -elemene and germacrene-A. The volatile oils from both species examined seem to be characterized by accumulation of large amounts of -caryophyllene. However, leaf oil of _C. odorata_ contained higher amount of -elemene, but very low -caryophyllene.

The chemical composition of volatile oils of juvenile and adult leaves of _C. fissilis_ were poorly differentiated (Table 1). The only exception refers to the main constituents. The juvenile leaf oil has a higher percentage of _cis_-4(14),5-murouladiene than the adult leaf oil. The latter produces bicyclogermacrene as the principal compound.

### Chemotaxonomic significance

A summary of sesquiterpene types from _T. ciliata_, _C. odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ are presented in Tables 2-5. For all species the percentages of each structural types were added (e.g. bicyclogermacrane: _T. ciliata_: 27.92 + 38.46 = 66.38%, Table 4). The skeletal types bicyclogermacrane, aromadendrane, aristolane, elemane, eudesmane, guaiane, germacrane and humulane can be assumed to derive from 2\(E\),6-_E_-f_anesyl pyrophosphate (_trans_, Figures 1-2), while the types seychellane, boubonane, cadinane, copaane, cubebane, longifolane, himachalane, longipinane, caryophyllane, bisabolane, acorane, chamigrane and cedrane derive from 2\(Z\),6_E_-f_anesyl pyrophosphate (_cis_, Figures 3-5). Intermediate cationic species have been invoked to explain how the various structures arise14. Each cationic intermediate can of course undergo rearrangement, or suffer hydride shifts, and functional groups may be introduced or modified, as some reasonable pathways are shown in Figures 1-5.



## Page 4



## Page 5

The oils from _C. odorata_ and _T. ciliata_ were found to have markedly different chemical compositions to that identified by other workers. Representatives of cadinanes (cedrelanol; torreyol; -muurolene; -muurolene; calamenene), one copaane ( -copaene), one cubebane ( -cubebene), one guaiane (guaiazulene) and two elemanes ( -elemene; -elemene) have been reported from the former15-19. Of these sequiterpenes only -copaene and -elemene were found in the present study. The second case is more interesting since the literature registers the occurrence of only -copaene in _T. ciliata_20. The oils of _C. fissilis_ had not been analysed previously.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} _Trans_-farnesyl derivatives & _Cis_-farnesyl derivatives \\ \hline Bicyclogermacane (**T.1**) & Seychellane (**C.1.1.4**) \\ Aromadrendrane (**T.1.1 – T.1.6**)b & Bouborane (**C.1.1.5**) \\ Aristolane (**T.1.7**) & Cadinane (**C.1.1.1 – C.1.1.2**) \\ Elemane (**T.2.1**) & Cadinane (**C.1.1.2.1 – C.1.1.2.4**) \\ Eudesmane (**T.2.2**) & Copaane (**C.1.1.2.2**) \\
**Guaiane (**T.2.3 – T.2.5**) & Copaane (**C.1.1.3.1**) \\ Guaiane (**T.3.3**) & Cubebane (**C.1.1.6**) \\ Germacrane (**T.3.1 – T.3.2.1**) & Cubebane (**C.1.2.4**) \\ Eudesmane (**T.3.1.1**) & Cadinane (**C.1.2.1 – C.1.2.3.1**) \\ Humulane (**T.4.1 – T.4.1.1**) & Longifolane (**C.1.3.1**) \\  & Himachalane (**C.1.3.2**) \\  & Longipinane (**C.1.3.3**) \\  & Caryophyllane (**C.1.4 – C.1.5.1**) \\ Bisabolane (**C.2.1**) \\  & Acorane (**C.2.2**) \\  & Chamigrane (**C.2.3**) \\ Cedrane (**C.2.4**) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: A summary of sesquiterpene typesa classified in the biogenetic maps

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} _Trans_-farnesyl derivatives (7 / 24.66 \%)a & _Cis_-farnesyl derivatives (6 / 11.84 \%)a \\ Aromadrendrane (3 / 21.87 \%)a & Cadinance (2 / 3.49 \%)a \\
**T.1.3** (4.16 + 12.50)b & **C.1.1.2.1** (1.64 + 1.19)b \\
**T.1.4** (1.09) & **C.1.2.2** (0.66) \\
**T.1.6** (0.72 + 3.40) & **Cubebane (1 / 1.28 \%)** \\
**Aristolane (1 / 1.34 \%)** & **C.1.1.6** (1.28) \\
**T.1.7** (0.35 + 0.99) & **Longifolane (1 / 1.17 \%)** \\
**Guaiane (3 / 1.45 \%)** & **C.1.3.1** (1.17) \\
**T.2.4** (0.34) & **Bisabolane (1 / 3.53 \%)** \\
**T.2.5** (0.23) & **C.2.1** (3.53) \\
**T.3.3** (0.88) & **Acorane (1 / 2.37\%)** \\
**C.2.2** (2.37) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Sesquiterpene types identified only from _Toona ciliata_

## Page 6

Based in the above evidences it is clear that _Cedrela_ contains the main sesquiterpenes formed from the _cis_- and _trans_-farnesyl pyrophosphate [_trans_: 109.29% + 15.03% ; _cis_: 52.67% + 65.68% (Tables 4 and 5, respectively)]. In contrast, _Toona_ tend to produce mainly sesquiterpenes formed from _trans_-precursor [_trans_: 108.64% + 24.66% ; _cis_: 42.94% + 11.84% (Tables 3 and 4, respectively)]. These interpretation of the sesquiterpene data and the fact that _Toona_ differs from other genera of Swietenioidea7-9, notably by the absence of limonoids of the mexicanolide group, are consistent with Roemer's4 taxonomic conclusions, but suggested that the affiliation of _Toona_ in the tribe Cedreleae together with _Cedrela_ is still rather problematic.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} _Trans_-farnesyl derivatives & _Cedrela odorata_ + _C._ & _Cis_-farnesyl derivatives \\ (9 / 108.64)b & _fissilis_ (9 / 109.29)b & (9 / 42.94)b & _Cedrela odorata_ + _C. fissilis_ (9 / 52.67)b \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Sesquiterpene types identified from _Toona ciliata_, _Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilisa_

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} _Trans_-farnesyl derivatives (4 / 15.03)b & _Cis_-farnesyl derivatives (10 / 65.68)b \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 5: Sesquiterpene types identified only from _Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilisa_

## Page 7

Figure 2: Part of a biogenetic map for sesquiterpenes featuring all structural types found in the oils from _Toona ciliata, Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ (Tables 1-5). The codes (**1**, **1.1** etc.) refer to the position of the structural types on a map. The **T** letter indicates _trans_-farnesyl pyrophosphate as precursor.

Figure 1: Part of a biogenetic map for sesquiterpenes featuring all structural types found in the oils from _Toona ciliata, Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ (Tables 1-5). The codes (**1**, **2.1** etc.) refer to the position of the structural types on a map. The **T** letter indicates _trans_-farnesyl pyrophosphate as precursor.



## Page 8



### Ecological significance

Mean electroantennogram responses (EAGs) to the essential oils from _T.ciliata_ and _C. odorata_ in _H. grandella_ females, were significantly greater than those obtained for males (Figures 6 and 7). In addition, females were more selective to leaf oils than those from stems. The high selectivity of _H. grandella_ female antenna to essential oils of _C. odorata_ and _T. ciliata_, indicate its potential role as a chemical messengers for habitat location and oviposition (host-plant: genera of Swietenioideae[9]). Males, however, would not use similar information in its search behaviour, probably due to the fact that the relationship between males and the host-plant might not have the same importance. Furthermore, the results from EAGs to leaf oils from _T. ciliata_ and _C. odorata_ were not significantly different (e.g. Figure 6: -2.982 mV and -3.073 mV, respectively), indicating that adult females would be unable to detect the different volatile compounds of both oils. The main constituents in the former were -caryophyllene (20.82%), germacrene-D (16.36%) and bicyclogermacrene (27.92%), while in the latter were -elemene (19.33%) and germacrene-A (22.56%). They share only bicyclogermacene as principal constituent (_T.c._ = 27.92%, _C.o._ = 7.59%). Attempts for locating potential components in leaf oils of _T. ciliata_ by coupled GC-EAD failed (Figure 8). The absence of electrophysiological response might be related to an additive or synergistic effects of these compounds in the communication system of _H. grandella_ female, which would not respond to an unique volatile, but to a mixture of two or more compounds. High EAG responses in previous expositions of the female antenna to the whole mixture confirm this theory (Figures 6-8). Field studies, optimal GC-EADs or/and EAG experiments with authentic samples are needed to clarify the role of essential oils in the _H. grandella_ behaviour.

Figure 3: Part of a biogenetic map for sesquiterpenes featuring all structural types found in the oils from _Toona ciliata_, _Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ (Tables 1-5). The codes (**1**, **1.3** etc.) refer to the position of the structural types on a map. The **C** letter indicates _cis_-farnesyl pyrophosphate as precursor. **C.1.1** and **C.1.2**: see Fig. 4.



## Page 9

Figure 4: Part of a biogenetic map for sesquiterpenes featuring all structural types found in the oils from _Toona ciliata, Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ (Tables 1-5). The codes (**1.1**, **1.1.1** etc.) refer to the position of the structural types on a map. The **C** letter indicates _cis_-farnesyl pyrophosphate as precursor.

Figure 5: Part of a biogenetic map for sesquiterpenes featuring all structural types found in the oils from _Toona ciliata, Cedrela odorata_ and _C. fissilis_ (Tables 1-5). The codes (**1.1**, **1.1.4** etc.) refer to the position of the structural types on a map. The **C** letter indicates _cis_-farnesyl pyrophosphate as precursor.



## Page 10

Figure 6: EAG responses of _Hypspiryla grandella_ females (A) and males (B) to essential oils from _Toona ciliata_ (leaves: TCL, stems: TCS) and _Cedrela odorata_ (leaves: COL, stems: COS) at 10-d stimulus load. Control: air and hexane. * Responses in mV.

Figure 7: Mean EAG in millivolts elicited from _Hypspiryla grandella_ males (\(\square\)) and females ( ) antennae, in response to essential oils from _Toona ciliata_ (leaves: TCL, stems: TCS) and _Cedrela odorata_ (leaves: COL, stems: COS) at 10-d stimulus load. Control: air and hexane.



## Page 11



## Acknowledgements

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support. We also thank the Departamento de Biologia Animal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, MG, Brazil, for laboratory facilities.

## References

* [1] Grijipma, P. _Turrialba_**1970**, _20_, 85.
* [2] De Paula, J. R.; Vieira, I. J. C.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. _Phytochemistry_**1997**, _44_, 1449.
* [3] De Paula, J. R.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; Oiano-Neto, J.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L. _An. Acad. Bras. Ci._**1998**, _70_, 737.
* [4] Roemer, M. J. _Familiarum Naturalium Regni Vegetabilis Synopses Monographicae. I, Hesperides_; 1846, p. 76.
* [5] Harms, H. In: _Engler, A. and Prantl, K. (Eds.), Die Naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien_; 2nd edn, 1940, _19_, bl. 1.
* [6] Pennington, T. D.; Styles, B. T. _Blumea_**1975**, _22_, 419.
* [7] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Gottlieb, O. R.; Dreyer, D. L. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1984**, _12_, 299.
* [8] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Gottlieb, O. R. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1987**, _15_, 85.
* [9] Agostinho, S. M. M.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P.C.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1994**, _22_, 323.
* [10] Oiano-Neto, J.; Agostinho, S. M. M.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. _Phytochemistry_**1995**, _38_, 397.
* [11] Oiano-Neto, J.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L. _Phytochemistry_**1998**, _49_, 1369.
* [12] Dool; Van Den, H.; Kratz, P. Dec. _J. Chromatog._**1963**, _11_, 463.
* [13] Adams, R. P. _Identification of Essential Oil Components by Gas Chromatography Mass Spectroscopy;_ 1995. Allured Publishing Corporation, Illinois.
* [14] Mann, J. _Secondary Metabolism_; 1980. Oxford University Press, NewYork.
* [15] Campos, A. M.; Oliveira, F. S.; Machado, M. I. L.; Braz-Filho, R.; Matos, F. J. A. _Phytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 1225.
* [16] Alderweireldt, F.; Chiurdoglu, G.; Smolders, R. R.; Soquet, A.; Verzele, M. _Bull. Soc. Chim. Belg._**1961**, _70_, 470.
* [17] Smolders, R. R. _Can. J. Chem._**1964**, _42_, 2836.
* [18] Smolders, R. R. _Can. J. Chem._**1967**, _45_, 889.
* [19] Kong, W. A.; Rieck, A.; Hardt, I.; Gehrcke, B.; Kubeczka, K. H.; Muhle, H. _J. High Resolut. Chromatogr._**1994**, _17_, 315.
* [20] Nagasampagi, B. A.; Yankov, L.; Dev, S. _Tetrahedron Lett._**1968**, 1913.

Figure 8: Simultaneously recorded EAD-FID chromatograms of _HypsylpA grandella_ female with FID responses to a essential oil (leaves) of _Toona ciliata_, injected under conditions described in the text. *Previous EAG response to the same oil tested prior to GC analysis.



