# 10.1016@0031-9422(79)80188-0.pdf

## Page 1



# LIGNANS OF _araucaria angustifolia_ and 13C NMR analysis of some phenyltetralin Lignans

Sebastiko F. Fonseca

Lawrence T. Nielsen and Edmundo A. Roveda

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, C.P. 1170, 13100 Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil

# Abstract

Seciosolariciresinol monomethyl ether and lariciresinol-4-methyl ether were isolated from the knots of dead trees of _Araucaria angustifolia_. On the basis of spectral evidence, the position of the OH group was located in these compounds. The 13C NMR spectra of the phenyltetralin lignans globulin, galactin, isogalactin and cyclo-gakgrainv have also been recorded and the signals assigned, based on the methyl shifts of cyclogalgravin.

## INTRODUCTION

Continuing our investigations on the constituents of the knots of _Araucaria angustifolia_ O. Ktze [1], we have now isolated pinoresinol **1a** and its monoMe ether **1c**, previously reported from the same source by Anderegg and Rowe [2]a and two new monophenolic lignans, seciosolaricresinol monoMe ether **2a** and lariciresinol-4-Me ether **3c**. The determination of the position of the phenolic OH groups of **2a** and **3c**, deduced by comparison of their _O_-Me derivatives with known products and by application of spectroscopic techniques, together with some comments on the effects of acetylation on the 13C NMR shifts of **1a** and **1c** and the 13C NMR analysis of some phenyltetralin lignans, forms the basis of this report.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

MS fragmentation pattern, M+, and 1H NMR spectrum of **2a** indicate a seciosolariciresinol lignan-type skeleton. The base peak at _m/e_ 151 and the peak at _m/e_ 137, together with the OMe proton signals (d 3.80 (6H) and 3.85 (3H)), suggested the presence of a dimethoxy group and a methylhydroxybenzyl group. On acetylation, **2a** yielded a triacetyl derivative **2b**, whose 1H NMR signals confirm the above observations and further show, on the basis of the doublet at d 6.87 (_J_ = 7 Hz), that a guaiacyl unit is present in **2a**. Further confirmation of the structure of the seciosolaricresinol monoMe ether was obtained by analysis of its 13C NMR spectrum. The carbon shifts of **2a**, its triacetyl derivative **2b**, the _O_-Me ether **2c** and its diacetyl derivative **2d** (Table 1) show the expected effects in comparison with the previously reported ones for seciosolariciresinol and its tetraacetate [1].

The second monophenolic compound, which yielded the diMe ether of lariciresinol by treatment with diazomethane, was analysed by 13C NMR spectroscopy. We have previously shown that the shifts of C-4 and C-4', carrying the phenolic OH groups in lariciresinol **3a**, or in its triacetate, are different [1], and by comparison of their d values with related carbons of the monoMe ether now isolated, its diacetyl derivative, seciosolariciresinol monoMe ether triacetate **2b** and pinoresinol diacetate **1b**, it could be suggested that the OH or OAc groups are

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Carbon & **2a** & **2b\(\uparrow\)** & **2c** & **2d\(\downarrow\)** \\
1 & 133.0 & 131.9 & 132.9 & 131.9 \\
2 & 111.09 & 111.18 & 111.08 & 111.08 \\
3 & 148.6 & 148.7 & 148.7 & 148.7 \\
4 & 147.0 & 147.3 & 147.0 & 147.2 \\
5 & 112.09 & 1

## Page 2

located at C-4' and C-9', as in 3c and 3d. Further confirmation of the position of the phenolic OH function in 3c was obtained by preparation of the alternative structure 3e by careful methylation of 3a. The shifts showed by C-4 of 3e and its diacetyl derivative 3f are the expected ones, in agreement with the above results. The carbon shifts of compounds 3c-3f, together with the shifts of the acetate of lariciresinol diMe ether 3g, not previously reported, are listed in Table 2.

An analysis of the shifts of C-1 and C-1' of lariciresinol 3a and its derivatives--mainly the diacetates 3d and 3f--indicates that our previous assignments at 133.7 and 131.6 ppm, respectively [1], based on a comparison with the shifts of related carbons of the guaiacyl units of seciosolariciresinol and the neoligan lacarin A, were not correct. As shown in Table 2, by reversal of these two assignments a more consistent set of shifts is obtained. Further support for the new assignment is obtained by comparison of C-1' shift of 3a (Table 2) with related carbons of the benzofurans 4a (134.5 ppm) and 4b (134.3 ppm) [3]. Although the stereochemistry of 4a and 4b is not indicated in reference [3], they probably represent better models than the previously selected one for C-1'.

That the phenolic OH in 3c is located at C-4' was confirmed by comparative 1H NMR and MS analysis of 3c and 3e, and their corresponding diacetyl and _O_-Me derivatives 3d, 3f and 3g, respectively. As was previously observed in sandshell 5 [4], acetylation of the OH at C-4' induces small, but significant changes on the benzylic proton signal at C-7' of 3c (deshielding of _ca_ 5 Hz and decrease of \(J\) value), while the comparable proton signal of 3e is unaffected in the transformation (3e - 3f). In agreement with these results, the MS of the diacetate 3d shows as its base peak the ion _m_/_e_ 151, assigned by accurate mass measurements to the ions 6a and 7a, arising via benzylic (a) and path b cleavages, 8 [5], with ketene elimination, respectively. The benzylic cleavage of 3g also gives rise to a base peak at _m_/_e_ 151, as expected from the presence of a dimethoxybenzyl moiety, while in 3b and 3f, the same benzylic cleavage with loss of ketene produces base peaks at _m_/_e_ 137, 6b. Further, in 3f and 3g the fragment at _m_/_e_ 165, 7b, arising by path b is also detected.

The observed effects of acetylation on the 1H NMR signal of the benzylic protons adjacent to the guaiacyl units of 2,6-diaryl-3,7-dioxabicyclo[3.3.0]octane lignans, such as pluriatiitol and xanthoxylol [4, 6], prompted us to compare the 13C NMR shifts of those carbons of pino-resinol 1a, its monoMe ether Ic and the acetyl derivatives 1b and 1d, hoping to detect features that could be used to supplement previous studies [6, 7] for the structure elucidation of other members of this group of natural products. However, as in the case of the monoMe ethers of laricireinol 3c and 3e, acetylation of the phenolic OH produces the known effects on the aromatic carbons of 1a and 1e, while the benzylic ones are practically unaffected. The carbon shifts of compounds 1a-1d, assigned on the basis of previous results [6, 7], on 13C-1H long-range couplings and on specific proton decoupling data, are listed in Table 3.

Following our 13C NMR spectral studies on lignans [8], the analysis of the natural phenyltetralins with identical relative configurations at C-7, C-8 and C-8', galbulin 9a, galactin 9b and isogalcatin 9c [9]*, together with cycloagravin 10, easily obtained by acid treatment of tetrahydrofuran lignan galaxyrin [10], was carried out. Table 4 lists the carbon shifts of compounds 9a, 9b and 9c, assigned on the basis of their multiplicity in the 

## Page 3

single-frequency off-resonance decoupled (sford) spectra, on the \(\delta\) values recorded for isolaicrineschi diMe ether 11 [1], on the effects produced by the replacement of two OMe groups of an aromatic system by a --OCH2O--moiety and on comparison of the signals of the 3 compounds with each other. As expected, and according to the known effects of an OH group on the a, b and g carbons, C-9, C-9, C-8 and C-8' are shielded while C-7 and C-7' are desiheled in **9a, 9b** and 9c in comparison to related sites of **11**. The replacement of the 3',4'-dimethoxy groups of **9a** and **9c** by the methylenedioxy unit of **9b**, produces the expected changes on the ring A carbon shifts, i.e. shielding of C-3', C-4', C-2' and C-5' and desiheliding of C-1' and C-6' by magnitudes similar to those previously observed [11]. A comparison of the essentially identical ring C shifts of **9a** and **9b** with the corresponding ones of 

## Page 4

the piperonyl unit of 9c shows again the expected changes, shielding of C-3, C-4, C-2 and C-5 and deshielding of C-1 and C-6, allowing the assignment of most of the aromatic shifts of **9a**, **9b** and **9c**. Comparison of the aromatic shifts of **9a** with those found for isolarciresinol diMe ether 11 shows significant differences for the shifts at 131.7 and 137.6 ppm assigned to C-1 and C-6', respectively [1]. It then seems reasonable, on the basis of the present results, to reverse the previous assignment.

The carbon shifts of cyclogalgravin 10, based on a comparison with those of **9a**, on the analysis of the sford spectrum and on the effects produced by the introduction of a double bond on the endocytic homoallylic positions [12], are listed in Table 4. Distinction of some close resonances like those of C-6 and C-7', and C-1 and C-8' was made by specific proton decoupling and 13C-1H long-range couplings, while the signals at 126.9 and 127.1 ppm remain for C-1' and C-6' or vice versa. The analysis of the Me shifts, compared with those of **9a**, **9b** and **9c**, reveals some information about the conformation of **10**. Galbulin, **9a**, and its relatives **9b** and **9c**, possess the same relative configuration of the substituents on ring B and it would be expected to prefer a half-chair conformation with the phenyl and both methyls at pseudoequadorial positions, as was shown by 1H NMR spectroscopy [13]. On the assumption that a neighbouring double bond does not affect the chemical shift of a Me group [14], it could be expected that the flattening of ring B, because of the introduction of the double bond between C-7' and C-8' in **10**, will induce a shielding effect on the Me groups as a consequence of the decrease in the dihedral angle between them. In cyclogalgravin 10, however, the Me groups are deshielded compared with those of **9a**, **9b** and **9c**, indicating a preferred conformation previously suggested for 1,2-dihydronaphthalenes by 1H NMR spectroscopy [15], in which C-9 and ring C are at 

## Page 5

pseudoaxial positions. In agreement with these observations, in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **10**, the signal at \(\delta\) 3.67, assigned to the methine at C-7, appears as a doublet with a \(J\) value of 4 Hz, compatible with a dihedral angle of _ca_ 70\({}^{\circ}\) between the methines at C-7 and C-8.

## 6 Experimental

The remaining fractions of the chromatography on a Si gel column of the C\({}_{x}\)H\({}_{6}\) extract of _Araucaria angustifolia_ knots [1] were purified on Si gel H (Merck) columns, eluted with CHCl\({}_{3}\) containing 1-10% MeOH, furnishing pinoresion (1a), its monoMe ether (1b), seciosolaricrisenol monoMe ether (2e) and lariciresinol4-methyl ether (3e), the monoMe ethers being eluted before their respective diphenols. The acetates and Me ethers were prepared by standard methods, except for compound **3e**. The MS of seciosolaricrisenol and lariciresinol derivatives were obtained by direct inlet using similar conditions (140\({}^{\circ}\), 20 eV and 140\({}^{\circ}\), 70 eV, respectively).

_Pinoresinol,_**1a**, 0.56 g, mp 118-120\({}^{\circ}\), [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 64\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)), M\({}^{+}\) 358. Pinoresionol diacetate, **1b**, mp 162-164\({}^{\circ}\), [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 48\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)), M\({}^{+}\) 442.

_Pinoresinol monoMe ether,_**1c**, 0.24 g, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 56\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)), M\({}^{+}\) 372. Pinoresion monoMe ether acetate, **1d**, mp 122-124\({}^{\circ}\) (from Et\({}_{2}\)O\({}_{x}\)-Me\({}_{x}\)CO\({}_{x}\) [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 52\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)), M\({}^{+}\) 414; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 23 (3H, s, OC-Me), 3-3.25 (2H, \(m\), C-1 and C-5), 3.85 (3H, s, OMe), 3.88 (3H, s, OMe), 3.9 (3H, s, OMe), 4.2 (2H, _dJ_, \(m\), 4- C and C-8), 4.15-4.45 (2H, \(m\), C-4 and C-8), 4.75 (1H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 4 Hz, C-6), 4.85 (1H, _bdJ_ \(\sim\) 3.5 Hz, C-2), 6.75 (1.5H, \(m\), aromatic protons).

_Seciosolaricrisenol monoMe ether,_**2a**, 0.235 g, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) - 34\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)), MS (night resolution) found: 376.1808, calc. for C\({}_{x}\)H\({}_{x}\)H\({}_{0}\)\({}_{x}\)367.186; MS (_m_/_e_, int.): 376 7\({}^{\circ}\) (5J, 189 (5), 177 (6), 151 (100), 137 (60); H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 1.7-2.15 (2H, m, C-8 and C-8), 2.75 (4H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 5.7), 3.55-3.75 (3H, s, (m,C-9 and C-9), 3.8 (6H, s, 2 \(\times\) OMe), 3.85 (3H, s, OMe), 6.5-6.9 (6H, \(m\), aromatic protons).

_Seciosolaricrisinol Mono ether triacetate,_**2b**, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) - 35\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); MS (_m_/_e_, int.): 502 [M\({}^{+}\)] (200), 460 (20), 203 (15), 189 (15), 177 (8), 151 (100), 137 (50); H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 1.7-2.15 (2H, m, C-8, C-8), 2.75 (4H, _br d_, C-7 and C-7), 3.5 (2H, _br d_, C-9 or C-9), 3.7 (2H, \(d\), _C-9 or C-9), 3.8 (6H, s, 2 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 2 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 2 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 6.6 6.9 (6H, \(m\), aromatic protons). This compound prepared from reconsolariational was identical in all respects to the diMe ether obtained from **2a**.

_Seciosolaricrisinol4-monoMe ether diacetate,_**2d**, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) - 28\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); MS (_m_/_e_, int.): 474 [M\({}^{+}\)] (200), 203 (15), 177 (10), 151 (100); \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 1.9-2.15 (m, C-8 and C-8), 2.07 (6H, s, 2 x OC-Me), 2.67 (4H, _br d_, C-7 and C-7), 3.8 (6H, s, 2 x \(\times\) OMe), 3.83 (6H, s, 2 x \(\times\) OMe), 4.1 (2H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 4 Hz, C-9 or C-9), 4.16 (2H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 4 Hz, C-9 or C-9), 6.4-6.8 (6H, \(m\), aromatic protons).

_Lariciresinol4-monoMe ether,_**3c**, 0.495, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 5\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); MS (_m_/_e_, int.): 488 [M\({}^{+}\)] (45), 416 (32), 356 (100), 339 (28), 219 (14), 205 (27), 178 (18), 164 (8), 151 (100), 137 (21); \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 2.03 (3H, s, OC-Me), 2.3 (3H, s, OC-Me), 2.4-2.8 (4H, m, C-7, C-8 and C-8), 3.5-4.1 (_ca_ 2H, m, C-9), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 3.88 (6H, s, 2 x \(\times\) OMe), 4.1-4.4 (2H, m, C-9), 4.9 (1H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 5 Hz, C-7), 6.5-6.95 (6H, \(m\), aromatic protons).

_Lariciresinol4-monoMe ether,_**3c**, 0.495, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 5\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); MS (_m_/_e_ (rel. int.): 458 [M\({}^{+}\)] (45), 416 (32), 356 (100), 339 (28), 219 (14), 205 (27), 178 (18), 164 (8), 151 (100), 137 (21); \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 2.03 (3H, s, OC-Me), 2.3 (3H, s, OC-Me), 2.4-2.8 (4H, m, C-7, C-8 and C-8), 3.5-4.1 (_ca_ 2H, m, C-9), 3.83 (6H, s, 20 \(\times\) OMe), 4.1-4.4 (2H, m, C-9), 4.8 (1H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 6 Hz, C-7), 6.5-6.9 (6H, \(m\), aromatic protons).

_Lariciresinol4-monoMe ether acetate,_**3d**, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 5\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); MS (_m_/_e_ (rel. int.): 458 [M\({}^{+}\)] (45), 416 (32), 356 (100), 339 (28), 219 (14), 205 (27), 178 (18), 164 (8), 151 (100), 137 (21); \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 2.03 (3H, s, OC-Me), 2.3 (3H, s, OC-Me), 2.4-2.8 (4H, m, C-7, C-8, C-8), 3.5-4.1 (_ca_ 4H, m, C-7), 3.87 (12H, s, 4 x OMe), 4.1-4.4 (_ca_ 2H, m, C-9), 4.8 (1H, _dJ_ \(\sim\) 6 Hz, C-7), 6.5-6.9 (6H, \(m\), aromatic protons).

_Laricinesinol4-mono_Me ether acetate,_**3d**, viscous oil, [a\({}_{0}^{\circ}\)]\({}_{0}^{25}\) + 5\({}^{\circ}\) (c 1.0, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); MS (_m_/_e_ (rel. int.): 458 [M\({}



## Page 6

* [6] Pelter, A., Ward, R. S., Venkata Rao, E. and Sastry, K. V. (1976) _Tetrahedron_**32**, 2783 and refs. cited therein.
* [7] Pelter, A., Ward, R. S. and Nishino, C. (1977) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 4137.
* [8] Fonseca, S. F., Barata, L. E. S., Ruveda, E. A. and Baker, P. M. (1979) _Can. J. Chem._**57**, 441.
* [9] Gottlieb, O. R. (1977) _Fortschr. Chem. Org. Naturst._**37**, 1.
* [10] Birch, A. J., Milligan, B., Smith, E. and Speake, R. N. (1958) _J. Chem. Soc._ 4471.
* [11] Wenkert, E., Buckwalter, B. L., Burffit, I. R., Gasic, M. J., Gottlieb, H. E., Hagaman, E. W., Schell. F. M. and Wovkulich, P. M. (1976) _Topics in Carbon-\(13\) NMR Spectroscopy_ (Levy, G. C., ed.) Vol. 2, Wiley-Interscience, New York.
* [12] Wenkert, E., Cochran, D. W., Hagaman, E. W., Schell, F. M., Neuss, N., K tanner, A. S., Kan, C., Plat, M., Koch, M., Mehri, H., Poisson, J., Kunesch, N. and Roland, Y. (1973) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**95**, 4990.
* [13] Wallace, R., Porte, A. L. and Hodges R. (1963) _J. Chem. Soc._ 1445.
* [14] Buckwalter, B. L., Burffit, I. R., Nagel, A. A., Wenkert, E. and Naf, F. (1975) _Helv. Chim. Acta_**58**, 1567.
* [15] Ayres, D. C. and Harris, J. A. (1969) _Chem. Commun._ 1135.



