# 10.1002@cbdv.200590016.pdf

## Page 1



# Antioxidant Quinone methide Triterpenes from _Salacia campestris_

by Paulo R. F. Carvalho, Dulee H. S. Silva, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, and Maysa Furlan

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, CEP14801-900, Araraquara, SP, Brazil

(phone: + 5516-201-6661; fax: + 55-16-222-7932; e-mail: maysafe@iq.unesp.br)

###### Abstract

A new quinonemethide triterpene named as salacin, has been isolated from the root bark of _Salacia campestris_ in addition to the known pristrimerin, maytenin, 20_a_-hydroxymyatenin, and netzahualcoyene. Salacin was identified on the basis of NMR-spectral and mass spectrometric analysis. The free-radical scavenging activities of the quinonemethide triterpenes salacin (**1**), pristrimerin (**2**), maytenin (**3**), 20_a_-hydroxymytenin (**4**), and netzahualcoyene (**5**) towards DPPH have been evaluated and showed absorbance variation (D_A_) of 19, 20, 39, 28, 55, and 10%, respectively, having rutin (74% at 50 um) and BHT (7% at 50 um) as standard compounds.

## 1 Introduction

Quinone methide triterpenes are natural products of occurrence restricted to Hippocrateaceae and Celastraceae families. Several representatives of this class are claimed to be medicinally useful [1][2], as antimicrobial [3-5], anticancer [4][6][7], antimalarial [8], and spermicidal compounds [9]. Some _Salacia_ species, _e.g._, _S. reticulata_, _S. oblonga_, and _S. chinesis_, have long been used in India, Sri-Lanka, and China, respectively, as traditional medicines for treating rheumatism and skin diseases, and for their anti-inflammatory properties as well. Recent investigations have confirmed the hepatoprotective and antioxidant properties of _S. reticulata_, and disclosed the presence of catechins as the active principle [10] and aldose reductase inhibition by tingenin B, a quinonemethide from _S. chinensis_[11].

The antioxidant activity of organic compounds is dependent of few structural features that include, in most cases, the presence of phenolic OH-groups. Thus, flavonoids, lignans, phenylpropanoids, and other aromatic compounds have been the focus of a large number of publications dealing with antioxidant properties [12]. Antioxidant terpenes are rare, and the best known examples include rosamanol and carnosic acid derivatives, abietane diterpenes from sage (_Salvia officinalis_) and rosemary (_Rosmarinus officinalis_), in which the phenolic moiety has been produced during their biosynthesis [13][14]. The antioxidant activities of the quinonemethide triterpenes celastrol, pristrimerin, and acetylcholinesterase have been previously assessed through demonstration of their lipid-peroxidation-inhibition effect in rat liver mitochondria [15]. On the other hand, no data are available on the free-radical scavenging activity of quinonemethide triterpenes. Useful information regarding the antioxidant activity of synthetic and natural products can be obtained from the measurement of their free-radical-scavenging properties, _e.g._, in dilution assays on the reduction of the stable free radical 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) [16].

In the course of our studies on biosynthesis and bioactive compounds from Celastraceae and Hippocrateaceae species [12][17], we describe herein the occurrence

## Page 2

of several quinonemethide triterpenes in _S. campestris_ (Hippocrateaceae) root barks, including the new salacin (**1**), which had its structure determined through MS and NMR analysis, along with the known pristimerin (**2**), maytenin (**3**), 20_a_-hydroxymatenin (**4**), and netzahualcoyene (**5**). In addition, the free-radical scavenging activities of the isolated quinonemethide triterpenes towards DPPH were measured and compared to those of the pentacyclic triterpene friedelin, which co-occurs with the quinoneme-thides in _S. campestris_, and to standard antioxidants BHT and rutin. The variation in the free-radical-scavenging activities due to structural features of the isolates is also discussed.

## 2. Results and Discussion

A CH2Cl2 extract of _Salacia campestris_ root bark was subjected to silica-gel column chromatography. The fractions obtained were further separated by silica gel (CC) to give the quinonemethide triterpenes **1** - **5**.

Salacin (**1**) was shown to have the molecular formula C28H38O4 by analysis of its ESI mass spectrum and elemental analysis. Its IR spectrum revealed absorption bands at 3490, 1725, and 1655 cm-1 characteristic of OH, ester C=O, and conjugated C=O groups, respectively. The 1H- and 13C-NMR spectra (_Table_) of **1** showed signals assignable to quinonemethide moiety at \(\delta\)(H) 6.30 (_d_, _J_(7,6) = 7.0, H-C(7)), a _doublet_ at \(\delta\)(H) 6.47 (_J_(1,6) = 1.0, H-C(1)), and a _doublet_ of _doublets_ at \(\delta\)(H) 6.96 (_J_(6,7) = 7.0, _J_(6,1) = 1.0, H-C(6)). The assignments of quinonemethide moiety were confirmed by interpretation of a DQCOSY spectrum, which showed mutual correlation between such H-atoms. The presence of one deshielded Me _singlet_ at \(\delta\)(H) 2.20, assigned to Me(23), associated to a Me _doublet_ at \(\delta\)(H) 0.89 (_J_ = 7.0), confirmed a norquinonemethide skeleton.



## Page 3

The presence of two OH groups was confirmed by signals at \(\delta\)(H) 3.81 (_dd_, _J_(21,20) = 3.5, _J_(21,22) = 2.0, 1 H) and 3.70 (_d_, _J_(22,21) = 2.0, 1 H), attributed to H\(-\)C(21) and H\(-\)C(22), respectively. The assignments of these two hydroxymethine H-atoms were corroborated by interpretation of the DQCOSY spectrum. The spin system derived from H\({}_{a}-\)C(21) and H\({}_{a}-\)C(22) was readily recognized by starting with the 1 H _doublet_ of _doublets_ at \(\delta\)(H) 3.81 assigned to H\({}_{a}-\)C(21), which showed a cross-peak with the 1 H _doublet_ at \(\delta\)(H) 3.70 assigned to H\({}_{a}-\)C(22). The relative configuration of H\({}_{\beta}-\)C(21) and H\({}_{a}-\)C(22) was deduced from \(J\) values between H\({}_{\beta}-\)C(21) and H\({}_{\beta}-\)C(20) (3.5 Hz), and H\({}_{\beta}-\)C(21) and H\({}_{a}-\)C(22) (2.0 Hz), which corroborated the axial - equatorial orientation of H\(-\)C(20) and H\(-\)C(21), and the equatorial orientation of H\(-\)C(22) (_Fig. 1_).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Position & \({}^{13}\)C & \({}^{1}\)H \\
1 & 120.5 & 6.47 (_d_, _J_(1,6) = 1.2) \\
2 &

## Page 4

The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR data were in agreement with the quinonemethide skeleton due to the signals related to conjugated C = C bonds in rings A and B at d(C) 170.4, 146.5, 133.9, 127.5, and 120.5, assigned to C(8), C(3), C(6), C(5), and C(1), respectively. The signals at d(C) 74.0 and 72.2 were attributed to two hydroxymethine C-atoms. The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR signal at d(C) 18.2 attributed to Me(29) group corroborated a 30-nor-skeleton once quinonemethides with C(29)-nor-skeleton (with d-orientation of the Me group at C(20)) shows the shielded signal for C(30) around d(C) 10.6 - 11.5 [1b]. The positions of these groups were unambiguously assigned by interpretation of the gHMDC spectra (_Fig. 1_). The signal at d(C) 74.0 assigned to C(21) showed correlation with the signal at d(H) 0.89 (H - C(29)); and the signal at d(C) 72.2, assigned to C(22), showed correlation with the signal d(H) 1.14 (H - C(28)). The analysis of gHMDC data was used to assign the signals for all H-bearing C-atoms and allowed the structural determination of the new quinonemethide triterpene salacin (**1**).

Pristimerin (**2**) has been previously isolated from _Salacia beddomei_[18] and from _S. kraussii_[19]. Maytenin (**3**) has been described from _S. crassifolia_[4] and _S. macrosperma_[20]. 20_a_-Hydroxymaytenin (**4**) has been reported from _S. macrosperma_[20] and netzahualcoyene (**5**) from _S. reticulata_[21]. Analysis of NMR data of compounds **2** - **5** and comparison with those reported in the literature allowed the identification of these quinonemethide triterpenes.

The radical-scavenging activity of compounds **1** - **6** has been evaluated towards the stable free radical DPPH, which exhibits an absorption maximum at 517 nm. The free-radical-scavenging activity of the quinonemethide triterpenes is due to the dienone-phenol moiety, which displays great stability to the quinonemethide radical as soon as it has been formed, after hydrogen radical donation to DPPH. Netzahualcoyene (**5**, D_A_ = 55 +- 3% at 50 mm) was more effective than quinonemethides **1** - **4** (D_A_ = 19 +- 2, 20 +- 1, 39 +- 2, and 28 +- 3%, resp., at 50 mm) (_Fig. 2_). Such behavior seems to be associated with the more extended conjugation, which, in the case of compound **5**, is spread through rings A - D and should, therefore, stabilize the netzahualcoyene radical more effectively than the radicals of compounds **1** - **4**, in which the conjugated system is restricted to rings A and B. Conversely, friedelin (**6**, D_A_ = 10 +- 2% at 50 mm), which lacks the dienone-phenol system, was not effective in promoting DPPH reduction and,

Fig. 1: _Selected HMDC correlations and \({}^{1}\)H-NMR coupling constants for salacin_ (**1**)

## Page 5

therefore, appears as a poor radical scavenger. Structural variations at ring E do not apparently interfere with the free-radical-scavenging activity, although the presence of free hydroxyls and/or carboxyls on ring E might be important in biological systems due to interaction of these groups with cell membranes, affecting lipid peroxidation processes [15]. The comparison of quinonemethide triterpenes and standard compound rutin (D_A_ = 74 +- 4% at 50 mm) evidences the reported major roles of some structural features of flavonoids as the catechol moiety present in ring B of rutin and the C(2) = C(3) bond for the enhancement of the free-radical-scavenging activity [22]. On the other hand, the synthetic antioxidant BHT (D_A_ = 7 +- 1% at 50 mm) exhibited the weakest antiradicalar activity as expected due to its slow reaction rate with DPPH [23]. The use of _Salacia_ and other Hippocrateaceae or Celastraceae species as folk medicines for purposes that include the treatment of gastric ulcer might be related to their content in antiradicalar compounds as flavonoids, which have been described elsewhere (_e.g._, from _Maytenus aquifolium_[12] and _Salacia reticulata_[10]) and the quinonemethide triterpenes described in this work.

### Experimental Part

_General._ Silica gel (_Merck_; 230 - 400 Mesh) was used for column chromatography (CC) unless otherwise stated, and solvents were redistilled prior to use. 1H- and 13C-NMR spectra were recorded on a _Varian Unity-500_ spectrometer at 500 and 125 MHz, resp., with CDCl3 as solvent and TMS as reference. IR Spectra were obtained on a _Nicolet_ spectrometer. ESI-MS were recorded on a _VG Platform-II_ spectrometer. Elemental analysis was performed on a _Perkin-Elmer 2400-CHN_ apparatus.

_Plant Material._ _Salacia empestris_ root barks were collected in Fazenda Canchin at the Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Carlos, SP and identified by Prof. Dr. _Maria Helena de O. Antunes._ The voucher specimens (No. 2845) are deposited at Herbarium of Departamento de Botanica da Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos - UFSCar, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil.

_Extraction and Isolation._ Root barks of _S. campestris_ were dried at 40deg for 24 h in an oven with forced air circulation. The dried and powered root bark of _S. campestris_ (485 g) was extracted with CH2Cl2. The resulting CH2Cl2 extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuum to afford a red gum (100.9 g), which was submitted to CC on silica gel (300 g) and eluted with hexane/AcOEt gradient followed by AcOEt/MeOH gradient. The hexane/AcOEt 1:1 fraction (11.6 g) was subjected to silica-gel CC with hexane/AcOEt gradient to give 45

Fig. 2: _Free-radical-scavenging activity of quinonemethide triterpenes_**1–5** _and friedelin_ (**6**) _isolated from_ S. campestris, _and reference compounds BHT and rutin_

## Page 6

fractions. _Fraction 6_ (0.296 g) was applied onto prep. TLC plates eluted with hexane/AcOEt/AcOH 97:2:1 to yield _Fr. 6-3_ (0.093 g), which was further purified by prep. TLC (hexane/AcOEt/AcOH 90:9:1) to give _mayterin_ (**3**; 0.030 g) and _netzahualcoyene_ (**5**; 0.046 g). _Fr. 31_ was subjected to prep. TLC eluted with CHCl_j_/ MeOH/AcOH 99:1:1 to give _pristinerin_ (**2**; 0.012 g) and _20a-hydroxynatenin_ (**4**; 0.043 g). _Fr. 27_ was submitted to two stepwise prep. TLC (hexane/AcOEt/AcOH 60:39:1 and then 70:29:1) to yield _Fr. 27-3-2_ (0.010 g), which was further purified by prep. TLC (hexane/AcOEt/AcOH 70:29:1) to yield the new quinnemethide triterpene_salacin_ (**1**; 0.0055 g).

_Salacin_ (**1**). Amorphous solid. UV (MeOH): 420. IR (KBr): 3490, 2930, 1725, 1655, 1288, 1080. 1H- and 13C-NMR: see the _Table_. ESI-MS: 439 (100, [_M_ + 1]+). Anal. calc. for C28H38O4: C 76.71, H 8.68, O 14.61; found: C 76.71, H 8.68, O 14.61.

_Reduction of 1,1-Diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl Radical_ (DPPH). The free-radical-scavenging capacities of quinonemethide triterpenes, friedelin, and standard compounds rutin and BHT were evaluated with respect to their ability to reduce the stable free radical DPPH. Stock solns. of each compound consisted of 1 mg solubilized in MeOH (10 ml). Several dilutions of each compound from 5 x 10-6 mol l-1 to 100 x 10-6 mol l-1 were then prepared in MeOH, and to each sample a soln. of DPPH (0.004%) was added. Tests were performed in triplicate, absorbance at 517 nm was determined after 30 min on a _Milton Roy 20D_ spectrophotometer, and the percentage of activity was calculated [16].

This work was supported by grants provided by _FAPESP_ (proc. 97/10184-7). _P. R. F. C._ thanks _FAPESP_ for providing a scholarship; _M. F._ and _V. S. B._ are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships. The authors are grateful to Prof. Dr. _Paulo Cezar Vieira_ for collecting the plant material.

## References

* [1] a) A. A. L Gunatilaka, 'Triterpenoid Quinonemethides and Related Compounds (Celastroloids)', _Prog. Chem. Org. Comp._**1996**, _67_, 1; b) H. C. Fernando, A. A. L. Gunatilaka, Y. Tezuka, T. Kikuchi, _Tetrahedron_**1989**, _45_, 5867.
* [2] F. Calzada, R. Mata, R. Lopez, E. Linares, R. Bye, V. M. Barreto, F. Del Rio, _Planta Med._**1991**, _57_, 194.
* [3] S. S. Bhatnagar, P. V. Divekar, _J. Sci. Ind. Res._**1951**, _10 B_, 56.
* [4] O. Goncalves de Lima, J. S. de B. Coelho, E. Weight, I. L. D'Albuquerque, D. A. Lima, M. A. de M. Souza, _Rev. Inst. Antibilot._**1971**, _11_, 35.
* [5] L. Moujir, A. M. Gutierrez-Navarro, A. G. Gonzalez, A. G. Ravelo, J. G. Luis, _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1990**, _18_, 25.
* [6] O. Ngassapa, D. D. Soejarto, J. M. Pezzuto, N. R. Farnsworth, _J. Nat. Prod._**1994**, _57_, 1.
* [7] A. T. Sneden, _J. Nat. Prod._**1981**, _44_, 503.
* [8] K. Pavanand, H. K. Webster, K. Yongvanitchit, A. Kun-Anake, T. De-Chatiwongse, W. Nutakul, J. Bansiddhi, _Phytother. Res._**1989**, \(3\), 136.
* [9] G. A. S Premakumara, W. D. Ratnasooriya, _Contraception_**1992**, _45_, 239.
* [10] M. Yoshikawa, K. Ninomyia, H. Shimoda, N. Nishida, H. Matsuda, _Biol. Pharm. Bull._**2002**, _25_, 72.
* [11] T. Morikawa, A. Kishi, Y. Pongpiriyadacha, H. Matsuda, M. Yoshikawa, _J. Nat. Prod._**2003**, _66_, 1191.
* [12] J. Corsino, D. H. S. Silva, M. V. B. Zanoni, V. da S. Bolzani, S. C. Franca, A. M. S. Pereira, M. Furlan, _Phytother. Res._**2003**, _17_, 913.
* [13] M.-N. Maillard, P. Giampaoli, M.-E. Cuvelier, _Talanta_**1996**, _43_, 339.
* [14] D. A Markovic, Z. Djamarti, R. M. Jankov, D. M. Markovic, L. M. Ignjatovic, _Mikrochim. Acta_**1996**, _124_, 219.
* [15] H. Sassa, K. Kogure, Y. Takaishi, H. Terada, _Free Rad. Biol. Med._**1994**, _17_, 201.
* [16] M. S. Blois, _Nature_**1958**, _181_, 1199.
* [17] a) J. Corsino, A. C. Alecio, M. L. Ribeiro, M. Furlan, A. M. S. Pereira, I. B Duarte, S. C. Franca, _Phytochemistry_**1998**, \(9\), 245. b) J. Corsino, P. R. F. Carvalho, M. J. Kato, L. R. Latorre, O. M. M. F. Oliveira, A. R. Araujo, V. da S. Bolzani, A. M. S. Pereira, S. C. Franca, M. Furlan, _Phytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 741.
* [18] A. Hisham, G. J. Kumar, Y. Fujimoto, N. Hara, _Phytochemistry_**1995**, _40_, 1227.
* [19] J. N. Figueiredo, B. Raz, U. Sequin, _J. Nat. Prod._**1998**, _61_, 718.
* [20] G. C. S. Reddy, K. N. N. Ayengar, S. Rangaswami, _Indian J. Chem., Sect. B_**1981**, _20_, 197.
* [21] B. Dhanabalasingham, V. Karunaratne, Y. Tezuka, T. Kikuchi, _Phytochemistry_**1996**, _42_, 1377.
* [22] S. A. B. E. Van Acker, D.-J. Vanden Berg, M. N. J. L. Tromp, D. H Griffioen, W. P Van Bennekom, W. J. F. Van der Vijgh, A. Bast, _Free Rad. Biol. Med._**1996**, _20_, 331.
* [23] V. Bondet, W. Brand-Williams, C. Berset, _Lebensm.-Wiss. Technol._**1997**, _30_, 609.



