# 10.1107@S160053680302107X.pdf

## Page 1

(5,7-Dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-benzo[_b_]-pyran-6-yl)propionic acid: a potential inhibitor against Leishmania

M. Silva,a H. B. Napolitano,a,b J. Ellena,a W. C. Rocha,b P. C. Vieira,b G. Olivaa and O. H. Thiemanna

# Abstract

The title acid, C16H20O5, was extracted from _Adiscanthus fusciformis_ (_Rutaceae_) and is shown to inhibit adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) enzyme activity. This compound crystallizes in the centrosymmetric space group C2/c with one molecule in the asymmetric unit. There is one hydrogen bond, with O_D_'*O_A_ = 2.6238 (12) A and O_D_-H_*O_A_ = 171.1 (17)deg involving the COOH group, forming a cyclic dimer about a center of symmetry. The packing of the molecules is additionally stabilized by one C-H_*O_[_C_'*O_A_ = 2.9820 (16) A and C_D_-H_*O_A_ = 101.8 (10)deg] and two C-H_*_p_ intermolecular hydrogen bonds.

## Comment

The title carboxylic acid, (I), has been investigated because of its interesting inhibitory activity against adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) from _Leishmania tarentolae_ which is a member of the phosphoribosyltransferase (PRTase) family. The PRTases are responsible for the salvage of purine, pyridine and pyrimidine nucleotides, as well as aromatic amino acids. Most organisms synthesize adenine nucleotides by both the _de novo_ and the salvage pathways. In contrast, protozoan parasites are strict purine nucleotide auxotrophs because of the absence of a purine _de novo_ biosynthetic pathway (Berens _et al._, 1995). Therefore, these microorganisms are absolutely dependent on scavenging pre-formed purine nucleotides from the host or the media (Ullman & Carter, 1997). To look for new potential anti-leishmania drugs, we used the APRT from _L. tarentolae_ as a model system to investigate the inhibitory capacity of _A. fusciformis_ extracts. The screening was performed using a spectrophotometric assay (Tuttle & Krenitsky, 1980); the IC50 of pure compound (I) is 147 u_M_. In view of this interest, we have extracted the title compound, (I), and present here its crystal structure.

## 1 Introduction

The study of the role of a protein in the asymmetric unit is a key to understanding the role of a protein in the asymmetric unit. The study of the role of a protein in the asymmetric unit is a key to understanding the role of a protein in the asymmetric unit.



## Page 2

1983). The benzene ring C4-C9 in the central part of the molecule is very nearly planar, the maximum deviation of any of its atoms from the least-squares plane describing them being 0.0051 (8) A, while the average deviation is 0.0030 (9) A. Atoms (C2, C3, C16, O17, O18 and O19) around the benzene ring are coplanar [r.m.s. deviation 0.0535 (10) A]. Thus, the structure exhibits a planar central moiety, a typical structural feature observed in anti-leishmania inhibitors (Chan-Bacab & Pena-Rodrigues, 2001).

Several packing features may be noted (Spek, 1990). There are classical intermolecular hydrogen bonds [O21-H21-O20]; symmetry code: (i) \(\frac{1}{2} - x\), \(\frac{1}{2} - y\), \(1 - z\)] between the COOH groups of neighbouring molecules, forming a centrosymmetric dimer (Fig. 2). O21-O20\(i\) is 2.6238 (12) A and O21-H21-O20\(i\) is 171.1 (17)deg.

There is also a weak C16-H16\(b\) * 0.21i [symmetry code: (ii) \(x\), \(-y\), \(z - \frac{1}{2}\)] intermolecular hydrogen bond that is responsible for stabilization of the infinite parallel chains (Fig. 3). Furthermore, two intermolecular C-H

## Page 3

and leaves 1.040 kg), were then extracted successively with hexane (10 l) and methanol (8.5 l). The hexane extract of the root (5.0 g) was chromatographed on an silica gel column (Ph x \(h\) = 28 x 2 cm) using a hexane/EtOAc gradient to fractionate the extract. Nine fractions were collected. Fraction 5 (hexane-ethyl acetate 7:3) was chromatographed on an silica gel column (Ph x \(h\) = 50 x 1.5 cm) using a gradient system of hexane, ethyl acetate and methylene chloride. 42 fractions were collected and, based on normal phase thin-layer chromatography (TLC), seven fractions were pooled. Fraction 3 (hexane/ethyl acetate/methylene chloride 7:21) produced an amorphous white solid (25 mg) that was washed successively with hexane and crystallized by vapor diffusion at room temperature from hexane/methylene chloride (1:1). The purity of the compound was checked by TLC (silica gel, Merck PF 254, 0.25 mm thickness).

### Crystal data

C1H2O3O3

\(M\), = 222,32

Mo _Ka_ radiation

Monoclinic, C2/c

Cell parameters from 3662

\(a\) = 23.022 (3) A

reflections

\(b\) = 10.2248 (2) A

\(c\) = 15.0785 (3) A

\(m\) = 0.10 mm-1

\(b\) = 122.273 (1)

\(V\) = 3037.60 (9) A3

Pfism, colorless

\(Z\) = 8

0.16 x 0.14 x 0.10 mm

### Data collection

Nonius KappaCCD diffractometer

_R_ext = 0.016

_ph_max = 25deg

5170 measured reflections

\(R\) = 27deg >= 27

2666 independent reflections

\(k\) = 12 - 12

2207 reflections with \(l\) >= 2_o_(_l_)

\(l\) = -17 - 17

### Refinement on \(F\)2

_R_[_F_2 2_σ_(_F_2)] = 0.033

_R_[_F_2 2_σ_(_F_2)] = 0.003

_R_[_F_2 2_σ_(_F_2)] = 0.009

_R_[_F_2 2_

