# 10.1016@0031-9422(75)85303-9.pdf

## Page 1



# Neoligans from _Aniba Terminals+
Footnote †: Part 31 in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Laureae”. For Part 30 see Ref. 1. Taken from part of the M.S. thesis presented by Z.S.F. to the Universidade de São Paulo (1974). Sponsored by Ministerio do Planejamento (Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos S.A.) through Academia Brasileira de Ciências and by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo.

Otto R. Gottlieb, Miriam Leao Da Silva

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brasil

Zenaide Scattone Ferreira

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brasil

###### Abstract

A benzene extract of the trunk wood of _Aniba terminals_ (Lauraceae) contained besides benzyl benzoate, benzyl salicylate, \(d\),1-camphor and sitosterol, (2S,3S,3a_R_)- and (2\(R\),3S,3a_S)-3a-allyl-5-methoxy-3-methyl-2-piperonyl-2,3,3a,6-tetrahydro-6-oxobenzofuran, which may be responsible, through sequential rearrangements of the Cope, retro-Claisen and Claisen types, and finally dehydrogenation, for the formation of the co-occurring (2S,3S,5S)- and (2\(R\),3S,5_K_)-5-allyl-5-methoxy-3-methyl-2-piperonyl-2,3,5,6-tetrahydro-6-oxobenzofuran, the (2S,3S)-6-O-allyl-5-methoxy-3-methyl-2-piperonyl-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran, the (2S,3S)- and (2\(R\),3S)-7-allyl-6-hydroxy-5-methoxy-3-methyl-2-piperonyl-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran and the 7-allyl-6-hydroxy-5-methoxy-3-methyl-2-piperonylbenzofuran.

## Introduction

Neolignans of structural types **1**, **2**, **3** and **4** co-occur in the C6H6-extract of an _Aniba_ sp. [1]. The opinion that all four represent natural products originating from an isoeugenol-eugenol oxidative dimer (type **1**) by successive _in vivo_ rearrangements was based on the stability of derivatives belonging to types **1** and **2** under extraction conditions. Additional evidence stems from the fact that in _Aniba terminalis_ representatives of these same types are accompanied by **5**. Dehydrogenation of 2,3-dihydrobenzofurans would not be expected to occur during manipulation of the plant or extract, and a reasonable rationalization of the biosynthetically unusual placement of the allyl substituent in **5** involves a sequence of reactions in which **2**, **3** and **4** would function as intermediates.

The NMR features of dihydrobenzofuran neoplignans are well known [1, 2, 3, 4]. The structures of the compounds belonging to types **1**-**4** were thus deduced with ease. The particular dienone systems of **1** and **2** were further characterized by

## Page 2

IR and UV spectra (_v_max 1645 and 1685 cm-1 respectively; _l_max 285 and 314 nm respectively). The relative position of the _O_-allyl and _O_-methyl substituents in **3** was inferred from considerations concerning the biogenesis of the compound. Analogous evidence, also decisive for structural assignments in the case of compounds **4** and **5**, was partially confirmed by determining NMR spectral modifications due to acetylation in the latter case. Constancy of position of the aromatic proton singlet established the _meta_-relationship of H and OH, while diamagnetic shifts of the CH2-CH2-CH2 and OMe resonances established the _ortho_-relationship of the allyl and the methoxyl to the hydroxyl. Placement of the lone aromatic hydrogen at C-4, rather than the C-7 position, seemed in better accord with its relatively low field NMR signal, while placement of the methoxyl at C-5, rather than the more hindered C-7 position, seemed in better accord with its relatively high field NMR signal. The spectrum of **5** was of course simpler than the spectra given by compounds belonging to types **1**-**4**. Selective conjugation with the furan system separated all piperonyl H-resonances, while the C-Me was represented by a sharp singlet at appropriately low frequency.

The known burchellin (**1a**) differs stereochemically from the _A. terminalis_ constituent Ib. While, with reference to the aryl substituent, the allyl group of Ib is again _trans_-oriented (CH2, \(t\) < 7*6[1]), the methyl is _cis_-oriented (_t_ 9*47). From the two configurational alternatives, which could be formulated on this evidence, Ib was chosen on grounds of the nearly antipodal ORD curves of **1**a and **1**b. Burchellin (**1a**), as characterized by a _trans_-methyl resonance (_t_ 8*84), and anothercompoundtentativelyidentifiedwith3a-_epiburchellin (**1c**) (Me \(t\) 8*73, CH2 \(t\) > 7*6), were present in substantial amounts, (35 and 10% respectively), in a less pure sample of **1**b.

Since a 2,3-_trans_ geometry must prevail in **2a** (Me \(t\) 8*75), it represents most probably the Coper rearrangement product of burchellin (**1a**). In agreement with this supposition, its ORD curve is different from the curves of (5_R_)-allyl derivatives [1]. The isolate contained about 10% of a 2,3-_cis_ derivative (Me \(t\) 9*38), probably **2**b, the Cope product of Ib. In contrast, **3** was obtained in pure form. Significantly, NMR (Me \(t\) 8*67) and ORD data showed this compound to belong to the (2S,3S)-2-aryl-3-methyl series of 2,3-dihydrobenzofurans [1,2]. Product **4** was again a 1:1*2 mixture of **4a** (Me \(t\) 8*67) and **4b** (Me \(t\) 9*19). The absolute stereochemical assignments in the formulae were based solely on the probable interrelationship of _A. terminalis_ constituents of the _trans_-(Ia - 2a - 3 - 4a) and the _cis_-(1b - 2b - 4b) series.

The leaves of this species [5] contain 4-methoxy-paracotoin [6], in addition to benzyl benzoate and benzyl salicylate.

## Experimental

### Isolation of the constituents.

Trunk wood (2 kg) of _Aniba terminalis_ Duxe (voucher specimens 1NPA. Manaus, Herbaria Bot. 42206, Chem. 5/73) from the Duxe Forest Reserve, Manaus, Amazonas, gave a C6H8-extract (15 g) which was chromatographed on Si gel (500 g) to give the following fractions with the indicated eluents: A1 and A2 (C6H8), A3 and A4 (C6H8-EtOAc, 9:1) A4 (C6H8-EtOAc, 9:1) A8 (C6H8-EtOAc, 7:3). A1 (4 g) was composed of aliphatic esters. A2 (122 g) was rechromatographed on Si gel to yield benzyl benzoate, benzyl salicylate, and a 3-component mixture which was separated by PLC (SiO2, C6H8) into **5** (15 mg) and a 2-component mixture. This was separated, again by PLC (SiO2, C6H8, CH6CH3, 99:1) into the less polar **3** (30 mg) and the more polar **4** (25 mg). A3 (09 g) in CHCl3, pptd, upon addition of MeOH. A solid which was crystallized from MeOH to give distorted (50 mg). A4 (1*9 g), upon heating, gave sitosterol (600 mg) in the residue and \(d\)1-camphor (100 mg) in the sublimate. A5 was separated by PLC (SiO2, Et2O) into the less polar Ib (40 mg) and the more polar **2** (50 mg).

(2R,3S,3aS)-3a-_Alllyl_-5-_methoxy-3-methyl_-2-_piperonyl_-2,3a,6 (_tetrahydro_-6-_oxobenzofuran_, (1b) viscous oil (M' found: 340:1314; C6H8O3 requires: 340-1310), UV \(l\)2

## Page 3



