# 10.1002@pca.818.pdf

## Page 1

An HPLC-PAD Method to Analyse Flavonoid Glycosides and Styrylpyrones from _Cryptocarya_ Species (Lauraceae)

Claudia J. Nehme, Wagner L. Bastos, Adelson J. de Araujo and Alberto J. Cavalheiro*

Notico de Bloemasio, Bisinfues e Ecofisologia de Produtos Naturais, Instituto de Quimica, UNESP, Aarasquara-SP 14800-900, Brazil.

###### Abstract

An HPLC-PAD method has been developed in order to evaluate simultaneously the main secondary metabolites, flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones, of leaves of _Cryptocarya moschata_. The sample preparation, consisting of extraction, liquid-liquid extraction and centrifugation, requires minimum sample manipulation but produces high yields with reproducibility, selectivity and simplicity. HPLC on a C18 column presents each class of metabolites grouped and with good resolution of the main compounds. The experimental conditions can be used to study inter- and intra-specific variability of secondary metabolites in _Cryptocarya_ spp. Copyright © 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

HPLC-PAD; retention index; flavonoid glycosides; styrylpyrones; _Cryptocarya moschata_; Lauraceae.

## INTRODUCTION

_Cryptocarya moschata_ Nees is an arboreal species of some 25-30 m height that is widely spread in the Atlantic forests of Brazil. It is recognised as an important food source for primates such as _Brachyletse arachonides_ E. Geoffroy, 1806 (mono-carvoiro or muriqui). A study of the genetic structure of four natural populations of this species, using isoenzyme markers, showed a high level of genetic diversity when compared with other tropical angiosperm trees. The intra-populational genetic variability was found to be more prominent than that exhibited between populations, and the estimated gene flow corroborated the pronounced divergence found among populations (Moraes _et al._, 1999).

Phyochemical studies of the bark of _C. moschata_ have shown that styrylpyrones are the typical secondary metabolites present in this species (Cavalheiro and Yoshida, 2000). Flavonoid glycosides, as well as styrylpyrones, have been detected in leaves, and the qualitative and quantitative intra-specific variability of these secondary metabolites has also been determined (Nehme _et al._, 2002).

In this paper, a protocol of extraction, clean-up and HPLC analysis is described that may be employed to establish simultaneously the flavonoid and styrylpyrone profiles of the leaves of _C. moschata_ with the aim of identifying chemotypes related to these metabolites.

## EXPERIMENTAL

**Materials.** Plant material of _Cryptocarya moschata_ was collected in the Carlos Botelho State Park (Sao Miguel Arcanjo, Sao Paulo, Brazil). Leaves were dried at 40degC and milled prior to solvent extraction.

Solvents used for extraction and flash chromatography were of AnalaR grade, whilst those used in HPLC analysis and sample preparation were of HPLC grade, and were from Mallinckrodt (St Louis, MO, USA). HPLC-grade water (18 m2) was prepared using a Barnstead (Dubuque IA, USA) E-pure system.

**Sample preparation.** In order to obtain a rapid and cheap protocol by which to prepare extracts of leaves of _C. moschata_, a liquid-liquid extraction method was developed to extract and clean up the samples. Milled leaves (120 mg) were weighed into a centrifuge tube and extracted with 4.0 mL of petroleum ether (60-68degC boiling point) for 30 min with sonication, followed by the addition of 4.0 mL of methanol:10% aqueous acetic acid (1:1, v/v) and sonication for a further 30 min. The resulting mixture was stirred and centrifuged at 1200 \(\boldsymbol{g}\) for 15 min and an aliquot (1.0 mL) taken from hydrochloric phase, filtered on a 0.45 \(\upmu\)m PTFE membrane and submitted to HPLC analysis by injection of 20 \(\upmu\)L.

**Isolation and identification of flavonoid glycoside standards.** Powdered leaf material (400 g) was extracted with methanol:10% aqueous acetic acid (1:1, v/v) for 60 min with sonication. The crude extract (15 g) was washed with petroleum ether (60-80degC boiling point) to remove the lipophilic compounds, and the residue (10 g) was dissolved in methanol:10% aqueous acetic acid (v/v) and fractionated by flash chromatography over RP18 (40-63 \(\upmu\)m) eluted using a step gradient from methanol:1% aqueous acetic acid (1:1, v/v) to pure methanol. Subfractions were submitted to preparative HPLC using a Supelcosil (Belleforte, PA, USA) LC18 column (250 x 22 mm i.d.; 12 \(\upmu\)m) eluted with methanol:1% aqueous acetic acid (3:7, v/v) to yield six flavonoid glycosides (**F1-F6**, Fig. 1) that were identified by comparison of their UV and 1H- and 1C-NMR data (Table 1) with those previously published (Agrawal, 1989).



## Page 2



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c c c c}  & \multicolumn{10}{c}{Compounda  } \\  & \multicolumn{2}{c}{F1} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{F2} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{F3} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{F4} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{F5} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{F6} \\ C & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{15}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)Hb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{13}\)Cb  & \({}^{14}\)D  & \({}^{14}\)D [FOOTNOTE:d]Footnote d: Corresponding to that shown in Table 2.



## Page 3



**Styrylpyrone standards.** Standards of the styrylpyrones cryptomoscatones E3 (**S1**), D1 (**S2**), D2 (**S3**), F1 (**S4**) and E1 (**S6**), and cryptofolione (**S7**) (Fig. 1) were obtained previously from bark of _C. moschata_ (Cavalihero and Yoshida, 2000). Deacetylcpropylcaprolactone (**S5**) and regionothalamin (**S8**) were obtained by flash chromatography and preparative HPLC of hydromethanolic extracts of _C. moschata_ and _C. aschersoniana_, respectively, and identified by UV and NMR data.

**Instrumentation.** A Varian (Palo Alto, CA, USA) ProStar system consisting of a ternary pump model 240, a diode array detector model 330 and an auto-sampler model 410 was employed, controlled by a Star chromatography workstation (version 5.3). The column used was a Supelcosil (Belleforte, PA, USA) LC18 (250 x 4.6 mm i.d.; 5 mm) protected by a corresponding guard-column (20 x 4.6 mm i.d.).

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### Sample extraction and clean-up

The protocol for sample extraction and clean-up was evaluated for efficiency of extraction and reproducibility of retention time and peak area. The same sample was submitted four times to the extraction procedure as described above and the experiment was carried out in triplicate. The efficiency of extraction with respect to each chromatographic peak was calculated by considering as 100% the total of all four of the peak areas obtained for that compound following analysis of the four extractions (Table 1 and Fig. 2). In the first extraction, the yield corresponding to the 12 main peaks was 86.0 +- 3.3%. No flavonoid glycosides or styrylpyrones were detected in the petroleum ether phase showing the high selectivity of the liquid-liquid extraction step that was used to eliminate lipophilic components.

### Development of the chromatographic protocol

In a previous paper (Nehme _et al._, 2002) the intraspecific variability of secondary metabolites in leaves of _C. moschata_ was determined using a Shimpack (Southall, UK) C18 column (15 x 0.46 cm i.d.) eluted with phosphoric acid-triethylamine (pH 2.0; solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) with a linear gradient from 85:15 (A:B) to 60:40 in 45 min followed by isocratic elution with 60:40 (A:B) for 10 min, at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min. Analysis of the UV spectra obtained from each chromatographic peak by PAD, together with retention time (_t_R) values of standards, showed the presence of flavonoid glycosides (_t_R between 12 and 21 min) and styrylpyrones (_t_R between 26 and 38 min.). The three main peaks were identified as queveritin (_t_R = 20.70 min), cryptomoscatone D2 (_t_R = 28.90 min) and cryptofolino (_t_R = 34.73 min). However, under these chromatographic conditions several peaks remained unresolved (Nehme _et al._, 2002).

In order to improve the resolution, a longer (25 cm) C18 column was employed with the elution conditions as described above except for the flow rate, which was 1.0 mL/min. The chromatogram obtained in these conditions showed 20 well-resolved peaks, with the flavonoids grouped from 12 to 20 min, and the styrylpyrones grouped from 24 to 36 min. In addition, at least two unresolved peaks between 22 and 25 min were tentatively attributed to aporphine alkaloids based on UV spectra (Fig. 3). These chromatographic conditions permitted the analysis of three classes of secondary metabolites in the polar extracts of leaves from _C. moschata_.

The identities of the main peaks was established by comparison of _t_R values and UV spectra with standards together with co-injection studies. In order to facilitate the identification of peaks, a relative retention time with respect to queveritin (as internal reference) was determined for each peak (Table 2).

The methodology was applied to analyse the secondary metabolites in leaves of four species of _Cryptocarya_ collected in the Atlantic rain forest in the state of Sao Paulo (Brazil). A comparison of the chromatographic profiles (Fig. 3) revealed that the pattern of flavonoids with peaks between 16 and 22 min was very similar among the species with only quantitative differences. _C. saligina_ and _C. aschersoniana_ showed an intense peak for quercetin-3-_O-b_-galactopyranoside (**FI**) whilst _C. saligina_ exhibited another intense peak (absent from the other species) at 24.7 min, attributed to an unidentified flavonoid with absorptions at 220, 293 and 335 nm. In the chromatograms from extracts of _C. mamidoccana_ and _C. moschata_, the most intense flavonoid peak was quercetin-3-_O-a_-b-rhamnopyranoside (**F6**). In addition, another unidentified flavonoid, labelled as (**F**) with a _t_R of 24.8 min, in the chromatograms of _C. mandioccana_ and _C. moschata_, showed UV spectra with absorptions at 203, 260 and 340 nm, which suggested the presence of the aglycone quercetin in this flavonoid. An additional unidentified peak with a _t_R of 42.7 min in the chromatogram of _C. aschersoniana_ showed absorptions at 235, 267 and 362 nm, which were indicative of a dihydrochalcone.

Furthermore, each species was shown to possess a distinguishable profile of styrylpyrones. Thus, _C. moschata_ showed higher diversity in this class of compounds; _C. aschersoniana_ showed only one intense peak with a UV spectra similar to styrylpyrone, which was assigned as gonoindialamin (**S8**); _C. mamidoccana_ showed only small peaks from 24 to 36 min with UV spectra similar to the styrylpyrones found in _C. moschata, and _C. saligna_ exhibited no styrylpyrone peaks as based on UV spectra. All peaks labelled with (**S**) in the chromatogram in Fig. 3 had UV spectra very similar those from identified styrylpyrones.

Figure 2.: Yields of the 13 main compounds obtained in four sequential extractions of the same sample of leaves of _Cryptocarya moschata_ (mean values of triplicate experiments).



## Page 4



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l c c c c}  & & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Relative} \\  & & \multicolumn{2}{c}{retention time} & \\  & & Retention & (in relation to & Area \(\pm\)\(\sigma\) & Yield \(\pm\)\(\sigma\) \\ Peak & Compound & time (min) & quercetin) & (arbitrary units) & (\%) \\ F1 & Quercetin-3-O-b-o-galactopyranoside & 17.09 \(\pm\) 0.08 & 0.83 & 481,887 \(\pm\) 12 & 75.6 \(\pm\) 1.7 \\ F2 & Quercetin-3-O-b-o-glucopyranoside & 17.52 \(\pm\) 0.09 & 0.84 & 415,356 \(\pm\) 28 & 88.1 \(\pm\) 0.6 \\ F3 & Quercetin-3-O-b-o-xylopyranoside & 18.82 \(\pm\) 0.05 & 0.90 & 180,651 \(\pm\) 10 & 87.4 \(\pm\) 1.3 \\ F4 & Quercetin-3-O-o-or-adenopyranoside & 19.61 \(\pm\) 0.05 & 0.94 & 295,680 \(\pm\) 11 & 84.9 \(\pm\) 1.1 \\ F5 & Quercetin-3-O-b-o-allopyranoside & 20.29 \(\pm\) 0.07 & 0.97 & 131,345 \(\pm\) 9 & 89.7 \(\pm\) 1.6 \\ F6 & Quercetin-3-O-o-o-rhamnopyranoside & 20.84 \(\pm\) 0.08 & 1.00 & 2,025,540 \(\pm\) 137 & 88.7 \(\pm\) 1.0 \\ S1 & Cryptomoschatone **E3** & 25.88 \(\pm\) 0.09 & 1.24 & 1,007,390 \(\pm\) 59 & 88.8 \(\pm\) 1.2 \\ S2 & Cryptomoschatone **D1** & 28.09 \(\pm\) 0.08 & 1.34 & 2,320,990 \(\pm\) 148 & 87.5 \(\pm\) 1.6 \\ S3 & Cryptomoschatone **D2** & 28.41 \(\pm\) 0.08 & 1.36 & 314,828 \(\pm\) 21 & 85.6 \(\pm\) 0.8 \\ S4 & Cryptomoschatone **F1** & 30.22 \(\pm\) 0.09 & 1.45 & 712,126 \(\pm\) 49 & 88.3 \(\pm\) 1.4 \\ S5 & Deacetyl-cryptocaryalactone & 32.04 \(\pm\) 0.08 & 1.53 & 714,667 \(\pm\) 50 & 85.3 \(\pm\) 1.3 \\ S6 + S7 & Cryptomoschatone **E1** and cryptofolione & 33.26 \(\pm\) 0.13 & 1.59 & 1,480,692 \(\pm\) 174 & 90.2 \(\pm\) 1.7 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Reproducibility of retention time, relative retention time, peak area and yield of flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones (data from first extraction only) from leaves of _Cryptocarya moschata_ obtained by liquid–liquid extraction

Figure 3: Chromatographic profiles of four species of _Cryptocarya_ growing in the Atlantic rain forest in the state of São Paulo, Brazil. Peaks labeled F, A and S were associated with, respectively, flavonoids, alkaloids and styrylpyrones; the peak labelled NI was not identified. The inserts show typical UV spectra (PAD) of compound classes F, A and S.



## Page 5

In conclusion, the proposed extraction and analytical methodology will be useful in studying the composition of flavonoids and styrylpyrones in _Cryptocarya_ species, assisting in taxonomic and physiological studies, including inter- and intra-specific variability of secondary metabolites.

## References

* [1] Agrawal PK. 1989. _Carbon-13 NMR of Flavonoids_. Elsevier: Amsterdam.
* [2] Cavallero AJ., Yoshida, M. 2000. 6-(a-Arylalkenyl)-5,6-dihydro-_a_-pyrones from _Cryptocarya moschata_ (Lauraceae). _Photochemistry_**53**: 811-819.
* [3] Moraes PLR, Monteiro R, Vencovsky R. 1999. Conservacao genetica de populacoes de _Cryptocarya moschata_ Nees (Lauraceae) na mata Atlantica do estado de Sao Paulo. _Rev Bras Bot_**22**: 237-248.
* [4] Nehme CJ, Moraes PLR, Cavalleiro AJ. 2002. Intra-populational variability of styrylpyrones in leaves of _Cryptocarya moschata_ Nees (Lauraceae) from Carlos Botelho state park. _Biochem System Ecol_**30**: 613-616.



