# 10.1002@elps.200900216.pdf

## Page 1

Enantioselective analysis of propranolol and 4-hydroxypropranolol by CE with application to biotransformation studies employing endophytic fungi

A CE method is described for the enantioselective analysis of propranolol (Prop) and 4-hydroxypropranolol (4-OH-Prop) in liquid Czapek medium with application in the study of the enantioselective biotransformation of Prop by endophytic fungi. The electrophoretic conditions previously optimized were as follows: an uncoated fused-silica capillary, 4% w/v carboxymethyl-b-CD in 25 mmol/L triethylamine/phosphoric acid (H3PO4) buffer at pH 9 as running electrolyte and 17 kV of voltage. UV detection was carried out at 208 nm. Liquid-liquid extraction using diethyl ether: ethyl acetate (1:1 v/v) as extractor solvent was employed for sample preparation. The calibration curves were linear over the concentration range of 0.25-10.0 mg/mL for each 4-OH-Prop enantiomer and 0.10-10.0 mg/mL for each Prop enantiomer (_r_ >= 0.995). Within-day and between-day relative standard deviations and relative errors for precision and accuracy were lower than 15% for all the enantiomers. Finally, the validated method was used to evaluate Prop biotransformation in its mammalian metabolite 4-OH-Prop by some selected endophytic fungi. The screening of five strains of endophytic fungi was performed and all of them could biotransformation Prop to some extent. Specifically, _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1) biotransformed 4.8% of (-)*(S)-Prop to (-)*(S)-4-OH-Prop with no formation of (+)*(R)*4-OH-Prop in 72 h of incubation.

## Introduction

_rac_-Propranolol (Prop) (Fig. 1) is a non-cardioselective b-adrenergic blocking agent that has gained widespread usage in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, angina pectoris and cardiac arrhythmia, as well as in the prophylaxis of acute myocardial infarction [1]. Furthermore, Prop is consumed in sports as a doping agent. The pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic proprieties of Prop enantiomers are quite different with the b-blocking activity predominantly related to (-)*(S)-Prop, which is about 100 times more potent than (+)*(R)-Prop [1, 2]. The major phase I mammalian metabolites of Prop include 4-hydroxypropranolol (4-OH-Prop), which also has equipotent b-receptor blocking action to the parent compound, _N_-desisopropylpropanol, 1-naphthoxylactic acid and propranolol glycol [3]. In addition, Prop and its metabolites are known to undergo conjugation, producing mainly sulfates and partially glucuronide derivatives [4, 5] such as propranolol glucoronide and 4-hydroxypropranolol glucuronide, which are the major phase II products [6-8].

Recently there has been a growing body of information about the use of biocatalysis for selective transformations of synthetic and natural products. The most important advantages of using biocatalysis in biotransformation processes are the relatively mild conditions of the procedures, environmental safety, and especially high selectivity. Many mammalian phase I and phase II metabolic reactions including hydroxylation, \(O\) and \(N\) dealkylation, dehydrogenation, and glucuronide and sulfate conjugation also occur in microbial models [9]. So, the utilization of microbial systems as biomimetic models to predict the metabolism of drugs in humans and animals have received considerable attention [10-13].

Endophytic fungi are prolific producers of natural products, since they live inside the health plant tissues

## Page 2

without causing any apparent disease [14, 15]. Endophytes have also been successfully used in the biotransformation of some compounds [16-22]. In addition, chemo-, region- and stereoselective reactions employing fungi have been studied [23-26].

Since 4-OH-Prop is also biologically active, the study of its production by endophytic fungi can be useful to obtain gram quantities of Prop metabolites in the enantiomerically pure form _via_ routine fermentation techniques [27, 28] and further accomplishment of clinical and/or toxicological studies. The purpose of the present study was to validate an enantioselective CE method for the simultaneous analysis of Prop and 4-OH-Prop in liquid Czapek medium to verify if some endophytic fungi might enantioselectivity biotransform Prop to 4-OH-Prop. The enantioselective analysis of Prop in biological matrices by CE has been described in several papers using carboxymethyl-b-CD (CM-b-CD) [29, 30], other b-CD derivatives [31-33] or mixture of chiral selectors [34]. However, the simultaneous resolution of Prop and 4-OH-Prop has been described in only two papers [35, 36], one of them carried out recently by our group, using chemometric design to optimize the resolution of these drugs in standard solutions [36]. In addition, the simultaneous determination of Prop and 4-OH-Prop enantiomers by CE to study the Prop biotransformation by endophytic fungi has not been reported.

## 2 Materials and methods

### 2.1 Standard solutions and chemicals

Prop (99%) was obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and 4-OH-Prop (98%) was obtained from Toronto Research Chemicals (North York, Canada). Acetaminophen (Acet, 98%) obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis) was used as internal standard (I.S.). Stock standard solutions of Prop and 4-OH-Prop were prepared in methanol (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at concentrations of 8, 20, 40, 80, 160, 200, 400 and 800 mg/mL. The stock solution of I.S. was used at the concentration of 100.0 mg/mL. The standard solutions were stored at -20degC in the absence of light. CM-b-CD was obtained from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). Triethylamine (TEA) was purchased from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA) and phosphoric acid (H3PO4, 85% in water) was obtained from Labsynth (Diadema, Brazil). Sodium hydroxide was purchased from Nuclear (Diadema, Brazil). Diethyl ether was purchased from Mallinckrodt Baker (Paris, France) and ethyl acetate from Tedia (Fairfield, OH, USA). Except for ethyl acetate and methanol which were HPLC grade, all other chemicals were of analytical grade in the highest purity available. Water was distilled and purified using a Millipore Milli-Q Plus system (Bedford, MA, USA).

### 2.2 Instrumentation and CE conditions

Analyses were performed on an Agilent Technologies CE system (Waldbronn, Germany) model G1600A consisting of an analyzer, an automatic sampler and a diode array detector operating at 208 nm. Agilent ChemStation Software was used for data acquisition. An uncoated fused-silica capillary obtained from MicroSolv Technology Corporation (Eatontown, NJ, USA) of 50 mm id, 50.0 cm in total length, and 41.5 cm in effective length was used. Before the first use, the capillary was conditioned by rinsing with 1.0 mol/L NaOH for 30 min, followed by water for 30 min at 25degC. At the beginning of each working day, the capillary was rinsed with 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 10 min followed by water for 10 min. The capillary was rinsed with 1.0 mol/L NaOH for 0.5 min, 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 1.5 min, water for 1 min and running buffer for 2 min between consecutive analyses. After daily use, the capillary was washed with 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 10 min followed by water for 10 min. When not in use, the capillary was stored in water. The electrophoretic conditions previously optimized by Box-Behnken design [36] were as follows: 4% w/y CM-b-CD in 25 mmol/L TEA/H3PO4 buffer at pH 9 as running electrolyte and 17 kV of voltage. UV detection was carried out at 208 nm. Sample injections were performed hydrodynamically at a pressure of 50 mbar for 20 s and the capillary temperature was set at 25degC. All solutions used as CE running buffer and in CE

Figure 1.: Molecular structures of Prop. and 4-hydroxypromatolol enantiomers and acetaminophen (internal standard).



## Page 3

rinse cycle procedure were filtered through a Millex-HA 0.45 mm disk filter from Millipore and degassed by ultrasound for 5 min.

### 2.3 Sample preparation

Aliquots of 1 mL of liquid Czapek medium spiked with 25 mL of standard solutions of Prop, 4-OH-Prop and I.S. or samples obtained in the biotransformation process were alkalinized with 200 mL 2 mol/L NaOH solution and extracted with 4 mL diethyl ether: ethyl acetate (1:1 v/v). The tubes were capped and submitted to vortex mixing using a Vibrax VXR agitator (IKA, Staufen, Germany) for 10 min and then centrifuged at 1800x g for 3 min. This liquid-liquid extraction system allowed up to 36 extractions at the same time. The upper organic phases (3 mL) were transferred to conical tubes and evaporated under compressed air. The residues were dissolved in 25 mL of the running buffer diluted 1:10 (running buffer with CD:purified water) and analyzed by CE.

### 2.4 Method validation

To determine the extraction recovery, liquid Czapek medium samples (1 mL) were spiked with Prop and 4-OH-Prop enantiomers to obtain the concentrations of 1.0, 2.5 and 5.0 mg/mL for each enantiomer (_n_ = 3) and submitted to the extraction procedure. Another set of samples were prepared extracting 1 mL aliquots of liquid Czapek medium and then spiking the extract with the same amount of Prop and 4-OH-Prop enantiomers. Both samples were extracted, but only one was spiked before extraction. The recovery was determined by comparing both areas obtained.

Calibrations curves were obtained by spiking aliquots of 1 mL liquid Czapek medium with standard solutions of _raa_-Prop and _rac_-4-OH-Prop to obtain enantiomer concentrations in the range of 0.10-10.0 mg/mL and 0.25-10.0 mg/mL, respectively. The I.S. was used in the concentration of 100 mg/mL. Enantiomer/I.S. peak area ratios were plotted against the drug concentrations to obtain the respective calibration graph. The data were then subjected to regression analysis by the least-squares method to calculate the calibration equation and correlation coefficient (_r_).

The limit of quantification of the method, defined as the lowest enantiomer concentration that could be determined with accuracy and precision below 20% over six analytical runs, was obtained using liquid Czapek medium samples (1 mL, \(n\) = 6) spiked at concentrations of 0.1 mg/mL of each Prop enantiomer and at concentrations of 0.25 mg/mL of each 4-OH-Prop enantiomer.

The precision and accuracy of the method were evaluated by within-day (_n_ = 6) and between-day (_n_ = 3) assays using liquid Czapek medium samples spiked with Prop and 4-OH-Prop at the concentrations of 1.0, 2.5 and 5.0 mg/mL of each enantiomer. Precision and accuracy results obtained were expressed in terms of relative standard deviation (RSD, %) and relative error (_E_, %).

The stability test of Prop and 4-OH-Prop was evaluated by studying the influence of freeze (-20 degC) and thaw (22+-C) cycles, short-term room temperature (24 h on the bench-top) and 48 h stored at -20 degC. These periods corresponds to the maximum time that the samples were kept on the bench-top or frozen, respectively. Six replicates (_n_ = 6) of spiked liquid Czapek medium at the low (1.0 mg/mL) and high concentration (5.0 mg/mL) were prepared to perform the stability test. The peak areas obtained from the stability tests were compared to the peak areas obtained with freshly prepared samples. One-way ANOVA test was applied, with the level of significance set at _p_-value <= 0.05.

The selectivity of the method was evaluated by analyzing sterile medium, sterile medium added of \(N\),_N_-dimethyl-formamide and endophytic fungal mycelium under the conditions previously established.

### 2.5 Endophytic fungi isolation and maintenance

The endophytic fungi used in the present study were previously isolated from the plants _Tithonia diversifolia, Viguiera robusta_ and _V. arenaria_ (Asteraceae). An initial screening of five strains was performed to evaluate if they were able to produce the 4-OH-Prop metabolite. The selected strains were _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2) isolated from _T. diversifolia, Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1) isolated from _V. arenaria, Penicillin crustosum_ (VR4), _Chaetomium globosum_ (VR10) and _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12) isolated from _V. robusta_. All the fungi studied were isolated and identified by rDNA sequences as previously described [37, 38]. The fungi have been maintained as agar plugs in sterile water, in silica gel (six to 12 mesh, grade 40, desiccant activated) at 10 degC, and on potato dextrose agar slants and stored at 4 degC. The strains have been deposited in the Academic Laboratory of Industrial Enzimology of Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirao Preto (University de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil).

### 2.6 Prop enantioselective biotransformation

Three discs of 0.5 cm of diameter containing the fungal mycelia were aseptically transferred to 9.0 cm diameter Petri dishes containing potato dextrose agar and allowed to grow for 7 days at 25 degC. Three uniform discs of 0.5 cm mycelial diameter of each endophytic fungus studied were cut with a transfer tube (Fischer Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and then inoculated in 50 mL Falcon tubes containing 10 mL of pre-fermentative medium (10.0 g malt extract, 10.0 g dextrose, 5.0 g triptone and 3.0 g yeast extract and distilled water to 1 L and pH adjusted to 6.2 +- 0.2 with a solution of 0.5 mol/L HCl), used for the growth of the microorganism. After three days the mycelium was completely transferred to 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 100 mL of modified

## Page 4

Czapek medium (25.0 g sucrose, 2.0 g NaNO3, 1.0 g KH2PO4, 0.5 g MgSO4*7H2O, 0.5 g KCl, 0.01 g FeSO4*7H2O, and distilled water to 1.0 L pH adjusted to 5.0 with a solution of 1.0 mol/L HCl). _rac_-Prop was added at this point using a stock solution in _N,N_-dimethylformamide that was filter-sterilized with a disposable 0.22 mm membrane filter Millipore (Sao Paulo, Brazil) and whose exact concentration was determined using the CE method. Quantification was necessary due to drug loss by adsorption onto the filter matrix.

The cultures were incubated for 72 h at 30degC with shaking at 120 rpm in the darkness. Aliquots were filtered through a Millipore membrane filter (0.45 mm) Millipore and then 1 mL of filtrate was submitted to extraction procedure and analyzed by the method described in this paper. Control tubes consisted of culture broth without Prop and fungi, sterile medium with _N,N_-dimethylformamide, sterile medium with _N,N_-dimethylformamide and Prop, sterile medium with _N,N_-dimethylformamide and endo-phytic fungal mycelium (each endophytic fungus studied).

## 3 Results and discussion

### 3.1 Method development and validation

Box-Behnken design was previously applied in the optimization of the simultaneous resolution of Prop and 4-OH-Prop, using a single chiral selector. The migration order was also previously established [36]. The enantioseparation was performed using an uncoated fused-silica capillary, 4% w/v CM-b-CD in 25 mmol/L TEA/H3PO4 buffer at pH 9 as running electrolyte and 17 kV of voltage. UV detection was carried out at 208 nm. The other conditions employed were hydrodynamic injections at a pressure of 50 mbar for 20 s and capillary temperature at 25degC.

The pairs of enantiomers and L.S. were well separated under the electrophoretic conditions employed, with Acet (I.S.) migrating at 12.6 min, (-)-(S)-4-OH-Prop at 13.3 min, (+)-(R)-4-OH-Prop at 13.7 min, (-)-(S)-Prop at 14.5 min and (+)-(R)-Prop at 14.9 min. Figure 2 shows the electro-pherograms of blank liquid Czapek medium (Fig. 2A) and liquid Czapek medium control spiked with Prop, 4-OH-Prop enantiomers and I.S. (Fig. 2B).

Various solvents or mixture of solvents at different compositions were evaluated to extract the Prop and its metabolite from liquid Czapek medium employing LLE and the selected one was diethyl ether: ethyl acetate (1:1 v/v). Recoveries of (-)-(S)-4-OH-Prop and (+)-(R)-4-OH-Prop were approximately 67 and 68%, respectively. The recoveries for (-)-(S)-Prop and (+)-(R)-Prop were higher with values approximately of 87% for both enantiomers. The RSD for the enantiomers of both analytes were lower than 15%. Results are summarized in Table 1.

Response ratio of peak areas between the corresponding enantiomer and the I.S. _versus_ theoretical enantiomer concentrations was fitted by a least-square linear regression. The calibration curves were linear over the concentration range of 0.25-10.0 mg/mL for 4-OH-Prop enantiomers and

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c} Concentration (μg/mL) & (−1-(S)-4-OHPROP & (+)-(R)-4-OHPROP & (−)-(S)-PROP & (+)-(R)-PROP \\ Recoverya [\%] (\%) & RSDb [\%] (\%) & Recoverya [\%] (\%) & RSDb [\%] (\%) & Recoverya [\%] (\%) & RSDb [\%] (\%) \\
1.00 & 69.88 & 8.19 & 68.67 & 8.58 & 84.41 & 2.60 & 85.74

## Page 5



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c c} \hline \hline Nominal concentration (μg/mL) & (−)-(S)-4-OHPROP & (+)-(\(\beta\))-4-OHPROP & (−)-(S)-PROP & (+)-(\(\beta\))-PROP \\ \hline _p_-Value & RSD(b) (\%) & _p_-value & RSD(b) (\%) & _p_-Value & RSD(b) (\%) & _p_-Value & RSD(b) (\%) \\ _24 h room temperature_a1 & & & & & & & & & \\
1.00 & 0.92 & 8.74 & 0.91 & 8.37 & 0.92 & 9.41 & 0.93 & 10.63 \\
5.00 & 0.49 & 8.75 & 0.91 & 10.95 & 0.95 & 14.04 & 0.95 & 14.29 \\ _Freeze–thaw cycles_a1 & & & & & & & & & \\
1.00 & 0.09 & 8.60 & 0.96 & 5.90 & 0.53 & 11.52 & 0.76 & 11.27 \\
5.00 & 0.31 & 11.19 & 0.21 & 11.00 & 0.86 & 8.77 & 0.99 & 5.13 \\ _48 h freeze_a1 & & & & & & & & & \\
1.00 & 0.36 & 8.04 & 0.55 &

## Page 6

0.10-10.0 mg/mL for Prop enantiomers. The correlation coefficients for all analytes were (_n_) >= 0.995 (Table 2).

The lowest concentrations quantified by the validated method are presented in Table 2. The RSD (%) and \(E\) (%) were lower than 15%.

Precision of a quantitative method is the degree of agreement among individual test results when the procedure is applied repeatedly to multiple samplings. It is measured by injecting repeatedly a ready-made sample pool and expressed as RSD (%) of the results. In addition, the accuracy of the method is defined as the degree of agreement of test results generated by the method to the true value. Within-day (_n_ = 6) and between-day (_n_ = 3) precision and accuracy presented RSD (%) and \(E\) (%) lower than 15%. These results are shown in Table 3.

To perform the stability test, spiked liquid Czapek medium were prepared in six replicates (_n_ = 6) at the low (1.00 mg/mL) and high concentration (5.00 mg/mL). These samples were analyzed freshly, after 24 h at room temperature (22 +- 2degC), after 48 h frozen at -20degC or after freeze/thaw cycles. As can be seen from the values, there were no statistically significant loss since all _p_-values were > 0.05 (one-way ANOVA, NS). Stability data are summarized in Table 4. The stability of Prop under the biotransformation conditions was evaluated by the analysis of a control tube consisting of sterile medium with \(N\),N-dimethylformamide and Prop. No degradation of Prop could be observed up to 72 h of incubation.

All studied fungi did not produce any secondary metabolites that presented retention times close to those of Prop and 4-OH-Prop enantiomers (Fig. 3).

### 2. Enantioselective biotransformation of Prop by endophytic fungi

In human liver microsomes, the ring hydroxylation of Prop is mediated by CYP2D6, whereas desisopropylation is mediated mainly by CYP1A2 and to a lesser extent by CYP2D6 [39]. Of these metabolites, the ring-hydroxylated products are of particular importance. 4-OH-Prop has been demonstrated to be equipotent to Prop as a b-receptor antagonist [40] and is believed to contribute to the bioactivity of Prop in humans [41].

The enantiomers of 4-OH-Prop, which were not present in the controls, were detected in the extracts of endophytic fungi culture medium obtained 72 h after the addition of Prop. Identification of Prop and 4-OH-Prop enantiomers was made by comparison of CE migration times and diode array detection spectra with those of authentic reference compounds. The screening of five strains of endophytic fungi _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2), _G. cingulata_ (VA1), _P. crustosum_ (VR4), _C. globosum_ (VR10) and _A. fumigatus_ (VR12) were performed and all of them could biotransform Prop to

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} Endophytic fungia1 & Time (h) & Concentration (μg/mL) \\  & & (—)-(S)-4-OH-Propb & (+)-(\(\beta\))-4-OH-Propb & (−)-(S)-Propb & (+)-(\(\beta\))-Propb \\ _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2) & 0 & – & – & 3.56 (100.0\%) & 3.34 (100.0\%) \\ _Glomerella cingulate_ (VA1) & 72 & 1.60 (44.9\%) & 0.41 (12.8\%) & 1.96 (55.1\%) & 1.89 (56.6\%) \\ _Glomerella cingulate_ (VA1) & 0 & – & – & 3.66 (100.0\%) & 3.60 (100.0\%) \\ _T2_ & 72 & 1.75 (47.8\%) & 0.00 (0.0\%) & 1.87 (51.1\%) & 1.84 (51.1\%) \\ _Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4) & 0 & – & – & 3.72 (100.0\%) & 3.61 (100.0\%) \\ _T2_ & 1.62 (43.5\%) & 0.90 (24.9\%) & 1.70 (45.7\%) & 1.47 (40.7\%) \\ _Chaetomium globosum_ (VR10) & 0 & – & – & 3.66 (100.0\%) & 3.30 (100.0\%) \\ _72_ & 1.65 (45.1\%) & 0.91 (27.6\%) & 1.65 (45.1\%) & 1.55 (47.0\%) \\ _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12) & 0 & – & – & 3.72 (100.0\%) & 3.37 (100.0\%) \\ _72_ & 1.33 (35.8\%) & 1.00 (29.7\%) & 1.64 (44.1\%) & 1.63 (48.4\%) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 5. Enantioselective biotransformation of Prop by endophytic fungi

Figure 3. Electrophograms of liquid Czapek medium incubated with the endophytic fungi showing that all fungi studied did not produce any secondary metabolites. (A) _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2), (B) _Glomerella cingulate_ (VA1), (C) _Penicillium crustosum_ (VR4), (D) _Chaetomium globosum_ (VR10) and (E) _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12). See Fig. 2 for electrophoretic conditions.



## Page 7

some extent. The concentrations of analytes were calculated considering the calibration curves for each enantiomer studied.

The cultures were incubated for 72 h and the concentrations (and percentage of formation) of 4-OH-Prop enantiomers for each endophytic fungus studied are presented in Table 5. As can be seen the fungus _G. cingulata_ (VA1) biotransformed 47.8% of (-)-(S)-Prop to (-)-(S)-4-OH-Prop, the more active metabolite with no formation of (+)-(R)-4-OH-Prop metabolite in 72 h of incubation. Figure 4 shows the electropherograms of all endophytic fungi studied after 72 h of incubation. In general, (-)-(S)-4-OH-Prop was the metabolite preferentially formed by all endophytic fungi studied. Therefore, the production of a specific metabolite Prop in enantiomeric pure form could be assigned by selecting the appropriate fungus.

## 4 Concluding remarks

A simple and suitable CE method was validated for the enantioselective determination of Prop and 4-OH-Prop simultaneously in liquid Czapek medium. All parameters evaluated are in accordance with the confidence criteria established in the literature. This method was successfully employed to study the Prop biotransformation by endophytic fungi, proving that these microorganisms are a promising source of microorganisms that could be used to obtain 4-OH-Prop active metabolite in enantiomerically pure form. The results reported here could be further used to obtain specific metabolites in higher quantities for pharmacodynamic, toxicological or other studies.

###### Acknowledgements.

_The authors are grateful to the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP). Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), and to Coordenacao de Apefeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) for financial support and for the granting of research fellowships._ The authors have declared no conflict of interest._

## References

* [1] Barrett, A. M., Cullum, V. A., _Br. J. Pharmacol._ 1968, _34_, 43-55.
* [2] Walle, T., _Drug Metab. Dispos._ 1985, _13_, 279-282.
* [3] Fitzgerald, D. J., O'Donnell, S. R., _Br. J. Pharmacol._ 1971, _43_, 222-235.
* [4] Wilson, B. K., Thompson, J. A., _Drug Metab. Dispos._ 1984, _12_, 161-164.
* [5] Walle, T., Walle, U. K., Olanoff, L. S., _Drug Metab. Dispos._ 1985, _13_, 204-209.
* [6] Hayes, A., Cooper, R. G., _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther._ 1971, _176_, 302-311.
* [7] Nelson, W. L., Bartels, M. J., _Drug Metab. Dispos._ 1984, _12_, 345-352.
* [8] Talast, R. E., Nelson, W. L., _Drug Metab. Dispos._ 1988, _16_, 207-211.
* [9] Abouwashed, E. A., Clark, A. M., Hufford, C. D., _Curr. Med. Chem._ 1999, \(6\), 359-374.
* [10] Cha, C., Doergo, D. R., Cerniglia, C. E., _Appl. Environ. Microbiol._ 2001, _67_, 4358-4360.
* [11] Duhart, B. T., Zhang, D., Deck, J., Freeman, J. P., Cerniglia, C. E., _Xenobiotica_ 1999, _29_, 733-746.
* [12] Moody, J. D., Zhang, D., Heinze, T. M., Cerniglia, C. E., _Appl. Environ. Microbiol._ 2000, _66_, 3646-3649.
* [13] Zhang, D., Freeman, J. P., Sutherland, J. B., Walker, A. E., Yang, Y., Cerniglia, C. E., _Appl. Environ. Microbiol._ 1996, _62_, 798-803.
* [14] Strobel, G., Daisy, B., Castillo, U., Harper, J., _J. Nat. Prod._ 2004, _67_, 257-268.
* [15] Yang, L., Ning, Z. S., Shi, C. Z., Chang, Z. Y., Huan, L. Y., _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 2004, _52_, 1940-1944.
* [16] Zikmundova, M., Drandarov, K., Bigler, L., Hesse, M., Werner, C., _Appl. Environ. Microbiol._ 2002, _68_, 4863-4870.
* [17] Shibuya, H., Kitamura, C., Maehara, S., Nagahata, M., Winarno, H., Simanjuntak, P., Kim, H-S., Wataya, Y., Ohashi, K., _Chem. Pharm. Bull._ 2003, _51_, 71-74.
* [18] Shibuya, H., Agusta, A., Ohashi, K., Maehara, S., Simanjuntak, P., _Chem. Pharm. Bull._ 2005, _53_, 866-867.
* [19] Agusta, A., Maehara, S., Ohasshi, K., Simanjuntak, P., Shibuta, H., _Chem. Pharm. Bull._ 2005, _53_, 1565-1569.
* [20] Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., _J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal._ 2008, _46_, 945-952.
* [21] Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., _Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol._ 2007, _77_, 669-674.

Figure 4: Electropherograms of all endophytic fungi studied after 72 h of incubation. **(1)** Acet, **(2)** (–)-(S)-4-OH-Prop, **(3)** (+)-(R)-4-OH-Prop, **(4)** (–)-(S)-Prop, **(5)** (+)-(R)-Prop, **Phomopsis** sp. **(T02)**, _G glomerella cingulata_ **(VA1)**, _Penicillinum crustosum_ **(VR4)**, _Chaeontrium globosum_ **(VR10)** and _Asppergillus fumigatus_ **(VR12)**. See Fig. 2 for electrophoretic conditions.



## Page 8

* [22] Verza, M., Arakawa, N. S., Lopes, N. P., Kato, M. J., Pupo, M. T., Said, S., Carvalho, I., _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._ 2009, _20_, 195-200.
* [23] Holland, H. L., _Stereoselective Hydroxylation Reaction_, Marcel Dekker, New York 2000.
* [24] Holland, H. L., Weber, H. K., _Curr. Opin. Biotechnol._ 2000, _11_, 547-553.
* [25] Pupo, M. T., Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Bonato, P. S., in: Saiki R., Bezbaruah, R. L., Bora, T. Ch. (Eds), _Microfluid Biotechnology_, New India Publishing Agency, New Delhi, India 2008, pp. 47-66.
* [26] Borges, K. B., Borges, W. S., Duran-Patron, R., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., _Collado, I.G. Tetrah. Asym._ 2009, _20_, 385-397.
* [27] Davis, P. J., _Dev. Ind. Microbiol._ 1988, _29_, 197-219.
* [28] Davis, P. J., Guenthner, L. E., _Xenobiotica_ 1985, _15_, 845-857.
* [29] Aturki, Z., Fanali, S., _J. Chromatogr. A_, 1994, _680_, 137-146.
* [30] Schmitt, T., Engelhardt, H., _J. Chromatogr. A_ 1995, _697_, 561-570.
* [31] Fillet, M., Bechet, I., Chiap, P., Hubert, Ph., _J. Chromatogr. A_, 1995, _717_, 203-209.
* [32] Assi, K. A., Clark, B. J., Altria, K. D., _Electrophoresis_ 1999, _20_, 2723-2725.
* [33] Vargas, M. G., Heyden, Y. V., Matfouh, M., Massart, D. L., _J. Chromatogr. A_ 1999, _855_, 681-693.
* [34] Maruszak, W., Trojanowicza, M., Margasinskaa, M., Engelhardt, H., _J. Chromatogr. A_ 2001, _926_, 327-336.
* [35] Pak, C., Marriott, P. J., Carpenter, P. D., Amiet, R. G., _J. High Resol. Chromatogr._ 1998, _21_, 640-644.
* [36] Borges, K. B., de Freitas, L. A., Pupo, M. T., Bonato, P. S., _Electrophoresis_, 2009, _30_, 2874-2881.
* [37] Momenso, L. S., Kawano, C. Y., Ribeiro, P. H., Nomizo, A., Goldman, G. H., Pupo, M. T., _Quim. Nova_ 2008, _31_, 1680-1685.
* [38] Guimaraes, D. O., Borges, W. S., Kawano, C. Y., Ribeiro, P. H., Goldman, G. H., Nomizo, A., Thiemann, O. H. _et al._, _FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol._ 2008, _52_, 134-144.
* [39] Masubuchi, Y., Hosokawa, S., Horie, T., Suzuki, T., Ohmori, S., Kitada, M., Narimatsu, S., _Drug Metab. Dispos._ 1994, _22_, 909-915.
* [40] Fitzgerald, J. D., O'Donnell, S. R., _Br. J. Pharmacol._ 1971, _43_, 222-235.
* [41] Coltart, D. J., Shand, D. G., _Br. Med. J._ 1970, \(3\), 731-734.



