# 10.1590@S0100-46702006000400008.pdf

## Page 1

Isolation of lignans glycosides from _Alibertia sessilis_ (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) by preparative high-performance liquid chromatography

V. C. da Silva, G. H. Silvab, V. da S. Bolzani, M. N. Lopes

# Abstract

Enantiomeric aglycone lignans contained in a mixture were separated from a fraction of the extract of the stems of _Alibertia sessilis_ (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) by preparative high-performance liquid chromatography. An efficient and fast separation can be achieved with methanol-water (30:70, v/v). Their structures were identified as (+)-lyoniresinol 3 -_O-_ -glucopyranoside and (-)-lyoniresinol 3 -_O-_ -glucopyranoside, being reported for the first time in Rubiaceae.

Rubiaceae; _Alibertia sessilis_; enantiomeric aglycone lignans; HPLC.

## Introduction

Rubiaceae is widely distributed in Brazilian main ecosystems (Amazon, Cerrado and Atlantic Forest). This family is well known due to economic and therapeutic importance of these species, specially _Coffea arabica_ and _Cinchona ledgeriana_ [1-2]. Reported chemical constituents of Rubiaceae revealed a great diversity of secondary metabolites such as iridoids, alkaloids, anthraquinones, flavonoids, phenolics derivatives, triterpenes and diterpenes [1].

Few chemical studies of _Alibertia_ have been reported resulting in the isolation of several triterpenes [2-4], iridoids [5], flavonoids [6] and caffeic acid esters [2].

_Alibertia sessilis_ (Vell.) K. Schum., popularly known as "marmelada-de-cachorro", is distributed in the states of Ceara, Mato Grosso, Goias and Minas Gerais. The plant possesses fruits with succulent pulp, black when ripe, which are consumed by birds in general [7].

From the stems of _A. sessilis_ we report the isolation of a mixture of lignan glycosides. The separation of (+)-lyoniresinol 3 -_O-_ -glucopyranoside (**1**) and (-)-lyoniresinol 3 -_O-_ -glucopyranoside (**2**) by conventional methods such as silica gel and RP18 low pressure column chromatography was unsuccessful. However, it was quite easy and fast to purify each compound by preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Reversed-phase HPLC is commonly used for the separation of compounds present in complex mixtures of plant extracts [8-9].

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis was used to identify the compounds. Compound **1** exhibit antioxidant [10] and antitumor-mor-promoting activities [11]. These compounds, whose chemical structures are given in Figure 1, are being reported for the first time in Rubiaceae.



## Page 2



## Experimental details

### Plant material

_Alibertia sessilis_ (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) was collected in the Estacao Ecologica Experimental de Mogi-Guacu, Sao Paulo State, Brazil in November 2003. A voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbario do Instituto Botanico da Secretaria do Meio Ambiente de Sao Paulo (no SP 370.914).

### Apparatus

The high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Shimadzu, Japan) equipment used was a CLASS-VP Ver.5.41 system comprised a Shimadzu SPD10Avp UV detector, a Shimadzu LC-8ATvp Multisolvent Delivery System, a Shimadzu SCL-10Avp controller, a Shimadzu LC pump, a Degasser Shimadzu DGU-14A and a CLASS-VP Ver.5.41 workstation (Shimadzu, Japan). HPLC-grade methanol was purchased from J.T. Baker (Baker-Mallinckrodt, Phillipsburg, NJ, USA). HPLC-grade water (18 M\(\overline{\text{\omega}}\)m) was obtained using a Millipore Milli-Q purification system (Millipore Co., Bedford, MA, USA).

### Extraction, fractionation and preparation of sample

Dried and powered stems (50.0 g) of _A. sessilis_ were successively extracted with ethanol at room temperature. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure yielding 3.7 g of crude extract. This extract was dissolved in methanol-water (80:20, v/v) and partitioned with hexane, ethyl acetate and _n_-butanol to yield 0.5 g of hexane extract, 1.4 g of ethyl acetate extract and 1.3 g of _n_-butanol extract after evaporated to dryness under reduced pressure.

The ethyl acetate extract was submitted to column chromatography using Sephadex LH-20. The column was eluted with methanol, to give 15 fractions reunited after thin layer chromatography (TLC) analysis. Fractions 2-3 (146.4 mg) were subjected to chromatography on a RP18 column using a water-methanol gradient system affording iridoid geniposidic acid (11.8 mg), a derivative fenolic glycoside (6.7 mg) not yet identified and the mixture of lignans glycosides (36.6 mg).

### Separation procedure

The separation of lignans was performed using a Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (250 x 21.20 mm I.D. x 10 mm, Torrance, CA, USA) in a Rheodyne 7125 sample injector with a 2.0 mL sample loop (Rheodyne, Cotati, CA, USA). The mobile phase composed of methanol-water (30:70, v/v, isocratic system) was eluted using a flow-rate of 10.0 mL min-1, the injection volume was 1.0 mL. Pure lignans were examined by HPLC on an analytical column. The analysis was performed with a Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (250 x 4.6 mm I.D. x 5 mm, Torrance, CA, USA) in a Rheodyne 7125 sample injector with a 20 mL sample loop (Rheodyne, Cotati, CA, USA). The mobile phase composed of methanol-water (30:70, v/v, isocratic system) was eluted at a flow-rate of 1.0 mL min-1, the injection volume was 20 mL. For both preparative and analytical HPLC, the detector was set as 238 nm.

### Structural identification of the compounds

The NMR spectra in CD3OD of all compounds were obtained using a Varian, INOVA 500 spectrometer (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA), operating at 500 MHz for 1H and 125 MHz for 13C, two-dimensional technique such as gCOSY (gradient chemical shift correlation spectroscopy), _g_HMQC (gradient heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence) and _g_HMBC (gradient heteronuclear

Figure 1: Lignans glucosides isolated from the stems of _Alibertia sessilis_.



## Page 3

multiple bond connectivity) were used to fully elucidate the structure of compounds. Chemical shifts were given in (ppm) using tetramethylsilane (TMS) as internal standard.

(+)-lyoniresinol 3 -_O_- -glucopyranoside (6.7 mg, **1**): ESI-MS (negative): m/z 581.2303 [M - H]*. 1H NMR (CD3OD, 500 MHz): 1.61 (1H, \(m\), H-2), 1.99 (1H, \(m\), H-3), 2.51 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 12 and 15 Hz, H-1) and 2.61 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 5 and 15 Hz, H-1), 3.11-3.15 (2H, \(m\), H-2" and H-3"), 3.18 (1H, \(m\), H-4"), 3.24-3.27 (1H, \(m\), H-5"), 3.25 (3H, s, CH3O-5), 3.35 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 4 and 10 Hz, H-3a), 3.43 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 6.5 and 11 Hz, H-2a), 3.55 (2H, \(m\), H-2a and H-6"), 3.64 (6H, s, CH3O-3' and CH3O-5'), 3.73 (1H, \(m\), H-6"), 3.76 (3H, s, CH3O-7), 3.78 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 5.5 and 10 Hz, H-3a), 4.18 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, H-1"), 4.32 (1H, \(d\), J = 5.5 Hz, H-4), 6.32 (2H, \(s\), H-2' and H-6'), 6.48 (1H, \(s\), H-8). 13C NMR (CD3OD, 125 MHz): 33.8 (C-1), 40.6 (C-2), 42.7 (C-4), 46.7 (C-3), 56.6 (CH3O-7), 56.9 (CH3O-3' and CH3O-5'), 60.2 (CH3O-5), 62.8 (C-6"), 66.2 (C-2a), 71.5 (C-3a), 71.7 (C-4"),

## Page 4

After this separation, each fraction was collected, weighed and analysed by 1H- and 13C-NMR and HPLC (fig. 3). The relative configurations at C-2, C-3 and C-4 were estabilished by comparison with literature data [12]. The coupling constants (_J_ = 7.5 Hz) of the anomeric proton signal of the glucosyl moiety demonstrated that sugar has b-

\[\begin{equation*}\mathrm{V.~{}C.~{}da~{}Silva,~{}G.~{}H.~{}Silva,~{}V.~{}da~{}S.~{} Bolzani,~{}M.~{}N.~{}Lopes.~{}Isolamento de lignanas glicosiladas de _Alibertia sessilis_ (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) por cromatografia liquida de alta eficiencia preparativa. \[\mathrm{He}\mathrm{S}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{c}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{c}\mathrm{e}\

