# 10.1590@S0100-40422007000500009.pdf

## Page 1



# Clerodane Diterpenes from LEAVES OF _Casearia sylvestris_ SWARTZ

Andre G. dos Santos, Carla C. Perez, Aristeu G. Tinnis, Vanderlan da S. Bolzani and Alberto J. Cavalheiro*

Instituto de Quimica de Araraquara, Universidade Estadual Paulista "Julio de Mesquita Filho", R. Francisco Degni, s/n, 14800-900 Araraquara - SP, Brasil

###### Abstract

Ethanolic extracts of the leaves of _Casearia sylvestris_ yielded a novel clerodane diterpene, 15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one, together with the known diterpene (-)-hardwicklic acid, reported for the first time from this species, and caesearins B and G, previously isolated from _C. sylvestris_. The structures of all four compounds were determined by spectrometric analysis. The new clerodane diterpene and (-)-hardwicklic acid contain structural features that are completely different from the highly oxygenated caesearins and caesearvstris isolated from _C. sylvestris_.

_Casearia sylvestris_; clerodane diterpene; 15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one.

## Introduction

_Casearia sylvestris_ Swartz (Flacourtiaceae) is a tree that is widely distributed within various ecosystems of South America, such as the Cerrado and the Atlantic and Amazon forests1. In the popular medicine of Brazil, the use of the plant1 is correlated with its pharmacological properties including anti-inflammatory2, anti-obidiana3 and anti-ulcer1,4 activities. A number of phytochemical investigations of species of _Casearia_3-6 have revealed the occurrence within the genus of oxygenated tricyclic clerodane diterpenes exhibiting a _cis_ configuration between rings A and B and a characteristic diacetal system in ring C at positions C-18 and C-19. Several compounds of this type have been isolated from _C. sylvestris_, specifically caesearins and caesearvestrins, and they exhibited cytotoxic activity5,6.

Footnote 1: e-mail: albjcava@iq.unesp.br

This paper describes the isolation and structure elucidation of a novel clerodane diterpene, 15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one (**1**), from the leaves of _C. sylvestris_, together with (-)-hardiwicklic acid (**2**), reported for the first time from this species. In addition, caesarin B (**3**) and G (**4**) were isolated, diterpenes that have been previously detected in the species7,8. The structures of compounds **1-4** (Figure 1) were deduced on the basis of their spectral data and comparison with appropriate values reported in the literature.

## Results and Discussion

Ethanol extract of the leaves of _C. sylvestris_ was submitted to chromatographic fractionation and yielded compounds **1-4**. In the positive-ion mode, the HRTOF-ESIIMS of **1** exhibited an [M+Na]+ ion at _miz_ 329.2481 that was compatible with a molecular formula of C5-H3O2. Analysis of the PND and DEPT 135deg 1C-NMR spectra of **1** revealed twenty signals similar to those of the clerodane diterpene skeleton6-11, being five of them attributed to methyl groups: C-16 (d 19.7), C-17 (d 16.0), C-18 (d 20.5), C-19 (d 32.2), C-20 (d 19.3). The IR and UV absorptions at 1653 cm-1 and at 218 nm (lmax) and the NMR signals at d 199.3 (C-2), 128.6 (C-3), 168.5 (C-4) and 5.84 _br s_ (H-3) indicated the presence of an a,b-unsaturated ketone group. In addition, the IR absorption at 3448 cm-1 and the NMR signals observed at d 61.2 (C-15) and 3.68 \(m\) (H-15) are characteristic of a hydroxymethine group. The 1H NMR and 1C assignments (Table 1) together with the results of HMQC, COSY and HMQC (Figure 2) experiments led to structure of compound **1**. The relative configuration assignment at C-5, C-8, C-9 and C-10 was firstly proposed based on comparison of chemical shifts of methyl groups C-17, C-19 and C-20 of compound **1** with literature data, as follow. The _cis_ stereochemistry at the junction of rings A and B in compound **1** could be deduced from the chemical shift of C-19 (d 32.2) when compared with C-19 chemical shifts of _cis_-clerodane diterpenes, for example florididic acid2 and 13-hydroxy-_cis_-_ent_-clerodona-3,14-diene1(d 83.36 and 33.0, respectively). In contrast, the _trans_-clerodane diterpenes 2-oxokolavenic acid10 and eremone11 presented chemical shifts for this methyl carbon at d 8 19.5 and 18.8, respectively. In clerodane diterpenes with a _cis_ configuration between methyl groups C-17 and C-20, such as hautriwaic acid11, 2-oxokolavenic acid10 and florididic acid12, the chemical shift of C-20 was observed at approximately d 18.0, whilst clerodane diterpenes with a _trans_ configuration between these methyl groups, as in the caesearins and caesearvstris5,6, show chemical shift for C-20 at approximately d 26.0. So, the chemical shifts attributed to C-20 in compound **1** (19.3) is indicative of a _cis_

Figure 1: Structures of 15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one (**1**), (-)-hardiwicklic acid (**2**), caesarin B (**3**) and caesarin G (**4**): AcO-acetate, BuO-butanoate

## Page 2

relationship between these methyl groups. These propositions were confirmed by the NOE enhancements arising from the dipolar interactions between H-19 (1.22 _s_) and H-10 (1.87 _br_ d; 6.5 Hz) and between H-17 (0.77 \(d\); 7.0 Hz) and H-20 (0.57 _s_). In addition, correlations observed in the NOE experiments (Figure 3) between H-1a(d (d 2.71) and H-19 and between H-1b and H-20, revealed the _trans_ relationship between C-17/C-20 and C-19 methyl groups. A diastereomer of compound **1** was previously isolated from _Cistus populifolia_ L. (Cistaceae)14, but the 10C NMR data of this compound were not included in the article to a complete comparison.

In the positive-ion mode, the HRTOF-ESIMS of compound **2** exhibited an [M+H]+ ion at _m_/_z_ 317.2117, compatible with a molecular formula of C30H2O3, which was confirmed by the finding of [M+Na]+ ion at _m_/_z_ 339.1963. Analysis of the PND 10C-NMR spectra revealed twenty signals similar to those of the clerodane diiterpene skeleton6-11 and showed the presence of three methyl groups: C-17 (d 16.0), C-19 (d 20.6) and C-20 (d 18.3). IR absorptions presented at 3397 cm-1 and 1684 cm-1, UV absorption (lmax) at 210 nm and the signals observed in the 13C-NMR spectra at d 172.5 (C-18), 140.2 (C-3) and 141.5 (C-4) were indicative of an a,b-unsaturated carboxylic group. In addition, the 1H and 13C NMR spectra showed signals that could be ascribed to a b-mono-substituted furan ring (C-13, C-14, C-15 and C-16) in the lateral chain of the diterpene. The complete attribution of the NMR signals (**table 1**) was based on the correlations observed in the HMQC, HMBC and COSY contour plots and this attribution is in agreement with the NMR data from literature for hardiwickic acid15. The negative value of [d]D25 confirmed the absolute configuration as (-)-hardiwickic acid16. Compound **2** or its enantiomer were previously isolated from other species of different families, as _Copajfera duckc_, _C. guianensis_, _Croton californicus_, _C. aromatics_, _Hardwickia pinnata_, _Salvia dvinorum_ and _Sindora sumatrana_51,7 and now we found it for the first time in a _Casera_ species.

The 1H- and 13C-NMR data of **3** (C3,H4O3) and **4** (C3,H4O3) showed signals identical of the compounds previously reported in _C. sylvestris_53,38, casearins B and G, respectively.

## EXPERIMENTAL

### General

Column chromatography (CC) and solid phase extraction (SPE) were performed over activated charcoal (Synth), silica gel G (40-63 mm; Merck) or RP-C18 (40-63 mm; Merck) and the resulting fractions were monitored by TLC, HPLC-UV and 1H-NMR. Comparative TLC was carried out on silica gel G60 layers (0.25 mm thickness; Merck). HPLC-UV analyses were conducted using a Supelcosil LC-18 column (250 x 4.6 mm; i.d. 5 mm) connected to a Varian chromatographic system consisting of a ProStar 240 solvent delivery module, a ProStar 330 photodiode array detector, a ProStar 410 autosampler and a Star chromatography workstation. For preparative HPLC, a Supelcosil PLC-18 column (250 x 21.2 mm; i.d. 12 mm) was coupled to a Varian system consisting of Dynamax model Sd-1 solvent delivery system and a ProStar 320 detector with Star integrator software.

IR spectra (KBr disc) were obtained using a Perkin Elmer FTIR 1600 spectrometer, UV spectra were measured on a Cary 13E instrument and a Perkin Elmer 341 polarimeter was employed to determine optical activities. NMR spectra of **1** and **2** were recorded at 500 and 125 MHz for 1H- and 13C-NMR, respectively, using a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer with CHCl3 as internal standard. The NMR spectra of **3** and **4** were measured at 200 and 50 MHz for 1H- and 13C-NMR, respectively, on a Bruker AC-200 instrument using the same internal standard. Accurate-mass measurements were performed on an ESI-quadrupole-time of flight instrument (UltrOTOFQ, Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA).

### Plant material

Leaves of _Casearia sylvestris_ Swartz (Flacourtiaceae) were collected at the Carlos Botelho State Park (Sao Paulo State, Brazil) and in Aranaquara (Sao Paulo State, Brazil) between August and November 1999. Voucher specimens (AGS13 and AGS45) are deposited at the State Herbarium "Maria Eneida P. Kaufmann" of the Botanic Institute (Sao Paulo State, Brazil).

### Extraction and isolation of 1, 3 and 4

Dried and powdered leaves of _C. sylvestris_ (2.1 kg) were extracted by sonication with EtOH (3 x 6.0 L; 20 min per extraction) and concentrated under reduced pressure to yield 139.0 g of residue. The crude extract was partitioned between MeOH:water (7:3, v/v, 0.8 L) and CHCl2 (1.5 L) and the CH2Cl2 layer separated, dried and concentrated under reduced pressure to yield 71.0 g of a residue that was suspended to SPE over silica gel eluted sequentially with CH2Cl2, CH2Cl2,MeOH (9:1) and MeOH, yielding 8 fractions, SPEfraction 5 (13.5 g) eluted with CH2Cl2,MeOH (9:1) was submitted to CC over silica gel eluted sequentially with hexane:EtOAc (8:2, 6:4 and 4:6), EtOAc, EtOAc:MeOH (9:1) and MeOH, yielding 12 CC-fractions. CC-fraction 8 (1.45 g) eluted with hexane:EtOAc at 4:6 was submitted to RP-CC over octadecyl silane eluted sequentially with MeOH:water (6:4, 8:2 and 9:5:0.5), MeOH and CHCl2,Sub-fraction 3 (120.0 mg) eluted with MeOH:water 8:2 was submitted to preparative RP-HPLC (C-18, 65% MeOH, isocratic mode, flow rate 13.0 mL/min, \(\lambda\) 235 nm) to yield **1** (5.0 mg). Further, CC-fraction 7 (2.4 g) eluted with hexane:EtOAc 6:4 was submitted to preparative RP-HPLC (C-18, 75% MeOH,

Figure 3: Selected correlations observed by NOE difference and NOESY spectroscopy of 15-hydroxy-3-clerodane-2-one (1)

Figure 2: Selected correlations observed in the HMBC spectra of 15-hydroxy-3-clerodane-2-one (1): (H→C)



## Page 3

isocratic mode, flow rate 10.0 mL/min, \(\lambda\) 235 nm), yielding compounds **3** (86.2 mg) and **4** (30.9 mg).

### Extraction and isolation of 2

Dried and powdered leaves of _C. sylvestris_ (2.0 kg) were extracted by maceration under agitation with EtOH (3 x 3.0 L; 2 h per extraction) and concentrated under reduced pressure to yield 190.0 g of residue. The crude extract was partitioned between EtOH/Water (6:4, v/v, 1.5 L) and hexane (1.5 L), and the hexane layer separated, dried and concentrated under reduced pressure to yield 120.2 g of a residue that was subjected to SPE over silica gel:activated charcoal (1:1) eluted sequentially with hexane:EtOAc (7:3 and 3:7) and MeOH. The fraction eluted with hexane/EtOAc 3:7 (28.4 g) was submitted to CC over silica gel eluted sequentially with hexane:EtOAc (7:3, 6:4, 1:1, 4:6 and 3:7) and EtOAc, yielding 24 fractions. Fraction 11 (34.0 mg) eluted with hexane:EtOAc 1:1 was submitted to SPE over RP-C18 eluted with MeOH:water (98:2) to yield **2** (29.0 mg).

#### 15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one (1)

White powder (5.0 mg). [\(\alpha_{\text{d}}\)]20 +42deg (c 0.14; MeOH). UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\) nm (MeOH) 218 (e = 10.5 x 101 cm3 mol-1 cm3). IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}\) cm-1 3448, 2958-2853, 1653, 1037 (KBr). \(\text{H}\)- and \({}^{1}\)C-NMR see Table 1. HRTOF-ESIMS _m/z_ 329.2481 [M+Na]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 329.2451).

#### (-)-Hardiwickic acid (2)

White powder (29.0 mg). [\(\alpha_{\text{d}}\)]25 -35deg (c 1.0; MeOH). UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\) nm (MeOH) 210 (e = 7.2 x 10 cm3 mol-1 cm3). IR \(\nu_{\text{min}}\) cm-1 3397, 2958-2864, 1684, 1640, 1257, 1078 (KBr). \(\text{H}\)- and \({}^{1}\)C-NMR see Table 1. HRTOF-ESIMS _m/z_ 317.2117 [M+H]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 317.2117) and _m/z_ 339.1963 [M+Na]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 164.4 m) [\(\alpha_{\text{d}}\)]25 -35deg (c 1.0; MeOH). UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\) nm (MeOH) 210 (e = 7.2 x 10 cm3 mol-1 cm3). IR \(\nu_{\text{min}}\) cm-1 3397, 2958-2864, 1684, 1640, 1257, 1078 (KBr). \(\text{H}\)- and \({}^{1}\)C-NMR see Table 1. HRTOF-ESIMS _m/z_ 317.2117 [M+H]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 317.2117) and _m/z_ 339.1963 [M+Na]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 164.4 m) [\(\alpha_{\text{d}}\)]25 -35deg (c 1.0; MeOH). UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\) nm (MeOH) 210 (e = 7.2 x 10 cm3 mol-1 cm3). IR \(\nu_{\text{min}}\) cm-1 3397, 2958-2864, 1684, 1640, 1257, 1078 (KBr). \(\text{H}\)- and \({}^{1}\)C-NMR see Table 1. HRTOF-ESIMS _m/z_ 317.2117 [M+H]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 317.2117) and _m/z_ 339.1963 [M+Na]a (caled for C20H3O2Na+, 339.1930).

## Conclusions

The new compound (+)-15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one (1) and (-)-hardwickic acid (2) are the first deterpenes reported in _C. sylvestris_ without the typical highly oxygenated backbone. Casearins and caseaverstrins, previously isolated from this species, have common stereochemical features of a _cis_-clerodane diterpene, notably a _cis_ configuration at the junction of rings A and B and, in addition, _trans_ configuration between the methyl groups at C-17 and C-203-29. However, whilst the newly described (+)-15-hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one (1) is a typical _cis_-clerodane, (-)-hardiwickic acid (2) possesses a _trans_-clerodane configuration. In conclusion, the occurrence of compounds **1**, **2**, **3** and **4** in _C. sylvestris_ reveals the ability of this species in biosynthesize both _cis_ and _trans_-clerodanes as it is common in other plant species as _Adelanthus lindenbergianus_ (Adelhataceae)13 and _Grangea madersapatana_ (Asteraceae)18.

Footnote 18: The authors are grateful to the Fundacao de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) and the Instituto Floresta del Secretaria do Mcio Ambiente de Estado de Sao Paulo for support of the project; Laboratorio de Espectromeria de Massas da Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas da Universidade de de Sao Paulo, campus de Ribeirao Preto for MS determination.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Position & 15-Hydroxy-3-cleroden-2-one (1) & (-)-Hardwickic acid (2) \\ \({}^{1}\)C-NMR a & \({}^{1}\)H-NMR b & \({}^{1}\)C-NMR a & \({}^{1}\)H-NMR b \\ \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) (ppm) & \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) (ppm) \(J\) (Hz) & \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) (ppm) & \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) (ppm) \(J\) (Hz) \\
1 & 35.5 \(t\) & 2.53 \(d\) (19.0) & 17.5 \(t\) & 1.70 \(m\) \\  & 2.71 \(dd\) (19.0, 6.5) & & & \\
2 & 199.3 \(s\) & & & \\
3 & 128.6 \(d\) & 5.84 \(br\) \(s\) & 140.2 \(d\) & 6.82 \(dd\) (4.5, 3.0) \\
4 & 168.5 \(s\

## Page 4

A. G. dos Santos and C. C. Perez thank FAPESP, and A. G. Tininis thanks CAPES, for the provision of respective scholarships.

## References

* (1) Basile, A. C.; Sertie, J. A. A.; Panizza, S.; Oshiro, T. T.; Azzolini, C. A.; _J. Ethuopharmacology_**1990**, _30_, 185; Correa, M. P.; _Dictonidio das Plantas Uteis do Brasil e das Exoticas Cultivadas_, Ministerio da Agricultura/IBDF: Brasilia, 1975; Lorenzi, H.; _Arvoes Brasileiras_, Plantarum: Sao Paulo, 1992.
* (2) Borges, M. H.; Soares A. M.; Rodrigues, V. M.; Andriao-Escarso, S. H.; Diniz, H.; Hamaguchi, A.; Quintero, A.; Lizano, S.; Gutierrez, J. M.; Giglio, J. R.; Homis-Brandebourg, M. I.; _Comp. Biochem. Physiol., Part B: Biochem. Mol. Biol._**2000**, _127_, 21.
* (3) Ruppelt, B. M.; Goncalves, L. C.; Pereira, N. A.; _Revista Brasileira de Farmacia_**1990**, _71_, 57.
* (4) Sertie, J. A. A.; Carvalho, J. C. T.; Panizza, S.; _Pharm. Biol._**2000**, _38_, 112.
* (5) Itokawa, H.; Totsuka, N. Morita, H.; Takeya, K.; Iitaka, Y.; Schenkel, E. P.; Moidome, M.; _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_**1990**, _38_, 3384.
* (6) Khan, M. R.; Gray, A. I.; Sadler, I. H.; Waterman, P. G.; _Pytochemistry_**1990**, _29_, 3591; Gibbons, S.; Gray, A. I.; Waterman, P. G.; _Pytochemistry_**1996**, _41_, 635; Hunter, M. S.; Corley, D. G.; Carron, C. P.; Rowold, E.; Kilpatrick, B. F.; Durley, R. C.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1997**, _60_, 894; Beutler, J. A.; McCall, K. L.; Herbert, K., Herald, D. L.; Pettit, G. R.; Johnson, T.; Shoemaker, R. H.; Boyd, M. R.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2000**, _63_, 657.
* (7) Morita, H.; Nakayama, M.; Kojima, H.; Takeya, K.; Itokawa, H.; Schenkel, E. P.; Moidome, M.; _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_**1991**, _39_, 693.
* (8) Carvalho, P. R. F.; Furlan, M.; Young, M. C. M.; Kingston, D. G. I.; Bolzani, V. da S.; _Pytochemistry_**1998**, _49_, 1659.
* (9) Oberlies, N. H.; Burgess, J. P.; Navarro, H. A.; Pinos, R. E.; Fairchild, C. R.; Peterson, R. W.; Soejator, D. D.; Farnsworth, N. R.; Kinghorn, A. D.; Wani, M. C.; Wall, M. E.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2002**, _65_, 95.
* (10) Hasan, C. M.; Healey, T. M.; Waterman, P. G.; _Pytochemistry_**1982**, _21_, 1365.
* (11) Jolstad, S. D.; Hoffmann, J. J.; Schram, K. H.; Cole, J. R.; _J. Org. Chem._**1982**, _47_, 1356.
* (12) Billet, D.; Durgeat, M.; Heitz, S.; Brouard, J. P.; Ahond, A.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1976**, _32_, 2773.
* (13) Blas, B.; Zapp, J.; Becker, H.; _Phylochemistry_**2004**, _65_, 127.
* (14) De Pascual, T. J.; Gonzalez, J.; Herrero, J. A.; Bermejo, F.; _Anales de Quinucia_**1978**, _74_, 531.
* (15) Misra, R.; Pandey, R. C.; Dev, S.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1964**, _49_, 3751; Luzbetak, D. J.; Torrance, S. J.; Hoffman, J. J.; Cole, J. R.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1979**, _42_, 315; Heymann, H.; Tezuka, Y.; Kikuchi, T.; Supryavata, S.; _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_**1994**, \(2\), 1202; Bandara, B. M. R.; Wimalasiri, W. R.; Bandara, K. A. N. P.; _Planta Med._**1987**, \(6\), 575.
* (16) Misra, R.; Pandey, R. C.; Dev, S.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1968**, _22_, 2681.
* (17) Cascon, V.; Benjamin, G.; _Photochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 773; Bigham, A. K.; Munro, T. A.; Rizacasa, M. A.; Robins-Browne, R.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2003**, _66_, 1242.
* (18) Singh, P.; Jain, S.; Jakupovic, J.; _Pytochemistry_**1988**, _27_, 1537.



