# 10.1155@2013@835081.pdf

## Page 1



# Anti-_Candida_ Properties of Urauchimycins from Actinobacteria Associated with _Trachymyrmex_ Ants

Thais D. Mendes, W. Borges, S. Andre Rodrigues, S. Scott E. Solomon, P. Paulo C. Vieira, Marta C. T. Duarte, Fernando C. Pagnocca

1 Center for the Study of Social Insects, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), 13506-900 Rio Claro, SP, Brazil

2EMBRAPA Agroenergy, Pargue Estacao Biologica, 70770-901 Brasilia, DE, Brazil

3Chemistry Departament, Federal University of Espirito Santo (UFES), 29075-910 Vitoria, ES, Brazil

4Chemistry Department, Federal University of Sao Carlos (UFSCar), 18052-780 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

5Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), 13506-900 Rio Claro, SP, Brazil

6Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA

7Division of Microbiology, Center for Chemistry, Biology and Agriculture Research (CPQBA/UNICAMP), 13081-970 Paulinia, SP, Brazil

12 November 201220132 February 201312 November 201220132 February 201312 November 201220132 February 20122013

###### Abstract

Acinobacteria are widely known for their ability to produce bioactive secondary metabolites, especially compounds with antimicrobial activity. These bacteria are responsible for producing two-thirds of the commercially available antibiotics [2, 3]. Most antibacterial species explored commercially were isolated from the soil. However, after decades of bioprospecting antibacterials from this environment, it is becoming more difficult to obtain strains producing novel bioactive metabolites [4]. Thus, many companies have turned the search for microbial producers of novel antifungal compounds to other environments such as hydrothermal vents,

## Page 2

marine environments, tropical rain forests, and microbial symbionts associated with plants and animals hosts [5, 6]. For example, the occurrence of actinobacteria associated with marine sponges and the fact that such strains produce compounds with antimicrobial activity confirms this potential [7, 8, 9]. In addition, endophytic actinobacteria are also explored for their capacity to produce antimicrobial compounds [10, 11, 12].

Several studies have focused on the association between actinobacteria and insects from an ecological perspective [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. On the other hand, few studies have focused on the multitude of chemical compounds that are involved in such interactions [26]. The best studied example is the symbiosis between actinobacteria and fungus-growing ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: tribe Attini). In this association, the actinobacteria are found on the ants' integument and produce antimicrobial compounds that help the ants to suppress the microfungus _Escovopsis_ sp. [13, 14]. This fungus is considered a specialized parasite of the ant cultivar and causes negative impacts to the ant colony [27].

Actinobacteria isolated from the integument of attine ants are generally classified in the genus _Pseudonocardia_ and _Streptomyces_. Bioactive molecules have already been isolated and characterized from actinobacteria isolated from several attine genera [26]. _Pseudonocardia_ isolated from _Acromyrmex octopinosus_ and _Apterostigma dentigerum_ are known to produce several compounds like (i) dentigerumycin, a complex compound active against _Candida albicans_ and _Escovopsis_[28]; (ii) a nystatin-like antifungal [29]; (iii) the novel quinone pseudonocardones A-C active against the malaria causal agent _Plasmodium berghei_[30]; (iv) the already known antibiotics 6-deoxy-8-O-methylrabelomycin and X-14 881, both active against _Bacillus subtilis_ and _P. berghei_[30]. In addition to _Pseudonocardia_, actinobacteria in the genus _Streptomyces_ are also found on the integument of _Acromyrmex_ workers and were shown to produce (i) candidin, active against _Escovopsis_ sp. [29, 31, 32, 33, 34], (ii) antimycins active against _Escovopsis_ sp. [32, 33, 34], and (iii) actinomycin D, actinomycin X2 and valinomycin that are active against _B. subtilis_[32].

Poulsen [35] suggested that the attine ant-microbe association is little explored regarding the search for new antimicrobials. The author highlights the various symbiotic associations between attine ants and microorganisms as a promising source for drug discovery, especially those with antimicrobial activity. Here, we explored the antimicrobial potential of actinobacteria isolated from the integument of _Trachymyrmex_ fungus-growing ants and demonstrate the action against different medically important _Candida_ species. We also report two previously described urauchimycins from a _Streptomyces_ strain and emphasize the newly discovered anti-_Candida_ activity of these compounds.

## 2 Material and Methods

### Actinobacteria Isolation and Identification

Twelve _Trachymyrmex_ colonies were collected in different Brazilian biomes (see Table S1 in Supplementary Material available online at [http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/835081](http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/835081)). Colonies were carefully excavated in order to reach the first fungus garden chamber. Fungus garden with the tending workers and brood was sampled using an alcohol-flamed spoon and stored in sterile plastic containers. All containers were kept in a cooler during transport to the laboratory where they were maintained at 25degC.

From each colony, we randomly selected four workers for actinobacteria isolation. Then, the propleural plates were scraped with a sterile needle under a low power stereomicroscope. All ants used in the present study had a visible, whitish covering on the propleural plates. Scrapings were plated on SCN agar (in g \(\cdot\) L\({}^{-1}\): 10.0 starch, 0.3 casein, 2.0 KNO3, 2.0 NaCl, 2.0 K2HPO4, 0.05 MgSO4, 7 H2O, 0.02 CaCO3, 0.01 FeSO4. 7H2O and 18.0 agar supplemented with 0.05 Nystatin) [36]. After scraping, the entire body of all workers was inoculated on SCN agar. All plates were incubated at 25degC for 30 days. From each sampled _Trachymyrmex_ colony, one representative strain was selected from each morphotype obtained. The strains were subcultured in YMA (in g \(\cdot\) L\({}^{-1}\): 3.0 yeast extract, 3.0 malt extract, 5.0 peptone, 10.0 glucose, 18.0 agar) and stored at \(-80\)degC in 15% glycerol.

We used a molecular approach to provide taxonomic affiliation to actinobacteria strains. Genomic DNA was extracted following the method of Sampaio et al. [37]. We carried out 16S rDNA PCR with the universal primers 27F (5'-AGAGTTTGATCATGGCTCAG-3') and 1492R (5'-TACGGTTACCTTTGTTACGACTT-3') [38]. Reactions were conducted in a final volume of 25 \(\mu\)L and contained 1 \(\mu\)L of diluted DNA template (1:10), 2.0 \(\mu\)L of each primer (10 mM), 2.5 \(\mu\)L of 10X buffer, 1.0 \(\mu\)L of MgCl2 (50 mM), 4.0 \(\mu\)L of dNTPs (1.25 mM each), 0.2 \(\mu\)L of Taq polymerase (5 U/\(\mu\)L), and 12.3 \(\mu\)L of ultrapure water. Amplicons were cleaned up with _GFX PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification Kit_ (GE Healthcare). Forward and reverse sequences were generated using the same primers, along with an internal primer U519F (5'-CAGCMGCCGGCGTAATWC-3'). Sequences were generated using _BigDye Terminator v.3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit_ (Life Technologies) in an ABI 3130 sequencer and manually edited in BioEdit v. 7.1.3 [39]. Contigs were compared with those available in the databases NCBI-GenBank ([http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/](http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)) and Ribosomal Database Project (RDP, [http://rdp.cmc.msu.edu/](http://rdp.cmc.msu.edu/)). Sequences generated in the present study were deposited in NCBI-GenBank (accessions KC480554-KC480557).

A phylogenetic analysis was carried out in order to determine the taxonomic affiliation of strain TD025. Sequences of closest relatives were retrieved from the NCBI-GenBank and the RDP Project and aligned in ClustalW. Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using the neighbor-joining algorithm implemented in PAUP v. 4.0 [40]. Genetic distances were calculated using the Kimura 2-parameter model of nucleotide substitution [41]. Robustness of the relationships was estimated from 1000 bootstrap pseudocircles.

### Organic Extracts and Antifungal Assays

All actinobacteria were grown in Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) containing 50 mL of modified MPE medium (in g \(\cdot\) L\({}^{-1}\): 5.0 soy flour,

## Page 3

20.0 glucose, 5.0 of NaCl, 4.0 CaCO3) [42]. Each flask was inoculated with five mycelium disks (1 cm in diameter) cut from a previously grown culture and then incubated at 28degC for two days on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm. From this culture, 10 mL was inoculated in two Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) containing 100 mL of the same medium and incubated for five days on the same conditions. After incubation, the fermented broth was separated from the mycelium by centrifugation and partitioned three times with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). The organic solvent was evaporated under vacuum, and the EtOAc extracts were diluted in RPMI-1640 culture broth containing 10% DMSO and used in the antimicrobial assays.

The antimicrobial activity of the extracts was evaluated against the yeasts _Candida albicans_ CBS 562, _Candida dubliniensis_ CBS 7987, _Candida glabrata_ CBS 138, _Candida krusei_ CBS 573, _Candida parapsilosis_ CBS 604, and _Candida tropicialis_ CBS 94. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined using the microdilution method according to the M27-A2 standard of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute [43].

### Isolation and Characterization of the Bioactive Compounds of Strain TD025

The actinobacteria strain that exhibited both a broad antifungal spectrum and lower MIC values was strain TD025. In order to identify the compounds responsible for the observed results, the strain was cultured in 5 L of modified MPE medium and the extracts were obtained as described.

The fermented broth (5 L) was separated from the cells by centrifugation and portioned three times with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). The organic solvent was evaporated under vacuum. The crude extract, a dark green oil (1.40 g), was separated by means of column chromatography using silica gel 60 eluted with n-hexane/EtOAc as the elution gradient, yielding 8 fractions. All fractions were submitted to antimicrobial assays against _C. albicans_ following the procedure described above. The most active fraction (67.5 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC (thin layer chromatography) eluted with n-hexane/EtOAc (7:3) two times, yielding 3 subfractions. The subfractions obtained were submitted to antimicrobial assays against _C. albicans_. The most active subfraction was submitted to semipreparative HPLC separations carried out in a Shimadzu (LC-6AD apparatus, Japan) multisolvent delivery system, Shimadzu SPD-MI0Avp Photodiode Array Detector, and an Intel Celeron computer for analytical system control, data collection and processing (software Class-VP). The separation was carried out using VP 250/10 NUCLEOSIL 120-5 C18 column eluted with acetonitrile/water/acetic acid (50:50:0.01) at a flow rate of 3 mL min-1, yielding compounds **1** and **2**. The isolated molecules were characterized by 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopic experiments recorded on a BRUKER DRX-400 spectrometer with CDCl3 as solvent and TMS as internal standard.

### Minimum Inhibitory Concentration and Minimum Fungicide Concentration of Bioactive Compounds

After isolation and determination of the structure of the targeted compounds, they were evaluated for antimicrobial activity following the method described previously. Besides the MIC determination, we also evaluated the minimum fungicidal concentration (MFC). The MFC was determined by inoculating Sabouraud dextrose medium with 10 \(\mu\)L of the contents of each of the wells where there was growth inhibition of yeast, the MFC was defined as the lowest concentration of the substance capable of preventing the onset of colony forming units.

## 3 Results and Discussion

### Actinobacteria Isolation and Identification

Several actinobacteria colonies were observed after incubation of isolation plates. We selected just one morphotype of each per ant colony, rendering a total of 24 strains out of 12 _Trabymyrmex_ spp. nests (Table S1). Four actinobacteria genera were identified and _Streptomyces_ was the most abundant taxon (Table I), corresponding to 66.67% of the strains. It is assumed that the main actinobacteria associated with the integument of attire workers is the genus _Pseudonocardia_[14, 15, 16, 20]. However, several authors have demonstrated the isolation of actinobacteria other than _Pseudonocardia_ on the integument of attire ants [17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 29, 31]. The prevalence of _Streptomyces_ and absence of _Pseudonocardia_ among our isolates may be due to the culture medium used [44]. The SCN medium is suitable for the isolation of fast-growing actinobacteria, but according to other authors [13, 14, 15, 16], the use of a low-nutrient medium, such as chitin agar, may provide the recovery of _Pseudonocardia_ strains.

In eight out of 12 ant colonies, we obtained more than one actinobacteria morphotype (Table S1). From colony CTL080820-02, the two morphotypes isolated from two different workers were identified as the same actinobacteria species (Tables S1 and 1). On the other hand, different actinobacteria species were isolated in the seven remaining colonies. We also observed the occurrence of different actinobacteria strains in a single worker (Tables S1 and I). This result demonstrates the diversity of actinobacteria present on the integument of these ants (Table S1, nests SES08091I-04 and SES080924-01).

The 16S rDNA sequence of strain TD025 showed 99% similarity with sequences of several species of the genus _Streptomyces_ deposited in the databases. For a better characterization, we performed a phylogenetic analysis (Figure I). The result suggests a differentiated phylogenetic position for strain TD025 when compared with the remaining sequences. This preliminary analysis allowed us to assign this strain as belonging to the genus _Streptomyces_, with _S. citratus_ as the closest relative strain (Figure I). However, more refined phylogenetic analyses, along with morphological and physiological studies, are necessary to ensure the identification of TD025 to the species level.

### Screening for Antifungal Activity

Our screening for antifungal activity revealed that seven out of 24 extracts (29.16%) inhibited the growth of at least one _Candida_ species. _C. albicans_ was the most sensitive yeast and was 

## Page 4

inhibited by seven extracts with MIC ranging between 10 and 1000 \(\mu\)g\(\cdot\) mL\({}^{-1}\) (Table 2). The yeasts _C. glabrata_ and _C. tropicalis_ were the most resistant strains, being inhibited by one and two actinobacteria extracts, respectively, with MIC values of 1000 \(\mu\)g\(\cdot\) mL\({}^{-1}\) (Table 2).

Except for strain TD034 identified as _Amycolatopsis decaplanina_ (Table 1), the other actinobacteria exhibiting antimicrobial activity were identified as belonging to the genus _Streptomyces_. This genus is recognized as the largest producer of antibiotics because from approximately 3,000 known antibiotics obtained from actinobacteria, the genus _Streptomyces_ contributes with 90% of this total [45].

The extracts of _Streptomyces_ sp. TD025 and _Streptomyces crystallinus_ TD027 showed activity against all yeast strains except for _C. glabrata._ These extracts were effective against _C. albicans_ and _C. krusei_ and showed low activity against _C. tropicalis_ (Table 2). More interestingly, both strains were isolated from the same colony but from independent workers (Table 1). Because lower MICs were obtained for the extract of _Streptomyces_ sp. TD025, this strain was selected to verify the chemical compounds responsible for the antimicrobial activity.

### Bioactive Compounds of Streptomyces sp. TD025.

Chromatographic procedures revealed that EtOAc extract from TD025 contains two compounds (**1** and **2**, Figure 2). Compounds **1** and **2** exhibited typical NMR data of urauchimycins (Figures S1 and S2). Their NMR data are in agreement with those previously reported by Imamura et al. [46]. Although these urauchimycins (**1** and **2**) have already been isolated, they have never been tested on various species of _Candida_ as carried out in the present study.

The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **1** showed 22 carbon signals: four carbonyls (\(\delta\) 179.0, \(\delta\) 170.6, \(\delta\) 169.8, and \(\delta\) 158.7), three quaternary sp\({}^{2}\) carbons (\(\delta\) 150.6, \(\delta\) 127.4, and \(\delta\) 112.8), three methine aromatic carbons (\(\delta\) 124.8, \(\delta\) 120.6, and \(\delta\) 119.0), two sp\({}^{3}\) methylene group (\(\delta\) 35.6 and \(\delta\) 30.5), three sp\({}^{3}\) methine groups (\(\delta\) 54.0, \(\delta\) 50.1, and \(\delta\) 32.4), three oxymethinic groups (\(\delta\) 77.1, \(\delta\) 76.3, and \(\delta\) 70.9), and four methyl groups (\(\delta\) 18.4, \(\delta\) 18.4, \(\delta\) 15.1, and \(\delta\) 11.4). Two carboxylic carbons \(\delta\) 170.6 and \(\delta\) 173.9 showed correlations with different hydrogens of the structure, showing a dilatone system of nine members, typical of the antimycin class.

The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum showed a singlet at \(\delta\) 8.50, assigned to a hydrogen bounded to a carbonyl group and three aromatic hydrogens at \(\delta\) 8.55 (dd, \(\delta\) 81 and 1.2 Hz), \(\delta\) 7.24 (dd, \(J\) 8.1 and 1.2 Hz), and \(\delta\) 6.92 (t, \(J\) 8.1 Hz), suggesting a 1,2,3 trisubstituted aromatic ring. The substance was identified as urauchimycin A by comparison with the literature data [46].

The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **2** were very similar to those observed for compound **1**. Differences were observed in chemical shifts of the hydrogen of the methyl and methylene

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c} \hline \hline Isolate Id & bp\({}^{1}\) & NCBI-GenBank closest relative & Coverage & \% & Accession \# \\ \hline TD016 & 1251 & _Nocardia neocaledoniensis_ DSM 44717 & 100 & 100 & JF79731I \\ TD017 & 1248 & _Nocardia neocaledoniensis_ DSM 44717 & 100 & 100 & JF79731I \\ TD018 & 1184 & _Streptomyces zoamyceticus_ NRLL B-2038 & 99 & 100 & NR044144 \\ TD019 & 1342 & _Streptomyces allvochromogenes_ NBRC 3404 & 99 & 100 & AB184761 \\ TD020 & 1167 & _Streptomyces samanensis_ NBRC 14239 & 99 & 99 & NR041I60 \\ TD021 & 1250 & _Streptomyces mauvecolor_ NBRC 13854 & 100 & 99 & NR041I54 \\ TD022 & 1254 & _Streptomyces lydicus_ CGMCC 4.1412 & 100 & 100 & JN566018 \\ TD023 & 1246 & _Streptomyces_ sp. QZGY-A17 & 100 & 100 & JQ812074 \\ TD025 & 1333 & _Streptomyces_ sp. QLS92 & 100 & 99 & JQ83812I \\  & & _Streptomyces cirratus_ & 100 & 99 & JQ222143 \\ TD027 & 1342 & _Streptomyces allvochromogenes_ NBRC 3404 & 99 & 100 & AB184761 \\ TD028 & 1353 & _Actinoplanes ferrugineus_ & 100 & 99 & AB048221 \\ TD030 & 1255 & _Streptomyces_ sp. CA13 & 100 & 99 & AB622252 \\ TD032 & 1263 & _Streptomyces chartreusis_ NBRC 12753 & 100 & 100 & NR041216 \\ TD033 & 1278 & _Streptomyces griseoplanus_ & 99 & 100 & HQ699516 \\ TD034 & 1283 & _Amycolatopsis decaplanina_ DSM 44594 & 100 & 100 & NR025562 \\ TD035 & 1320 & _Streptomyces attriuber_ NRLL B-24676 & 100 & 99 & FJ169330 \\ TD045 & 1183 & _Amycolatopsis equina_ & 100 & 99 & HQ021204 \\ TD047 & 1173 & _Amycolatopsis albidoflavus_ NBRC100337 & 100 & 100 & AB327251 \\ TD049 & 1260 & _Streptomyces lutoefigeus_ NBRC 13402 & 100 & 99 & NR041I28 \\ TD050 & 1261 & _Streptomyces rubtiginosheluolus_ NBRC 12912 & 100 & 100 & NR041093 \\ TD051 & 1173 & _Amycolatopsis albidoflavus_ NBRC100337 & 100 & 100 & AB327251 \\ TD053 & 1265 & _Streptomyces kummingensis_ NBRC14463 & 99 & 98 & AB184597 \\ TD055 & 1173 & _Amycolatopsis albidoflavus_ NBRC100337 & 100 & 100 & AB327251 \\ TD058 & 1257 & _Streptomyces globisporus_ KCTC 9026 & 100 & 100 & HQ995504 \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular} \({}^{1}\)bp: base pair.

\end{table}
Table 1: Actinobacteria identification according to 16S rDNA sequencing.



## Page 5

groups of the side chain. Based on published data [46] compound **2** was identified as Urauchimycin B, an isomer of compound **1**.

Urauchimycins belong to the antimycin class, a group of well-known antifungals. Antimycins act by inhibiting the electron flow in the mitochondrial respiratory chain [47]. Antimycins have been previously identified in _Streptomyces_ isolated from the integument of atting ants [32, 33, 34]. Schoenian and colleagues [32] detected the well-know antimycins Al-A4 in 50% of the actinobacteria identified as _Streptomyces_ isolated from workers of several _Acromyrrmex_ species. These data along with the rare antimycins identified in the present study indicate that this chemical class is often produced by _Streptomyces_ associated with atting ants. Compounds belonging to this class may have an important role in the atting ant-microbe association.

Another antifungal compound widely distributed in _Streptomyces_ associated with atting ants is candididin [31, 32, 33, 34], which was not detected in _Streptomyces_ sp. TD025. It is possible that candididin was lost in one of the purification steps of the AcOEt extract or it is not produced by this strain.

Urauchimycins A and B were previously isolated from _Streptomyces_ sp. Ni-80 isolated from a marine sponge in Urauchicove, Irimore, Japan. These substances were the first antimycins having an odd number of carbons and a branching side chain [46]. Imamura et al. [46] suggested that such structures are the result of an evolution of actinobacteria in the marine environment, which could have resulted in a change in their secondary metabolism.

In 2006, two new urauchimycins were described: urauchimycin C, isolated from _Streptomyces_ sp. Bl751 from marine sediment, and urauchimycin D, isolated from _Streptomyces_ sp. AddM21 from soil [48]. In the study by Imamura and coworkers [46], the urauchimycins A and B inhibited the morphological differentiation of _C. albicans_ up to a concentration of 10 \(\mu\)g\(\cdot\) mL\({}^{-1}\). Urauchimycins C and D showed no inhibitory activity against _C. albicans_, _Mucor miehei_, and bacteria [48].

The study of antimicrobial activity of urauchimycins A and B was restricted to _C. albicans_ in the work by Imamura and colleagues [46]. The reisolation of these molecules in the present study allowed a better evaluation of its spectrum of

Figure 1: Phylogenetic relationships of strain TD025 (in bold) isolated from the integument of _Traclymyrrnex_ sp. The phylogeny was inferred from 165 rDNA sequences retrieved from the NCBI-GenBank using the neighbor-joining algorithm and the Kimura 2-parameter model of nucleotide substitution. Numbers in parentheses correspond to GenBank accessions. Numbers on branches indicate the bootstrap support after 1,000 pseudoreplicates. The scale bar denotes the number of substitutions per site.



## Page 6

activity. The urauchimycins from _Streptomyces_ sp. TD025 presented MIC values equivalent to the reference antifungal nystatin for _C. albicans_ and _C. glabrata_ (Table 3). Urauchimycin B showed inhibitory activity against all _Candida_ strains evaluated, showing MIC similar to those provided by nystatin.

Urauchimycin B showed a broad spectrum of activity against _Candida_ spp. with MIC values equivalent to the antifungal nystatin, which indicates the potential for medical use. For many years, antimycins were used for the treatment of human infections, but due to its mechanism of action and associated side effects, its use in human treatment was discontinued [47]. However, with the pressing need for new antifungal agents that complement or substitute for the scarce products available on the market, it is interesting and necessary to determine the toxicity presented by urauchimycin B, to assess whether it can be used as an antifungal agent for humans and animals. In addition, evaluation of the isolated compound against _Candida_ species resistant to commercially available antifungal agents should be performed to confirm the potential of this relatively unexplored antifungal.

Here we show that _Trachymymrex_ ants, one attine genus understudied with respect to its microbial symbionts, harbor antimicrobial-producing actinobacteria. As observed by other authors [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33], the present study demonstrates that

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c} \hline \multirow{2}{*}{Isolate ID} & _C. albicans_ & _C. dubliniensis_ & _C. glabrata_ & _C. lrusei_ & _C. parapsilosis_ & _C. tropicalis_ \\  & CBS 562 & CBS 7987 & CBS 138 & CBS 573 & CBS 604 & CBS 94 \\ \hline TD016 & * & * & * & * & * & * \\ TD017 & * & * & * & * & * & * \\ TD018 & * & * & * & * & * & *

## Page 7

actinobacteria of attine ants are able to produce antifungal compounds active against other fungal species and not only against the specific fungal parasite _Escovopsis_.

Moreover, our study corroborates previous work [35] that suggests the attine ant-microbe association is a promising source of microorganisms that produce active metabolites. The few recent studies that focused on the chemical characterization of bioactive compounds produced by actinobacteria associated with attine ants support the potential isolation of novel molecules with biological activity [28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. Thus, an exploration program of isolation of bioactive molecules from actinobacteria from attine ants certainly will result in the discovery of novel compounds with activity against microorganisms that are potentially pathogenic to humans.

## 4 Conclusion

As suggested by Poulsen [35], we found that the integument of _Trachymrymex_ ants is a potential source for the isolation of actinobacteria that produce bioactive molecules. The isolation of Urauchimycins A and B enabled, for the first time, the evaluation of their activity against various _Candida_ species. Urauchimycin B showed a broad spectrum of activity and MIC values equivalent to the reference antifungal nystatin. Toxicity studies and _in vivo_ activity should be carried out in order to verify the potential use of this molecule in the treatment of fungal infections.

## Acknowledgments

The authors thank FAPESP (Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo), CNPq/INCT (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico), and NSF IRFP (United States National Science Foundation International Research Fellowship Program no. 07012333) for financial support. The authors also thank CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior) for providing a scholarship to the first author. This work was conducted under collecting permit number 14789-1 issued by the "Instituto Brasileiro do Meio Ambiente e dos Recursos Naturais Renovaveis" (IBAMA) and the "Instituto Chico Mendes de Conservacao da Biodiversidade" (ICMBio). The authors also thank two anonymous referees for helpful comments on this paper.

## References

* [1] J. Travis, "Reviving the antibiotic miracle?" _Nature_, vol. 264, no. 5157, pp. 360-362, 1994.
* [2] S. Miyadoh, "Research on antibiotic screening in Japan over the last decade: a producing microorganism approach," _Actinomycetologica_, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 100-106, 1993.
* [3] G. L. Challis and D. A. Hopwood, "Synergy and contingency as driving forces for the evolution of multiple secondary metabolite production by _Streptomyces_ species," _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_, vol. 100, no. 24, pp. 14555-14561, 2003.
* [4] M. Goodfellow and H. P. Fiedler, "A guide to successful bio-prospecting: informed by actinobacterial systematics," _Antonie van Leeuwenhoek_, vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 119-142, 2010.
* [5] A. C. W. Waugh and P. F. Long, "Prospects for generating new antibiotics," _Science Progress_, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 73-88, 2002.
* [6] J. Clardy, M. A. Fischbach, and C. T. Walsh, "New antibiotics from bacterial natural products," _Nature Biotechnology_, vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1541-1550, 2006.
* [7] T. K. Kim, A. K. Hewawitharana, P. N. Shaw, and J. A. Fuerst, "Discovery of a new source of rifampicin antibiotics in marine sponge actinobacteria by phylogenetic prediction," _Applied and Environmental Microbiology_, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 2118-2125, 2006.
* [8] R. Gandhimathi, M. Arunkumar, J. Selvin et al., "Antimicrobial potential of sponge associated marine actinomycetes," _Journal de Myrologie Medicale_, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 16-22, 2008.
* [9] E. J. Choi, H. C. Kwon, J. Ham, and H. O. Yang, "6-Hydroxymethyl-1-phenazine-carboxamide and 1,6-phenazinedim-ethanol from a marine bacterium, _Breubacterium_ sp. KMD 003, associated with marine purple vase sponge," _Journal of Antibiotics_, vol. 62, no. 1l, pp. 621-624, 2009.
* [10] B. Bieber, J. Nuske, M. Ritzau, and U. Grafe, "Alnumycin a new naphthoquinone antibiotic produced by an endophytic _Streptomyces_ sp.," _Journal of Antibiotics_, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 381-382, 1998.
* [11] U. F. Castillo, G. A. Strobel, E. J. Ford et al., "Munumbicins, wide-spectrum antibiotics produced by _Streptomyces_ NRRL 30562, endophytic on _Kennedia nigriscans_," _Microbiology_, vol. 148, no. 9, pp. 2675-2685, 2002.
* [12] D. Ezra, U. F. Castillo, G. A. Strobel et al., "Coronamycins, peptide antibiotics produced by a verticillate _Streptomyces_ sp. (MSU-2110) endophytic on _Monstera_ sp.," _Microbiology_, vol. 150, no. 4, pp. 785-793, 2004.
* [13] C. R. Currie, J. A. Scott, R. C. Summerbell, and D. Malloch, "Fungus-growing ants use antibiotic-producing bacteria to control garden parasites," _Nature_, vol. 398, no. 6729, pp. 701-704, 1999.
* [14] C. R. Currie, J. A. Scott, R. C. Summerbell, and D. Malloch, "Corrigendum: fungus-growing ants use antibiotic-producing bacteria to control garden parasites," _Nature_, vol. 423, no. 6938, p. 461, 2003.
* [15] M. J. Cafaro, M. Poulsen, A. E. F. Little et al., "Specificity in the symbiotic association between fungus-growing ants and protective _Pseudonocardia_ bacteria," _Proceedings of the Royal Society B_, vol. 278, no. 1713, pp. 1814-1822, 2011.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c} \hline \multirow{2}{*}{Candida species} & \begin{tabular}{c} Urauchimycin A \\ MIC \\ \end{tabular} & \begin{tabular}{c} Urauchimycin B \\ MIC \\ \end{tabular} & \begin{tabular}{c} Nystatin \\ MIC \\ \end{tabular} & 
\begin{tabular}{c} Nystatin \\ MIC \\ \end{tabular} \\ \hline _C. albicans_ & 1 & * & 1 & 3 & 1 & 2 \\ _C. dubliniensis_ & 800 & * & 2 & 3 & 1 & 2 \\ _C. glabrata_ & 2 & 15,6 & 2 & 2 & 1 & 1 \\ _C. krusei_ & 15,6 & 15,6 & 2 & 3 & 2 & 3 \\ _C. parapsilosis_ & * & * & 2 & 2 & 1 & 2 \\ _C. tropicalis_ & * & * & 2 & 2 & 4 & 4 \\ \hline \multicolumn{6}{l}{\({}^{+}\)\(>\)1000 \(\mu\)g\(\cdot\)mL\({}^{-1}\).} \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum fungicide concentrations (MFC) (\(\mu\)g\(\cdot\)mL\({}^{-1}\)) of Urauchimycins A and B obtained from _Streptomyces_ sp. TD025 in comparison with the antifungal Nystatin.



## Page 8

* [16] M. J. Cafaro and C. R. Currie, "Phylogenetic analysis of mutualistic filamentous bacteria associated with fungus-growing ants," _Canadian Journal of Microbiology_, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 441-446, 2005.
* [17] C. Kost, T. Lakatos, I. Bottcher, W. R. Arendholz, M. Redenbach, and R. Wirth, "Non-specific association between filamentous bacteria and fungus-growing ants," _Naturwissenschaften_, vol. 94, no. 10, pp. 821-828, 2007.
* [18] U. G. Mueller, D. Dash, C. Rabeling, and A. Rodrigues, "Coevolution between attine ants and actinomycete bacteria: a reevaluation," _Evolution_, vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 2894-2912, 2008.
* [19] U. G. Mueller, "Symbiont recruitment versus ant-symbiont coevolution in the attine ant-microbe symbiosis," _Current Opinion in Microbiology_, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 269-277, 2012.
* [20] M. Poulsen, M. Cafaro, J. J. Boomsma, and C. R. Currie, "Specificity of the mutualistic association between actinomycete bacteria and two sympatric species of _Aconormexar_ leaf-cutting ants," _Molecular Ecology_, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 3597-3604, 2005.
* [21] T. D. Zucchi, A. S. Guidolin, and F. L. Consoli, "Isolation and characterization of actinobacteria ectosymbionts from _Acorromyrnex subterraneus brumeus_ (Hymenoptera, Formicidae)," _Microbiological Research_, vol. 166, no. 1, pp. 68-76, 2010.
* [22] R. Sen, H. D. Ishak, D. Estrada, S. E. Dowd, E. Hong, and U. G. Mueller, "Generalized antifungal activity and 454-screening of _Pseudonocardia_ and _Amycolatopsis_ bacteria in nests of fungus-growing ants," _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_, vol. 106, no. 42, pp. 17805-17810, 2009.
* [23] M. Kaltenpoth, W. Gottler, G. Herzner, and E. Strohm, "Symbiotic bacteria protect wasp larvae from fungal infestation," _Current Biology_, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 475-479, 2005.
* [24] M. Kaltenpoth, W. Goettler, C. Dale et al., "Candidatus _Streptomyces philanthi_, an endosymbiotic streptomycete in the antennae of _Philanthus_ digger wasps," _International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology_, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1403-1411, 2006.
* [25] J. J. Scott, D. C. Oh, M. C. Yuceer, K. D. Klepzig, J. Clardy, and C. R. Currie, "Bacterial protection of beetle-fungus mutualism," _Science_, vol. 322, no. 5898, p. 63, 2008.
* [26] R. V. vander Meer, "Ant interactions with soil organisms and associated semiochemicals," _Journal of Chemical Ecology_, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 728-745, 2012.
* [27] C. R. Currie, "Prevalence and impact of a virulent parasite on a tripartite mutualism," _Oecologia_, vol. 128, no. 1, pp. 99-106, 2001.
* [28] D. C. Oh, M. Poulsen, C. R. Currie et al., "Dentigerumycin: a bacterial mediator of an ant-fungus symbiosis," _Nature Chemical Biology_, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 391-393, 2009.
* [29] J. Barke, R. F. Seipke, S. Gruschow et al., "A mixed community of actinomycetes produce multiple antibiotics for the fungus farming ant _Acorromyrnex octospinosus_," _BMC Biology_, vol. 8, article 109, 2010.
* [30] G. Carr, E. R. Derbyshire, E. Caldera et al., "Antibiotic and antimalarial quinones from fungus-growing ant-associated _Pseudonocardia_ sp.," _Journal of Natural Products_, vol. 75, no. 10, pp. 1806-1809, 2012.
* [31] S. Haeder, R. Wirth, H. Herz, and D. Spiteller, "Candididin-producing _Streptomyces_ support leaf-cutting ants to protect their fungus garden against the pathogenic fungus _Escovopsis_," _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_, vol. 106, no. 12, pp. 4742-4746, 2009.
* [32] I. I. Schoenian, M. M. Spiteller, M. J. Manoj et al., "Chemical basis of the synergism and antagonism in microbial communities in the nests of leaf-cutting ants," _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_, vol. 108, no. 5, pp. 1955-1960, 2011.
* [33] R. F. Seipke, J. Barke, C. Beraley et al., "A single _Streptomyces_ symbiont makes multiple antifungals to support the fungus farming ant _Acorromyrnex octospinosus_," _PLoS ONE_, vol. 6, no. 8, Article ID 22028, 8 pages, 2011.
* [34] F. R. Seipke, S. Gruschow, R. J. Goss, and M. I. Hutchings, "Isolating antifungals from fungus-growing ant symbionts using a genome-guided chemistry approach," _Methods in Enzymology_, vol. 517, pp. 47-70, 2012.
* [35] M. Poulsen, "Biomedical exploitation of the fungus-growing ant symbiosis," _Drug News and Perspectives_, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 203-210, 2010.
* [36] E. Kuster and S. T. Williams, "Selection of media for isolation of streptomycetes," _Nature_, vol. 202, no. 4935, pp. 928-929, 1964.
* [37] J. P. Sampaio, M. Gadanho, S. Santos et al., "Polyphasic taxonomy of the basidiomycetous yeast genus _Rhodospiridium: Rhodosporidium kratochvilova_ and related anamorphic species," _International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology_, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 687-697, 2001.
* [38] D. J. Lane, "16S/23S RNAr sequencing," in _Nucleic Acid Techniques in Bacterial Systematic_, E. Stackebrandt and M. Goodfellow, Eds., pp. 115-175, John Willey, New York, NY, USA, 1991.
* [39] T. A. Hall, "BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and analysis program for Windows 95/97/NT," _Nucleic Acids Symposium Series_, vol. 41, pp. 95-98, 1999.
* [40] D. L. Sowford, _PAUP\({}^{*}\): Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony ( \(\cdot\)'and other Methods), Version 4_, Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Mass, USA, 2002.
* [41] M. Kimura, "A simple method for estimating evolutionary rates of base substitutions through comparative studies of nucleotide sequences," _Journal of Molecular Evolution_, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. Ill-120, 1980.
* [42] S. M. Bomfim, _Isolamento de metabolites antifangicos de Stremomyces sp., UFPEDA, 3347; endofito de Monoracta charantia L., (Cucruthiaceae) [1]_.M.S. thesis_, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil, 2008.
* [43] CLSI (Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute), "Norma Aprovada M27-A2," Metodo de referencia para testes de diluicao em caldo para determinacao da sensibilidade de leveduras a terapia antifangica, 2002.
* [44] C. N. Seong, J. H. Choi, and K. S. Baik, "An improved selective isolation of rare Actinomycetes from forest soil," _Journal of Microbiology_, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 17-23, 2001.
* [45] M. G. Watve, R. Tickoo, M. M. Jog, and B. D. Bhole, "How many antibiotics are produced by the genus _Streptomyces_" _Archives of Microbiology_, vol. 176, no. 5, pp. 386-390, 2001.
* [46] N. Imamura, M. Nishijima, K. Adachi, and H. Sano, "Novel antimycin antibiotics, urauchimycins A and B, produced by marine actinomycete," _Journal of Antibiotics_, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 241-246, 1993.
* [47] C. J. Barrow, J. J. Oleynek, H. H. Sun et al., "Antimycins, inhibitors of ATP-citrate lyase, from a _Streptomyces_ sp.," _Journal of Antibiotics_, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 729-733, 1997.
* [48] C. B. F. Yao, M. Schiebel, E. Helmke, H. Anke, and H. Laatsch, "Prefluostatin and new urauchimycin derivatives produced by _Streptomyces_ isolates," _Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung B_, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 320-325, 2006.



