# 10.1016@j.carres.2008.07.014.pdf

## Page 1



# First record of l-quebrachtol in _Allophylus edulis_ (Sapindaceae)

Martina Diaz, Andres Gonzalez, Ian Castro-Gamboa, David Gonzalez, Carmen Rossini

# Abstract

_Allophylus edulis_, commonly called 'Chal chal', is a member of the Sapindaceae occurring in the Uruguayan and Brazilian native flora as well as in Bolivia, Argentina and the Guayanas.1 Although this species has scarcely been studied, there are reports of its anti-hepatotoxic activity,2 negative ionotropic activity,3 and its inhibitory action of the angiotensin converting enzyme.4

During the course of a prospecting program of members of the native flora for anti-insectan products, members of Sapindaceae were studied.5 Among them, _A. edulis_ was biologically and chemically screened. This plant is commonly used as a source of tannins and essential oils.6 Indeed a tissue (infusion) of the leaves is ethnically used as a throat anti-inflammatory agent and for intestinal disorders.7

L-Quebrachtol (**1**) is the 2-methyl ether of l-_chloro_-inositol. l-_chloro_-inositol is a cyclitol whose isomers occur in various plant sources (i.e., Proteaceae,89 Apocyaceae,92ehaemaceae,10 Sapindaceae11. Quebrachtol was first described as a natural product in _Aspidosperma quebrachtol_ (Apocynaceae),12 Despite not being the most ubiquitous cyclitol, quebrachtol occurs in various species of Sapindaceae including _Acer pseudoplatanus_ L., _Acer platanoides L., _Cardiospermum halicacabum_ L., _Alectyon excelsus_ Gaertn., _Harpullia pendula_ Planch., as well as members of the Accaceae and Euphorbiaceae (within this family, _Hevea brasiliensis__Muell. Arg._ is a good source of quebrachtol).11 It has also been recently isolated from the leaves of _Allophylus cobbe_ L in Vietnam.13 In nature, quebrachtol has been suggested to be a major contributor to osmotic pressure14 and a cryoprotective agent for plants.15 Besides, it has been shown to be a feeding stimulant for _Serrodes partia_ (Lepidoptera: Noctitude) larvae.16 The present work reports the isolation of l-quebrachtol from specimens of _A. edulis_ collected in two different locations. This natural product has not been previously reported in this species.

\(\iota\)-Quebrachtol was isolated as crystalline white powder; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{25}\)\(-\)84 (0.16% water); 171 MNR (D2,0, 400 MHz); \(\delta\) 3.39 (dd, 1H, \(\text{J}_{2}\)-1.3 2,3.2, 9.5 Hz, H-2); 34 (4, 3H, \(\text{H}_{1}\)-OHe); (2H, 2H, \(\text{J}_{2}\)-H, 4); 3.73 (dd, 1H, \(\text{J}_{5}\)-4.9 6, \(\text{J}_{6}\)-3.2 Hz, H-5); 4.05 (dd, 1H, \(\text{J}_{6}\)-1.3 6, \(\text{J}_{6}\)-5.3 7 Hz, H-6); 4.25 (dd, 1H, \(\text{J}_{1}\)-2.3 5, \(\text{J}_{1,6}\) 3.6 Hz, H-1); 13C NMR (100 MHz, D2O): \(\delta\) 57.333 (Me); 67.601 (C1); 70.877 (C5); 71.809 (C6); 72.369 (C4); 73.283 (C3); 80.602 (C2); HRESIMMS: _m_/2 217.079 [M+Na]+; Calcd for C7H4O6, 194.0790. The recorded spectroscopic data were compared to the reported information for natural methyl insottids, and the compound was identified as l-quebrachtol.18

The 1H NMR spectrum showed six signals between 3.3 and 4.3 ppm: one of them at \(\delta\) 3.44 was assigned to three methoxyl protons, four (\(\delta\) 3.39, 3.73, 4.05, and 4.25) were assigned to the methonic protons, and a multiplet (\(\delta\) 3.60) was attributed to two unresolved signals of the methine protons.

The 13C NMR spectrum displayed seven carbon resonances with chemical shifts within the region of heteroatom-linked carbon

## Page 2

atoms. The assignment of the protons was made by their spin-pattern analysis, COSY, HMQC, and HMBC experiments.

In spite of revealing the same \(R_{\rm f}\) on TLC as r-3-O-methyl-_chiro_-inositol (r-pinitol), NMR experiments showed the cyclitol obtained from _A. edulis_ was a different isomer, since the \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H chemical shifts from both samples were clearly different.

For the specific assignment as the isomer r-2-O-methyl-_chiro_-inositol (**1**), the values of the coupling constants (_l_) on the \({}^{1}\)H spectrum and the intensities of the signals from the NOEs spectra were taken into consideration. Each of the protons H-2 and H-5 couple with two different neighboring protons with one large (>9 Hz) and one small (<3.5 Hz) coupling constant. This coupling pattern indicates that both H-2 and H-5 have one axial and one equatorial proton neighbors. The signals corresponding to protons H-1 and H-6 show small coupling constants (<4 Hz), indicating either equatorial-equatorial or axial-equatorial couplings. While the H-3 and H-4 signals could not be differentiated on the basis of the \({}^{1}\)H spectra, analysis of NOEs showed an enhancement of the multiplet at \(\delta\) 3.60 upon irradiation of H-5 or H-2, supporting the assignment of this multiplet to H-3 and H-4 (Fig. 1). The other results in NOE experiments supported the assigned stereochemistry for the remaining protons: irradiation of H-2, H-6 and the methyl group enhanced H-1; and they were in turn enhanced upon irradiation of H-1. H-6 was enhanced by irradiation of H-5, and irradiation of H-6 enhanced the H-5 signal.

This is the first report of r-quebrachtol in _A. edulis_, a plant that is used locally as an infusion to treat diabetes.[19] Interestingly, the potential of r-quebrachtol as a sugar substitute for diabetics has been investigated.[20] Even though the study reported that this methylcyclitol seems neither to prevent hypoglycemia nor to raise blood sugar content, a later work showed that r-quebrachtol has hypoglycemic effects in hyperglycemia rats.[21] It would be interesting to further investigate whether the local ethobotanical use of _A. edulis_ is related to its r-quebrachtol content.

## 1 Experimental

Extraction of plant material: _A. edulis_ twigs were collected in the fall of 2005, at a riverbank nearby Montevideo city (Uruguayan sample) and at Assis, SP, Brazil (Brazilian sample). The Uruguayan species was identified by the Catedra de Botanica, at the Chemistry School (Voucher number 4316 MVFQ), and the Brazilian species was identified by Ines Cordeiro (Voucher number Brumati 104). Plant material was air-dried, and ground (Kinematica AG, Polymix grinder) before extraction. Ethanolic extracts were produced under stirring (Labotec 23-2 stirrer, 50 rpm, 16 h) at room temperature (114 g of starting plant material treated with 1200 mL of ethanol). The procedure was repeated twice (re-extraction with 1200 mL, 88 h), and then the combined extracts were concentrated under vacuum to give a dark solid residue (Yields: Uruguayan sample, 9.4%; Brazilian sample, 8.1%). Acetone was added to this residue, and the solution was kept at 4 degC for 24 h to promote crystallization. The precipitate thus obtained was successively washed with hexane, chloroform, dichloromethane and ethyl acetate, yielding 51 mg of pure crystals for elucidation purposes. Although more material precipitated during the following days, no further purification was carried out. Methanol (HPLC grade) and deionized water (Milli-Q) were used throughout the whole study.

NMR spectra were recorded using a Bruker DPX-400 Avance Spectrometer (400 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H, 100 MHz for \({}^{13}\)C) for solutions in D\({}_{2}\)O (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc.).

ESI mass spectra were acquired in both positive- and negative-ion mode and recorded on a Quattro-LC spectrometer (Micromass, Manchester, UK) that held a quadrupole, hexapole quadrupole configuration (probe electrospray tip voltage 3 kW; cone voltage 25 V; nitrogen was used for both bath and nebulizing gas at 345 L/h and 27 L/h, respectively). Solutions were infused into the ESI source (5 mL/min) using a Harvard Apparatus model 1746 (Holliston, MA) pump. Accurate-mass measurements were performed on a quadrupole-time of flight instrument (UltrOTOF-Q, Bruker Daltonics, Billierca, MA). The optical rotation was determined in H\({}_{2}\)O using a Zuzi automatic polarimeter, Model 412 with a sodium lamp operating at 589.3 nm at room temperature.

## Acknowledgments

The authors thank OPCW (Grant I/ICA/ICB/111817/06), TWAS (Grant RGA 05-318), PEDECIBA (Grant PNUD- URU/06/004), and Program ESCALA-AUGM (MD fellowship).

## References

* (1) Piaggio, M.; Delfino, I., _Plantas natives del Uruguay_. Facultad de Ciencias. Seccion Micologia. [http://micol.fcien.edu.uy/lora/](http://micol.fcien.edu.uy/lora/) (accessed 20 Nov 2007).
* (2) Hoffmann-Bohm, K.; Lotter, H.; Seligmann, O.; Wagner, H. _Planta Med._**1992**, 58, 544-548.
* (3) Matsunaga, K.; Sasaki, S.; Ohizumi, Y. _Not. Med._**1997**, 51, 478-481.
* (4) Arisawa, M.; Morinaga, Y.; Nishi, Y.; Ueno, H.; Suzuki, S.; Hayashi, T.; Shimizu, M.; Yoshizaki, M.; Morita, N.; Bergnza, L. H. Nat. Med. **1989**, 478-80.
* (5) Castillo, L.; Gonzalez-Coloma, A.; Gonzalez, A.; Diaz, M.; Alonso-Paz, E.; Rossini, C. _Ind. Crop. Prod._, in press, doi:10.1061/j.indero.2008.05.004.
* (6) Resicco, C. _Etstoa actual de la loroformac sobre products foresales no madereros_. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. [http://www.fao.org/DOCE/96/203935/039331.htm](http://www.fao.org/DOCE/96/203935/039331.htm) (accessed 22 Nov 2007).
* (7) Korbes, V. C. _Plantas medicina_, 48th ed.: Graft: Francisco Beltrato, 1995.
* (8) Bielectis, R. L.; Briggs, B. G. _Aust. J. Bot._**2005**, 53, 205-217.
* (9) Nishibe, S.; Sakushima, A.; Takemura, H.; Takenaka, T.; Noguchi, Y. _Nat Med._**2001**, 55, 268-271.
* (10) Schill, V.; Hartung, W.; Orthen, B.; Weisensel, M. H. _J. Exp. Bot._**1996**, 47, 123-133.
* (11) van Halphen, J. _Ind. Eng. Chem._**1952**, 43, 141-145.
* (12) Tanret, C. _Compt. Rend._**1889**, 109, 808.
* (13) Nguyen, D. T. D. T. Duc Loue _Icpa_, 11, 13-14, [http://english.vista.gov.vn/english/st_documents_abstract/](http://english.vista.gov.vn/english/st_documents_abstract/).
* (14) Richter, A.; Pop, M. _New Phytol._**1992**, 121, 431-438.
* (15) Orthen, B.; Pop, M. _Environ. Exper. Bot._**2000**, 44, 125-132.
* (16) Hewitt, P. H.; Whitelaker, O. B.; Read, S. J. _Issect Physiol._**1969**, 15, 1929-1933.
* (17) Clark, E. P. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **1936**, 58, 1009-1010.
* (18) Angyal, S. J.; Odier, L. _Carbohydr. Res._**1983**, 123, 23-29.
* (19) Anonymous Ofell Lab. [http://www.ofell.com.py/te_pojha_saq.html](http://www.ofell.com.py/te_pojha_saq.html) (accessed 1 Dec 2007).
* (20) McCance, R. A.; Lawrence, R. D. _Biochem. J._**1933**, 27, 986-989.
* (21) Mussalman, M.; Elkhatiere, M. R.; Lau, C. M.; Wan, N. W. Z. _Malaysian J. Biochem. Mol. Biol._**2001**, 6, 7-11.

Figure 1: Most significant NOEs.



