# 10.1016@0031-9422(74)80105-6.pdf

## Page 1



# New Peltogynoids from three _Peltogyne_ species*
Footnote *: Part XLIII in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Leguminosae”. For Part XLII see Ref. 1. Taken, in part, from the M.Sc. theses submitted by M.E. de A. and M.A.T. to the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (1973). Sponsored by Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus.

Maria E. de Almeida, Otto R. Gottlieb, Jose Rego de Sousa

and Marco A. Teixeira

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil

16 September 1973

###### Abstract

Two novel peltogynoids, 7-\(O\)-methylpeltogynol and 4-\(O\)-methyl-4,5'-\(O\),0-methylidenemopanol were isolated respectively from the trunk wood of _Peltogyne paniculata_ Benth. and _P. confertiflora_ Benth. The latter species, as well as _P.__catingae_ Ducke, also contain the common peltogynoids peltogynol and mopanol.

Peltogyne, 7-\(O\)-methylpeltogynol, 4-\(O\)-methyl-4,5'-\(O\),0-methylidenemopanol, fraxetin.

A recent investigation of _Goniorrhadnis marginata_ Taub. (Leguminosae-Caesalpinioideae) revealed the existence in its heartwood of peltogynoid flavonones and chalcones.1,2 The genus was, consequently, considered to have evolved into _Peltogyne_, the known species of which contain mainly peltogynoid flavonols.2 Since _Goniorrhadnis_ is monotypic, the only way of placing this hypothesis on firmer ground and, eventually, to use it as basis of a phyletic classification of related genera, requires the analysis of additional _Peltogyne_ species.

A search for peltogynoids in the bark of _Peltogyne confertiflora_ Benth. (from Espirito Santo State), _P.__catingae_ Ducke and _P.__paniculata_ Benth. (both from Amazonas State) was unsuccessful. Only a glycoside of fraxetin (7,8-dihydroxy-6-methoxycoumarin) was located in _P.__confertiflora_. The heartwoods, however, of _P.__catingae_ and _P.__confertiflora_ were found to contain peltogynol (**1a**) and mopanol (**2a**), typical constituents of _Peltogyne_ and related genera. From the C6H6 extracts of _P.__paniculata_ and _P.__confertiflora_ two additional phenols, respectively C17H16O6 and C18H16O6, were isolated. Their UV spectra were very similar to those of peltogynol and mopanol, so they were considered to be closely related peltogynoids. Comparisons of the PMR spectra in the acetate series not only confirmed this (see chemical shifts of aliphatic protons with lit.3 data), but also indicated identical relative configurations at the chiral centres 2, 3 and 4 (cf. \(J\)2,3 and \(J\)3,4). Attribution of the substitution pattern of peltogynol to C17H16O6 and of mopanol to C18H16O6 was based on the analysis of the aromatic spectral regions.



## Page 2

The peltogynol derivative harbours a catechol system (UV shift by H3BO3 + NaOAc) and an aliphatic hydroxyl (\(\nu_{\max }^{\text{KBr}}\) of acetate 1730 cm-1). Its methoxyl (\(\tau 6\cdot 27\), _s_) can thus occupy only position 7, as in **1c**, a proposition which is consistent with the MS of the triacetate **1d** which contains evidence for an aliphatic acetoxyl [(M-AcOH)-382] and a methoxylated A-ring (retro-Diels-Alder fragments _m/e_ 152, 153).

In agreement with this both peltogynol (**1a**) and the new (**1c**), yield tri-_O_-methylpeltogynol (**1g**) upon methylation either with Me2SO4-K2CO3 in boiling Me2CO or with CH2N2 in ether at -10deg. The CH2N2-methylation of peltogynol at -10deg is a stepwise reaction and, using appropriate reaction times, can be used to produce the natural compound **1c** (48 hr), a separable mixture of 7-_O_-methyl- (**1c**), 7,3'-di-_O_-methyl-(**1e**) and 7,3',4'-tri-_O_-methyl ethers (1g) (96 hr), or mainly 7,3',4'-tri-_O_-methylpeltogynol (250 hr). Two additional compounds, probably insertion products,4 were also detected in trace amounts in these reaction mixtures. The substitution pattern of the novel 7,3'-di-_O_-methylpeltogynol (**1e**) was identified through PMR spectral comparison (CDCl3) of two pairs of compounds: its monomethyl ether (**1g**) and its diacetate (**1f**) vs 7-_O_-methylpeltogynol triacetate (**1d**) and peltogynol tetraacetate (**1b**).3 The 3'-positions in the first pair are substituted by methoxyls and in the second pair by acetoxyls. In consequence, H-2' of **1g** and **1f** resonates at higher field (resp. \(\tau 2\cdot 82\) and \(2\cdot 90\)) than H-2' of **1d** and **1b** (resp. \(\tau 2\cdot 49\) and \(2\cdot 53\)).

\[\begin{array}{l} {(1a)\ \text{R}^{1} = \text{H}



## Page 3

The methylenedioxy group (_t_ 406, _s_) of the mopanol derivative C18H16O6 can, of course, occupy only the 4',5'-positions. Three pieces of evidence show that the methoxyl (_t_ 6:38, _s_) is at C-4:(1). The H-4 chemical shifts of the acetate (2e) and of tri-_O_-acetylmopanol (2b) are comparable (_t_ 5:35 and 5:33), suffering the expected large downfield shift (D -1:59 ppm) if the hydroxyl at C-4 appears in acetylated form, as in 2c (2). The MS of the derivative (Scheme 1) conforms to the pattern observed for other flavanols of this series,2 with the exception of the [M-H2O]+: peak which is replaced by a strong [M-MeOH]+: peak (3). While tri-_O_-methylmopanol (2f) and tri-_O_-methylpeltogynol (Ig) readily give tri-_O_-methylmopanone and tri-_O_-methylpeltogynone with the Jones reagent, the novel phenol is quite stable under oxidizing conditions. Thus, the lone phenolic hydroxyl can only be situated at C-7, as in 2d.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of the constituents of P._ _G_- _

## Page 4

_Selective methylation of peltogynol_ (**1a**). An Et2O soln of 1a was treated with CH2N2-Et2O (-10', 48 hr). The reaction product was separated by TLC into two cmpds, identified, by direct comparison, with starting material and natural 1c. Upon extending the time interval to 96 hr, tri-_O_-methylpeltogynol was present in the reaction product. After 250 hr 1c had disappeared. The reaction product, in CHCl3, was extracted with 5", 1a9. NaHCO3. The evaporated CHCl3 soln gave 1g, identified by direct comparison with the Me2SO4-methylation product of peltogynol. Acidification of the aq. soln gave 1c.

7,3-_Di_-O-_methylpeltogynol_ (**1e**). PMR [(CD3)2CO, t]: 3*29 (_d, J_ 8*5 Hz, H-5), 3*52 (_s_, H-2'), 3*97 (_s_, H-5'), 4*17 (_dd_, \(J\) 8*5 and 30 Hz, H-6), 4*26 (_d, J_ 3*0 Hz, H-8), 5*87 (_m_, H-2, H-4, OCH2), 6*84 (_s_, OCH3), 6*89 (_s_, OCH3), 7*11 (_dd_, \(J\) 10*0 and 8*6 Hz, H-3). _Diacetate_ (**1f**). Colourless crystals, m.p. 183 *186" (EtOH), \(\left\langle {\text{{\bf{r}}}_{\max}^{\text{KBr}}\left( {\text{{\bf{c}}}{\text{m}}^{- 1}} \right)} \right\rangle\): 1770, 1720, 1615, 1590, 1520, 1500, 1460, 1435, 13

