# 10.1021@jf00125a014.pdf

## Page 1

Schwinmer, S. "Source Book of Food Enzymology"; Avi Publishing Co.: Westport, CT, 1981; p 283.

Sussman, A. S. _Arch. Biochem. Biophys._ 1961, 95, 407.

Van Loon, L. C. _Phytochemistry_ 1971, 10, 503.

Vanenste, W. H.; Zuberbahler, A. In "Molecular Mechanisms of Oxygen Activation"; Hayashi, O., Ed.; Academic Press: New York, 1974; p 371.

Vaotile Sulfides of the Amazonian Garlic Bush

Maria das Gracas B. Zoghbi, Lamar Scott Ramos, Jose Guilherme S. Maia,* Miriam L. da Silva, and Arnaldo Iran R. Luz

The essential oil from _Adenocalymma allianceum_ leaves (ca. 0.04%) was investigated with GC and GC-MS. Of the 13 compounds tentatively identified, 9 are likely to be part of a homologous series. The most abundant components were diallyl disulfide and diallyl trisulfide, which comprise 62% of the oil.

The garlic bush (Portuguese, cip6 d'alho) is a widespread plant in Brazil, particularly in the north where the principal species is _Adenocalymma allianceum_ Miers. Upon the sample handling of the large leaves, a strong odor exudes, similar to that of garlic (_Allium sativum_). Although infusions of the leaves are used in treating colds and fevers (Pio Correa, 1931; Figueiredo, 1979), its principal use is in the substitution of garlic, especially in the interior regions of difficult access.

The ethereal extracts of steam distillates from fresh leaves of the garlic bush were first studied by Apparao et al. (1978), using packed column gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). The principal components of the extracts to be the diallyl di-, tri-, and tetrasulfides.

Not surprisingly, these are also among the major constituents in garlic (Oaks et al., 1964; Brodnitz et al., 1971). As part of an ongoing study of the essential oil of amazonian plants, we have characterized the volatiles of garlic bush, using capillary column gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, and we now report the presence of additional alkenyl sulfides.

EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

Plant material of _A. allianceum_ was collected in Aura, near Belem, state of Paris, and an exiscate (no. 69734) has been placed in the herbarium at the Emilio Goeldi Museum, in Belem. The air-dried leaves were subjected to steam distillation, and the volatile oil obtained was dried in the presence of sodium sulfate. The yield was 0.04%.

The volatile oil was analyzed with a Carlo Erba 4160 gas chromatography (FID), with a 30 m x 0.25 mm fused silica capillary column containing a 0.25 \(m\) film of SE-54. Hydrogen was used as the carrier gas, adjusted to a linear velocity of 33 cm/s (measured at 150 degC); the split flow was adjusted to give a 20:1 ratio, and the septum sweep was a constant 10 cm3/min. Splitless injection of 2 _m_L, on a 1:1000 _n_-hexane solution, was followed by a delay of 30 s before beginning the purge. Injection was done with the oven at 50 degC. After a 3-min initial wait, the temperature was programmed at 6 degC/min to 230 degC.

Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed on a Finnigan 4021 GC-MS system, which includes on Lncos data system. An identical 30-m SE-54 silica capillary column was installed in the GC, in a Grob-type injector, and directly coupled to the ion source of the MS. Helium was used as carrier gas, and injection and oven-programming temperatures were the same as above except a 4 degC/min gradient was used. The mass spectrometer was in EI mode at 70 eV. The quadrupole filter was scanned from 34 to 434 daltons once every second, and resulting spectra were stored on computer discs for later recall.

Identifications were based on mass spectra by comparison with those in the data system library and confirmed by retention data (Kovats, 1958).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A gas chromatogram of the essential oil of the garlic bush is presented in Figure 1. From this GC trace one can see the simplicity of the mixture and the prominence of two components, peaks 6 and 13. These were tentatively confirmed to be the diallyl di- and trisulfides, as reported by Apparao et al. (1978). Diallyl tetrasulfide (peak 15) was also found to be present, although not as abundant as reported. For each of these sulfides, the MS matched almost perfectly with that given by Apparao et al. (1978). Several other major peaks were present, most of which

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} peak & Kovats & \% of \\ no. & compounda & indices & oilb \\
1 & diallyl sulfide & 850 & trace \\
2 & allyl methyl disulfide & 910 & trace \\
3 & dithiacyclopentene & 945 & 2.18 \\
4 & allyl proxyl disulfide & 1048 & trace \\
5 & diallyl disulfide & 1065 & 31.38 \\
6 & allyl methyl trisulfide & 1123 & 0.96 \\
7 & 3-vinyl-1,2-di-lithi-5ene & 1160 & 2.60 \\
8 & trithiaicyclohexene (tent.) & 1168 & 6.67 \\
9 & 3-vinyl-1,2-di-lithi-5ene & 1205 & 4.71 \\
10 & allyl proxyl trisulfide & 1262 & 0.75 \\
11 & diallyl trisulfide & 1296 & 30.55 \\
12 & allyl methyl tetrasulfide & 1535 & 2.51 \\
13 & diallyl tetrasulfide & 1690 & 1.23 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Constituents of _A. allianceum_

## Page 2

produced fairly unambiguous mass spectra. For example, peaks 5 and 12 each had molecular weights 2 units higher than their neighboring peaks, the diallyl di- and trisulfides, respectively. On the basis of their MS fragmentation, these were determined to be either allyl propyl or propenyl dropyl di- and trisulfides. From a discussion of the relative stabilities of the 1-propenyithio and allylithio cations (Nishimura et al., 1971), it was apparent that the two compounds were, in fact, allyl propyl sulfides. Similarly, peak 7 presented a mass spectrum that appeared to be a allylyl methyl trisulfide. The components tentatively identified are listed in Table 1.

All of the sulfides mentioned above with the exception of diallyl tetrasulfide have been determined in garlic and onion (Oaks et al., 1964; Brodnitz et al.8 1971; Boelens et al., 1971). Oaks et al. (1964) showed by means of a log plot of the relative retention time (RRT) vs. the number of sulfur atoms that each additional sulfur atom is additive in its effect on the retention time. By using a similar strategy, making a normal plot (instead of log, because we used temperature programming) of RRT and the number of sulfur atoms (Figure 2), we were able to locate minor peaks in the chromatogram likely to be part of a homologous series. Thus, peak 1 was identified as the diallyl sulfide and peaks 2 and 14 were identified as allyl methyl di- and tetrasulfides.

Peaks 4 and 8-10 did not produce mass spectra that were easily interpreted. Bodnitz et al. (1971), in analyzing garlic extracts, found the principal components to be the vinyldithienes (peaks 8 and 10) shown in Table 1. Dithiacyclopentene (peak 4) was detected in the flavor of cooked asparagus (Tressl et al., 1977), and the mass spectrum given compares very well with that for our peak. Peak 9 is the only peak for which we had no confirmatory mass spectrum. By calculation of isotope ratios, its molecular formula, based on the apparent molecular ion at 136 daltons, appeared to be C3H4S3. We propose this compound is trithieacyclohexane, based on the MS fragmentation and the presence of dithiacyclopentene, but this has not yet been confirmed.

The somewhat unpleasant, although characteristic, aromas of all the plants mentioned are due in large part to the presence of a combination of these alkenyl sulfides and the thiosulfonates, coproducts formed from the alkylcysteine sulfoxides, precursors in the intact plant material (Whitaker, 1976). Although the leaves of the garlic bush quickly produce the pungent, garlicky odor upon handling, the aroma disappears after several days of drying. As shown by Boelens et al. (1971), the quality (i.e., the mixture of alkenyl sulfides) of cut onion is considerably modified over time. Further studies must be done to determine the viability of the garlic bush as a large-scale substitute of garlic, in particular, with respect to harvesting and storage.

## Acknowledgment

We thank Drs. William Rodrigues and Marlene Silva of the Department of Botany (INPA/CNPq), for specimen identifications.

**Registry No.** Dially sulfide, 592-88-1; alkyl methyl disulfide, 2179-58-0; dithiacyclopentene, 288-26-6; allyl propyl disulfide, 2179-59-1; dially disulfide, 2179-57-9; alkyl methyl trisulfide, 34135-85-8; 3-vinyl-1,2-dithi-5-ene, 62488-53-3; 3-vinyl-1,2-di-thi-4-ene, 62488-52-2; allyl propyl trisulfide, 33922-73-5; diallyulf, 2050-87-5; allyl methyl tetrasulfide, 90195-83-8; diallyl tetraulfide, 24444-7-4.

### Literature Citred

Apparso, M.; Kjaer, A.; Madsen, J. O.; Rao, E. V. _Phytochemistry_ 1978, _17_, 1660.

Boelens, M.; Valois, P. J.; Wobben, H. J.; Van der Gen, A. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1971, _19_, 984.

Brodnitz, M. H.; Pascale, J. V.; Van Dersilice, L. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1971, _19_, 273.

Figueiredo, N. "Rezadores, Pajes e Pugangas"; Editora Boi-Tempo: Belem, Hersil, 1979; Sterie Peguisua No. 8-UFPA.

Kovats, E. _Helv. Chim. Acta_ 1958, _14_, 1915.

Nishimura H.; Fujiwara, K.; Mizutani, J.; Obata, Y. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1971, _19_, 992.

Oaks, D. M.; Hartman, H.; Dimick, K. P. _Anal. Chem._ 1964, _36_, 1560.

Pio Correa, M. "Dictionary das Plantas Uteis e das Exoticas Cultivadas"; Imprens NaCl: Rio de Janeiro, Brasil, 1931.

Tressl, R.; Bahri, D.; Holzer, M.; Kossa, T. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1977, _29_, 460.

Whitaker, J. R. _Adv. Food Res._ 1976, _22_, 83.

Figure 1.: Gas chromatogram of the essential oil of the garlic bush.

Figure 2.: Normal plot of retention time vs. number of sulfur atoms.



