# 10.1016@0031-9422(92)90048-U.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

double bond (C-1/C-2) was reduced. The reduced compound did not show the typical doublets for H-1 and H-2 in the 1H NMR. The 13C NMR obtained for 3 (Table 2), showed 32 signals, of which 10 corresponded to C-sp2. The presence of an epoxide group as occurs in cedrelone [3] and hirtin [1], was ruled out due to the absence of signals between 69.8 and 55.1. On the other hand, one double bond at C-14 was proposed, based on the signals (6150.0 and 128.8), attributed to C-14 and C-15, respectively. The presence of a 4_b_-carbonethoxy group at C-4 was deduced from 1H NMR. Furthermore, a very strong correlation between the carbonethoxy group and the C-10 methyl was revealed from NOESY experiments [4] (Table 3). Several correlations were confirmed by NOE difference spectroscopy through irradiation at Me-19, Me-28, CO2Me and OAc signals frequencies, respectively. A different relative configuration based mainly on the chemical shift of C-4 methyl has been proposed for hirtin [5], a limonoid very closely related to 3. The stereochemistry suggested for C-9, C-13 and C-17 is based on the biosynthesis of limonoids [6]. However, for C-11 and C-12 the small coupling constants between H-11 and H-12 (_J_ = 4.7 Hz), and between H-11 and H-9 (_J_ = 5.1 Hz) requires a trans-relationship for these protons [7]. This attribution was confirmed by 1H-1H, 1H-13C COSY experiments [8]. The assignment of the stereochemistry and relative positioning of the acetoxy and isobutrioxy groups was possible by NOESY experiments (Table 3). A strong correlation between the carbomethoxy and acetyl groups showed their _cis_ relationship. This also determined the position C-11 for the acetoxy group. From several 2D-experiments it was possible to attribute the chemical shifts for all protons and carbons in the molecule. From long range carbon double bond (C-1/C-2) was reduced. The reduced compound did not show the typical doublets for H-1 and H-2 in the 1H NMR.



## Page 3

proton coupling [9] the signals referring to the four methyl groups could be distinguished in the 13C and 1H NMR. Representative long-range 1H-13C couplings are given in Table 4. Finally, structure **3** was proposed for this limonoid. The complete attribution of all chemical shifts for the carbons in 13C NMR is found in the Table 2. Cedrelone (**8**) [3] was used as a model compound.

Compound **4** was very closely related to **3**. Its IR spectrum was essentially superimposable on that of **3**, suggesting the same functional groups in the latter. The mass spectrum showed the parent peak _m_/_z_ 626, which when compared with **3**, indicated the presence of two more oxygen atoms in **4**. Therefore, the combination of this data with those obtained from 13C NMR (Table 2) suggested the elementary formula C33H38O12. The analysis of the 1H NMR (Table 1), revealed that the difference between compounds **3** and **4** was only in the furan ring. For compound **4** instead of a furan unit, there is a _g_-hydroxybutriolactone attached to C-17. This unit was confirmed by 1H NMR (66.17 _g_) attributed to H-23, and by the diacetate **4a** obtained when **4** was acetylated; the 1H NMR of **4a** showed two extra peaks (d2.16 and 2.08). One of these signals is attributed to the diosphenol

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} H & Correlated H \\ OMe & OAc, 19 \\
18 & 9 \\
30 & 12, 19 \\
19 & OMe, OAc, 30 \\
11 & l \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Selected long-range coupling to carbon 1H 2D-NMR data for limonoid 3 (CDC13, 200 MHz)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} C & **3** & **4** & **8** & **9** & **10** \\
1 & 150.3 & 150.5 & 152.4 & — & — \\
2 & 126.2 & 126.3 & 127.4 & — & — \\
3 & 194.0 & 195.7

## Page 4

acetate unit, the other to the OAc-23, where the acetyl-carbinolic proton showed a signal (\(\delta\)6.82). Comparison of the \({}^{13}\)C MMR of **4** with minuconidide [10] showed clearly that this compound has a 23-\(\gamma\)-hydroxybutenolic moiety (\(\delta\)136.4, 169.8, 145.6 and 96.3) attributed to C-20 and C-23, respectively. The same argument can be used to rule out the possibility that **4** is the isomer corresponding to isonimocinolide [11]. Based on the above evidence we proposed structure **4** for this limonoid.

The three protolimonoids were also identified from their spectral data by comparison with the known compounds melianone (**5**), melianodiol (**6**) [12] and bourjotinolone A (7) [13]. Melianone and bourjotinolone A occurred as a mixture, which was separated only after acetylation.

The limonoids we have isolated are slightly different from those isolated by Taylor [1]; however, they are very typical compounds from the Meliaceae [14].

## Experimental

### General

NMR spectra were run at 25\({}^{\circ}\) using a 5 mm \({}^{1}\)H or \({}^{13}\)C probe with observations frequencies of 200 and 50 MHz, respectively. NOESY: shift correlations were performed using the pulse sequence [5]; D1-90\({}^{\circ}\)-D0-90\({}^{\circ}\)-D9-90\({}^{\circ}\)-FID; pulse with \({}^{1}\)H (90\({}^{\circ}\)) = 6.1 \(\mu\)sec; proton relaxation delay (D1)= 3 sec; length of delay D9= 0.4 sec; number of experiments NE = 512; number of scans NS = 120. \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{13}\)C COSY long-range correlation: shift correlation sequence [8, 9]; proton relaxation delay (D1)= 3 sec; D3 and D4 values (0.071 sec and 0.036 sec respectively) were calculated using the observed three-bond coupling constant, \({}^{3}J_{\text{CH}}\) = 7 Hz. In both expts, 40 mg of 3 were dissolved in 0.5 ml of CDCl3, containing TMS as int. standard.

Isolation of constituents. T. Hirta was collected in Espirito Santo, Brazil, and a voucher is deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias USP, Sao Paulo. The CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract from fruits (11.82 g) was chromatographed on silica gel eluting with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc (9:1). The column yielded 10 hrs which were rechromatographed in small columns affording pure compounds. Fr. 4, gave 3(43 mg), fr. 5, 4(23 mg) and dissociated (6 mg). Fr. 7 afforded bourjotinolone A (5 mg) and melianone (6 mg). Fr. 8 gave melianodiol (89 mg), bourjotinolone A (10 mg) and melianone (8 mg). Fr. 9 yielded melianodiol (66 mg), bourjotinolone A (6 mg) and melianone (5 mg). Fr s containing bourjotinolone and melianone, were first acetylated and the corresponding acetates sept by TLC. A petrol extract from leaves (9.09 g) using the same procedure yielded stosterol (158 mg) and stostenone (65 mg).

### Limonoid 3

Yellowish viscous oil. IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3390, 1740, 1680, 1637, 902. \({}^{1}\)H NMR: Table 1. \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 2. EIMS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 594 (34), 358 (9), 316 (7), 211 (70), 180 (100).

### Limonoid 4

Yellowish viscous oil. IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3398, 1792, 1681. \({}^{1}\)H NMR: Table 1. \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 2. EIMS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 626 (1), 236 (2), 208 (7), 180 (100). Limonoid 2 acetate. Viscous yellowish oil. IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 1792, 1681. \({}^{1}\)H NMR: Table 1.

### Acknowledgements

The authors thank FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES for the financial support. D.A.G.C. thanks CAPES for the award of a fellowship.

## References

* [1] Chan, W. and Taylor, D. R. (1966) _J. Chem. Soc._, _Chem. Commun._ 206.
* [2] Dreyer, D. L. (1965) _Tetrahedron_**21**, 75.
* [3] Halsall, T. G. and Roke, J. A. (1975) _J. Chem. Soc._, _Perkin Trans 1_ 1758.
* [4] Jeener, J., Meier, B. H., Bachmann, P. and Ernest, R. R. (1979) _J. Am. Chem Soc._**101**, 6441.
* [5] Taylor, D. A. H. (1983) _Fortschr. Chem. Org. Natural._**45**, 1.
* [6] Arignoni, D., Barton, D. H. R., Corey, E. J., Jeger, O., Caglioti, L., SukhDev,, Ferrini, P. G., Glazier, E. R., Melera, A., Pradhan, S. K., Schafner, K., Sternhell, S., Templeton, J. F. and Tobinaga, S. (1960) _Experiencia_**16**, 41.
* [7] Akinnij, J. A., Connolly, J. D., Mulholland, D. A., Rycroft, D. S. and Taylor, D. A. H. (1986) _Phytochemistry_**25**, 2187.
* [8] Bax, Ad and Morris, G. A. (1981) _J. Magn. Res._**42**, 501.
* [9] Hernandez, H. P. and Fisher, N. H. (1988) _Spectrosc. Letters_**21**, 927.
* [10] Siddiqui, S., Faizi, S., Mahmood, T. and Siddiqui, B. S. (1986) _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans 1_ 1021.
* [11] Siddiqui, S., Faizi, S., Mahmood, T. and Siddiqui, B. S. (1986) _Heterocycles_**24**, 1319.
* [12] Polonski, J., Varon, Z., Rabanal, R. M. and Jacquemin, H. (1977) _Israel J. Chem._**16**, 16.
* [13] Jolad, S. D., Hoffmann, J. J. and Cole, J. R. (1980) _J. Org. Chem._**45**, 3132.
* [14] Silva, M. F. G. F. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1987) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**15**, 85.



