# 10.1002@bmc.1155.pdf

## Page 1

Validated HPLC method for the standardization of _Phyllanthus niruri_ (herb and commercial extracts) using corilagin as a phytochemical marker

Renata Colombo, Andrea N. de L. Batista, Helder L. Teles, Geraldo H. Silva, Giovanni C. C. Bomfim, G Rosilene C. R. Burgos, A Alberto J. Cavalheiro, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Dulce Helena S. Silva, G.

Clicia R. Pelicia, Fabiana M. Guimaraes, Maria Celia H. Heimberg

# Abstract

ABSTRACT: _Phyllanthus niruri_ L, commonly known in Brazil as 'quebra-pedra; has long been used in the treatment of diverse diseases and especially utrilinissis. The therapeutic effects of _r.niruri_ are attributed to various compounds present in the plant, including the hydrolysate thanifolia. In the present study, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC-P4D) profiles of leaves and commercial extracts of _P. niruri_ were examined and three compounds, found to be present in all of the samples studied, were isolated by open column chromatography over _c._a._ silica gel followed by preparative HPLC. These compounds were identified by nuclear magnetic resonance as corilgin, rutin and ethyl 3,4,5-trifluoroylbenzoate. Corilagin, which has been proposed as a phytochemical marker for _P.niruri_, was employed as an external standard in the development and validation of a rapid and efficient qualitative and quantitative HPLC assay for the analyte. The method may be applied in the standardization of herbs and phytomedicines commercialized in Brazil as quebra-pedra. Copyright (c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

## 2 Introduction

Medical plants have been employed since antiquity in the treatment of a wide range of diseases and conditions, and have played a key role in the provision of health care worldwide. In spite of the spectacular advances in the discovery of novel drugs that have occurred over the last few decades, plants still continue to make important contributions both in providing lead molecules for further pharmaceutical research and as alternative sources of efficacious medication (Cragg _et al._, 1997; Shu, 1998).

Phytomedicines are composed of plant organs supplied either _in nature_ (generally leaves, roots or bark) or in processed form (typically liquid or powdered extracts). Commercial extracts normally contain the active principles of the plant material in crude or processed state, together with excipients, i.e. solvents, diluents or preservatives (Galoto, 2000). Irrespective of the formulation of the phytomedicine, however, quality control and standardization of product is critical to the efficacy of the therapy. In this respect, the source and quality of the raw materials play a pivotal role in guaranteeing the quality and stability of the herbal preparations (Calito, 2000). Moreover, it is very important to monitor and standardize the active principles responsible for the pharmacological action of the drug through direct quantification. In cases where the active principles are unknown, appropriate phytochemical marker compounds need to be established for analytical purposes (Anvitsa, 2004).

The annual herb _Phylanthus niruri_ (family Euphorbiaceae) has a worldwide distribution and is particularly popular in Brazilian folk medicine under the common name of quequeta pedex (stone breaker; by virtue of its strong action on kidney stones and gallstones; Mikail _et al._, 2006). The plant is used in the treatment of a wide range of human diseases and especially in the treatment of urilinissis (Barros _et al._, 2006; Paulino _et al._, 1996). Clinical studies have demonstrated that _P.niruri_ exhibits no acute or chronic toxicity, and preliminary data indicate that the drug promotes the normalization of calcium levels in hypercalciuric patients (Nishiru _et al._, 2004).

The therapeutic effects of _P. niruri_ have been attributed to various classes of constituents including lignans (Singh _et al._,

## Page 2



# Biomedical Chromatography

1989; Satyanarayana _et al._, 1988], alkaloids (Tempesta _et al._, 1998; Joshi _et al._, 1986; Mulchandani and Hasearsani, 1984), flavonoids (Than _et al._, 2006), terpenoids (Ume _et al._, 1988), phenylproponoids (Singh _et al._, 1986) and the hydrolysatekinin, cortiglia (Duan _et al._, 2005; Kolodziej _et al._, 2005; Hatano _et al._, 2005), Several chromatographic studies have demonstrated the presence of colaglin in the leaves and extracts of various species of the genus _Phyllenthus_ (Kumaran and Karunakaran, 2006; Markom _et al._, 2007) and pharmacological evidence indicates a correlation between the presence of corlain and therapeutic activity (Duan _et al._, 2005; Shen _et al._, 2003).

The aim of the present study was to develop high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC)-ultra violet-photodiode array detection (PAD) methods for the rapid isolation and quantitative determination of corlain (Fig. 1). In leaves of _P. minui_ and in commercial phytomedicines derived therefrom. Using the developed methods, two further components that are characteristic of the herbal drug were purified and identified as ethyl 3,4-5-trifluorobenzoate and rutin (Fig. 1) by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis. It is proposed that the described method for the analysis of the phytochemical marker, corlain, could be applied in the quality control and standardization of herbs and extracts commercialized in Brazil as authentic qua-peda:

## Experimental

### Plant Material and Commercial Extracts

Leaf material (air-dried at ca 40degC and stored at room temperature for 6 months) of _Phyllenthus_ _inuri_ L and of three industrial extracts (dry powder, code 2016; water soluble dry powder, code 20131; and fluid extract, code 20517) derived from the macerated leaves of the plant were provided by Anifdo da Brasil ExtraCqes Ltda, Sotucukt, SP, Brazil. The plant material was identified and authenticated by Rapuel Popolo Siberia at the Instituto Botanico de Sao Paulo, SP Brazil, and the identity confirmed from the results of histological tests carried out in the quality control section of the supplying company.

### Chemicals and Standards

HPLC-grade acetonitrile and methanol were supplied by J. T. Baker (Philippus), PA, USA, whilst analytical grade acetic acid was from Synth (Diadema, SP, Brazil). Water was purified using a Millipore, 530 Paule, SP, Brazil, Caffeine (9910 pure; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and corlain (97% pure; isolated in the Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Aaraquara, SP, Brazil) were employed as standards.

### Isolation of components from _P. minui_

A sample (2,5 g) of the commercial fluid extract derived from _P. minui_ was dried in a rotary evaporator and the residue dissolved in 15 ml. of methanolwater (15:85 v/v). The methanolic extract was submitted to fractionation using classical liquid chromatograph technical and one column (110 x 2.5 cm (1 d.) packed with C48 silica gel (2 g) and eluted with a step gradient comprising 200 ml each of methanolwater mixtures (15:85, 25:75; 40:60; 65:35 v/v) and finally with methanol (200 ml). Fractions 2 and 3, which eluted with 25 and 40% aqueous methanol, respectively, were further purified by preparative HPLC using a Shimadzu (Jyotto, Japan) LC-10-AWP chromatograph equipped with a model SPD-10A VP UV detector, a model FR-10ASIL-10AF fraction collector and an LC workstation for data collection and processing. Separation was carried out on a Phenomenex (Torrance, CA, USA) Luna* C48 column (250 x 21.2 mm l.d.; 10 mm particle size; 100 A pore size) eluted isocratically with 0.1% acetic acid in

Figure 1.: (1) Structures of corlain, (2) rutin and (3) ethyl 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoate isolated from extracts of _P. minui_.



## Page 3

water:acetonitrile (60:20 v/v) at a flow rate of 17 mL min-1. The detector was set to record at 254 nm. The major components of fraction 2 eluted from the HPLC at 8.5 min (2) and 15.0 min (3), whilst that of fraction 3 eluted at 6.5 min (1).

### Structural Characterization of the Major Components 1-3 Isolated from P. _mini_

The eluates associated with each of the three major HPLC peaks of fractions 2 and 3 were collected, concentrated by rotary evaporation, dried to constant weight in a vacuum desiccator under nitrogen, and dissolved in deuterated dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO-_d_) for MRB analysis. The NMR experiments were carried out using a Varian (Harbor City, CA, USA) model 11.7 T NOVA-500 spectrometer operating at 500 MHz (1H) and 126 MHz (1C). The "H+ and "CNNIR spectra were assigned using data obtained from gHMDC and gHMDC experiments, whilst multiplicities were determined with the aid of 500 MHz gCOSY spectra: in all cases DMSO-_d_d_d was employed as the internal standard.

### Preparation of Samples for Analytical HPLC Analysis

Commercial dry powder extracts (_a_ 0.01 g) were weighed accurately and sonicated with 10 mL of methanobacter (40:60 v/v) for 30 min at room temperature. A 1 ml aliquot of the resulting solution was submitted to solid-phase extraction (SPE) over Background (_t_. J. Baker SP certificates (3 mL), each containing 500 mg of C15 silica gel (40 mm particle size), that had been pre-conditioned with 1 mL of methanol and 1 mL of water. Cartridges were eluted with 2 ml of methanobacter (40:60 v/v). The interfering compounds were retained by the C15 silica gel, whilst the eluate (2 mL) was filtered through a 0.22 mm MIlex membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) and an aliquot (20 mL) assayed by HPLC.

Commercial fluid extracts (1 mL) were diluted to 10 mL with methanolwater (40:60 v/v), and a 1 mL aliquot of this solution submitted to the SPE procedure as described above. In the case of dried leaf material, a sample (1.0) was sonicated with 20 mL of methanolwater (40:60 v/v) for 30 min at room temperature, and a 1 mL aliquot of this solution was submitted to the SPE procedure as described above. The eluate (2 mL) was filtered through a 0.22 mm MIlex membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) and an aliquot (20 mL) assayed by HPLC.

### Chromatographic Conditions

In preliminary studies, the HPLC profiles of leaves and of various commercial extracts of _P. _mini_ were obtained using a Phenomenex Uma CA column (250 x 4.6 mm id.5; mm grade size 100 A pore size) protected by a C150 water column (4.0 x 3.0 mm id.5; mm particle size; 100 A pore size). The mobile phase comprised 1% aqueous acetic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B), and linear gradient elution from 5 to 1000% B in 40 min at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min-1 was employed.

During further investigations, the chromatographic parameters (column, mobile phase, flow rate and elution program) were optimized in order to provide better separation of components in a shorter run time. Validation of the optimized method were performed using a Waters (Milford, MA, USA) Alliance model 2795 liquid chromatographic system equipped with a model 996 PAD and a Phenomenex Uma phenyl-hexyl column (250 x 4.6 mm id.5; mm particle size; 100 A pore size) protected by a phenyl-hexyl guard column (4.0 x 3.0 mm id.4; 5 mm particle size; 100 A pore size). The mobile phase comprised a mixture of solvents A and B, as above, and was delivered at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min-1, the sample injection volume was 20 mL, and the column was held at room temperature during the analysis. The final gradient employed in the developed analytical method was: 0-12 min, 13-37% B; 12-13 min, 37-100% B; 13-15 min, 100% B; 15-16 min, 100 to 13% B; and 16-30 min, isocratic at 13% B. The chromatogram was monitored at 267 nm, and 0/5 spectra of individual peaks were recorded in the range 200-400 nm. Data were processed using Waters Empower Pro* version 5.0.

### Validation of the Method

The validation of the analytical method was performed according to the requirements of the Brazilian Government proposed by National Agency of Sanitary Vigilance (Amvisa, 2003) and suggestions proposed by Ribani _et al._ (2004).

### Selectivity and Specificity

Analytic purity across the peak eluting from the HPLC at a retention time corresponding to that of corilaginous was confirmed using the data derived from the PAD in association with the software resource provided by the workstation.

### Analytical curve

An external standard method was utilized to construct the analytical curve for corilaginous measured at a wavelength of 2667 nm. A stock solution of standard was prepared by weighing 15.7 mg of corilaginous (purity 97%) and dissolving in 25 mL of methanobacter (40:60 v/v) to give a final concentration of 609.16 mg L-1. Four additional standard solutions, with concentrations of 304:58, 121:83, 60:92 and 24.37 mg L-1, were prepared by appropriate dilution of the stock solution. Each of the five standard solutions was injected into the HPLC in triplicate, and the regression equation and linearly factor determined.

### Repeatability and intermediate precision

Repeatability was estimated by assaying solutions containing three different concentrations of the water-soluble dry powder extract in methanobacter (40:60 v/v), each analysis being carried out in triplicate by the same operator on the same day. Intermediate precision was determined by analysing, in triplicate, one of the solutions employed in the repeatability test on two consecutive days and by another operator.

### Reproducibility

Reproducibility was examined in another laboratory by carrying out analyses on a Shimadzu LC-10-AWP instrument equipped with a model 51-10A wide sampler and a SPD-10A HV UV-3 detector together with a similar phenomenex phenyl-hexyl analytical column system to that described above. A second stock solution of standard was prepared by weighing 13.2 mg of corilaginous (purity 97%) and dissolving in 25 mL of methanolwater (40:60 v/v) to give a final concentration of 512.16 mg L-1. Four additional standard solutions, with concentrations of 256:08, 1024:31, 51:22 and 20.49 mg L-1 were prepared by appropriate dilution of the stock solution. A separate analytical curve was constructed by analyzing the five collagen standard solutions as described above. The same solution employed in the repeatability test was reanalysed in triplicate in the second laboratory in order to determine the reproducibility. Precision was expressed in terms of the coefficient of variation 

## Page 4

(CV), the maximum acceptable value of which was set at 5% (Anvisa, 2003).

### Accuracy and recovery.

Accuracy and recovery were determined by application of the developed method to a certified reference material (Surrogate:Risani et al., 2004). Caffeine was employed as the'surrogate' since it exhibited solubility properties and the _l_max that were similar to those of origin, but the alkaloid did not co-elute with any of the peaks present in the extracts. An analytical curve was constructed at 267 nm by analysing a stock solution of caffeine with a concentration 522.72 mg L-1 (obtained by dissolving 13.2 mg of caffeine (purple 99%) in 25 ml of meth-anolwater (4060 v/ml), and four diluted standard solutions containing 261.36, 104.54, 52.27 and 10.45 mg L-1 caffeine. Samples of the water-soluble dry powder extract were spiked with three different concentrations of caffeine and submitted to sonication and SPE procedure as described in the Experimental section. Aliquots (20 μl) were quantified by HPLC using the described method. Accuracy was evaluated by back-calculation and expressed as the percentage deviation between the amount of caffeine found and the amount added at the three concentrations examined.

### Limit of detection and limit of quantification.

The limit of detection (LOD) was calculated on the basis of a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) of 3, whilst the limit of quantification (LOD) was determined at an S/N of 10. The noise level was measured during the analysis of a sample and involved a portion of the chromatogram that was separate from the region containing the corilgin peak.

### Robustness.

Analyses were carried out with different flow rates of the mobile phase (0.9 and 1.1 mL min-1), with different pH values of the mobile phase (3.33 and 3.25), with different elution gradients (i.e. starting the gradient at 12 or 140 of solvent B), and with different batches of the phenyl-hexyl column (lot numbers 5296-24 and 5296-26), in order to estimate the robustness of the method.

## Results and Discussion

### HPLC Profile of _P.nirvi_ Leaf Extract

The initial HPLC profiles of commercial and leaf extracts of _P. nirvi_ were similar and showed several minor peaks and some more abundant peaks (Fig. 2). On the basis of these analyses, the commercial fluid extract was submitted to the described isolation process and, following preparative HPLC separation, three compounds that were present in all of the extracts were obtained (Fig. 2).

### Common Components of Leaves of _P. nirvi_

The structures of the three common compounds, isolated in the form of dark brown amorphous powders, were identified by NMR analysis and confirmed by comparison with spectral data available in the literature (Nawara et al., 1994; Congeep et al., 2003; Eexarchou et al., 2006; Wenkert and Gottlieg, 1977; Fumar et al., 1997). The structures of the components identified are presented in Fig. 1 and their spectral details are shown below.

### Corilagin (1).

1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_): \(d\), 7.01 (2H, \(k\), _l_-2_) and _h_-67.6 (55 (1H, \(k\), _l_-2), 6.48 (1H, \(k\), _l_-2), 6.20 (1H, \(d\), _l_-7.5 Hz, H-2), 7.5 Hz, H-1/-7), 4.58 (1H, _b

## Page 5

Figure 2.: HPLC-PAD chromatograms of: (a) the commercial fluid extract of P. _nuri_; (b) the isolated standards 1 with the on-line UV spectrum; (c) the isolated standards **2** and (d) the isolated standards **3**. Chromatographic conditions: Phenomenex Luna’s \({}^{-}\)Cm column (250 × 4.6 mm i.d; 5 mm); linear gradient of 0.1% acetic acid in water (solvent _N_) and acetonitrile (solvent _B_), 0–40 min from 5 to 100% b at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min ’; UV detection at 267 nm.



## Page 6

Figure 3.: HPLC PAD chromatograms of extracts of _P.n._m._m._m showing (A) commercial fluid extract, with the on-line UV spectrum of 1 displayed as an insert, (B) commercial water soluble dry powder extract, (C) commercial dry powder extract and (D) leaf extract. Chromatographic conditions:Phenomen Luma mg/happ-flop column (250 x 4.6 mm i.d.; 5 μm): linear gradient of 0.1% acetic acid in water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B), 0–12 min from 13 to 37% B, 12–13 min from 37 to 100% B, 15–16 min from 100 to 13% B, 16–30 min isocratic at 13% B all at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min; UV detection at 267 nm.



## Page 7

analysed were 1.21, 1.94 and 0.84% and the intermediate precision CV was 1.80%.

The reproducibility of the method was examined in two different laboratories, in the second laboratory in which a analytical curve was constructed with corlain an external standard, the response of the UV detector at 267 nm was found to be linear in the range 512.16-20.49 mg L-1 of analyte, and the regression equation was \(y\) = 13,281x - 108,131, with a correlation coefficient (_t_) of 0.9999 and \(x\) of _z_/28 for triplicate analyses. The CV of the results between laboratories was 0.06%.

The LOD and LOD values were 0.987 and 3.29 mg L-1, respectively. The test of robustness showed that the method was insensitive to small variations in the flow rate, pH and the initial composition of the mobile phase. No significant variations (relative standard deviation 1.07%) were found between analyses conducted using different batches of chromatographic columns.

## Conclusions

Several studies have indicated that corlain is one of the key compounds responsible for the pharmacological activity of _p. minuri_ (Daan et al., 2005; Shen et al., 2003), in the present study, a simple and efficient method has been developed for the isolation of pure corlain, a compound that is not currently commercially available as a standard analyte. Additionally, a rapid and fully validated HPLC method using corlain as a potential physicochemical marker has been elaborated for the analysis of industrial extracts, commercial phytomechanics and herbs sold as authentic 'quebra-pedar' in Brazil. Using the isolation method described, two further compounds that are characteristic of _p. minuri_ were also isolated and their structures were elucidated by NMR. It is possible that these components might also be to be applied as phytochemical markers.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Professor Elizabeth Teran (_in memoriam_) for her important contribution to this work, Anidro de Brasil Extracges Ltda (Botucatu, SP. Brazil) for technical and financial support, and CNPq for fellowships (grant no. 500185/2006-9).

## References

- Anvisa _Resolvedio-BC ET 899: Goto pour l'alidrodo de Médoles Analytics e Sloanblattes_. Dalito Oficial da Republica Federaleur de Brasil, 2003. Available from www.anvisa.gov/helis/resol 2003/rev899.03ee.html
- Anvisa _Resolvedio-BC ET 84: Dapole avec registro de mecanimento Meteorologico_. Dario Oficial da Republica Federaleur de Brasil, 2004. Available from [http://e-leeds.anvisa.gov/helis/fusel/](http://e-leeds.anvisa.gov/helis/fusel/)
- Shoukenph 012 023 (accessed April 2008).

- Barros de Lima _et al._ (2006) Barros de Lima, M. Mercuri L, Matos H, Schotr and Beim MA. Effect of external d'Astrophismus muri on crystal absorption in experimental turbidins, _Natologica_ 2006. 34 351-357.

- Bebrevska L, Bravo L, Vandermort J, Peters L, Vitelato A and Apers S, Development and validation of an HPLC method for stability control of the Peravian electron flower, _Polar Medio_ 2007: 13606-1613.

- Calito _et al._ (2000) Calito _et al._ Efficacy, safety, quality control, marketing and regulatory guidelines for herbal medicines (phytotherapeutic agents), _Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research_ 2000; **38**: 179-180.

- Gragu GM, Newman DJ and Stave RM Natural products in drug discovery and development, _Journal of Clinical Practice_ 1997; **66**: 32-60.

- Congenj S, Loe RM, Nazari S, Sarangidiotou MH, Taka flip8 Ph, Nakamura CV, Carvalho J and Fogolu MA Constituentes Quimico de Astronomia glutathione (Euphytotobacteraceae, _Olama Nove_ 2003; **26**: 825-827.

- Duan W, Yu Y and Zhang L. Antiatherogenic effects of _Polytanthus Embolic associated with corlain and its analogue_. _Natagoya Zurich_ 2005; 1285: 507-591.

- Karchou V, Fannenberg, Yu, Van Beek TA, Ramos C and Veronert J. Hyphenet chromatographic techniques for the rapid screening and identification of antioxidants in metabolism extracts ofhydroxymethyl used plants, _Journal of Chromatography A_ 2006; **1112**: 239-243.

- Hiano T, Kusada M, Inada K, Ogawa T, Shouku S, Tsuchiya T and Yoshida T. Effects of tannins and related polyphenols on methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus, _Photochemistry_ 2006; **66**: 2047-2055.

- Joshi S, Guicht O, Pfeiffer W, Karta G and Shamatov K. Isolation and growth of the K-ary analysis of end-concentrative, an alkaloid from _Polytotathion_ 1994; **59**: 41-62.

- Kolodzie R, Bummerle T, Amitou W, Nadko GA, Melottari A, Ito H, Hatano T, Yoshida T and Fogolu T. Tamins and related compounds induce nitric oxide synthase and cytokines gene expressions in Leishmania major-infected macrophage-like RAW 264.5. _Biosopane and Medical Chemistry_ 2005; **13**: 6470-6476.

- Kumaran A and Kumaran A, Rustic Oxide radical scavenging active components from _Polytanthus emplica L Plant foods for human_ 2006; **61**: 1-5.

- Li H and G M. Simultaneous quantitation and quantification of four photocytosomes in flasks _Abbreviations_ 2006: **1-5.**

- Mahkom M, Hasan M, Daud W, Singh H and Jahm M. Extraction of hydrolysate-extrins for PBMCs minuri (min: effects of solvents and extraction methods), _Spearborn and Pollution Technology_ 2007; **52**: 496-497.

- Micali S, Sijinbotht MC, Celia A, Stefani S, Grande M, Cicero AF and Bianchi G. _Can Phylanthus muri affect the efficacy of extracorporeal shock whose turbidity for renal stones?_
- Archimedean perspective, _top_ term study, _The journal of biology_ 2006; **176**: 1020-1022.

- Mulchandari N and Hassanari N, "Applications within normal marmless elevated urinary calcium levels in calcium stone forming (CSF) patients, _Photo Medio_ 1984; **50**: 104-105.

- Navarro M, Hussain S, and Merri T. NMR spectral analysis of polyphenols from Fmucan gram. _Phytochemistry_ 1994; **36**: 793-798.

- Nishimura A, Taka G, Ikoma H, Heiberg J, and Schotr N. _Polytanthus muri

## Page 8

panaguy, geranin, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor from paraquali mr; Phylanthus intant. Journal of Natural Products 1988; **51**: 357-359.
* Wang et al. (1977) Wang J. Lou Z. Zhu Z. Chi Y and Wu Y. A rapid high-performance liquid chromatography method for quantitative analysis of antidiabetic-active components in _Anamembrane explodeoides Rhizemes. Chromatographia_ 2005; **51**: 633-636.
* Weerlet and Gottlie (1977) Weerlet E and Gottlie H. Carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of flavonoid and sulfulfuronoid compounds. Phytochemistry 1977; **16**: 1811-1816.



