# 10.1016@j.chroma.2009.02.009.pdf

## Page 1

Isolation of secondary metabolites from _Hortica orendica_ (Rutaceae) leaves through high-speed counter-current chromatography

Vanessa Gisele Pasqualotto Severino, Cristiane de Melo Cazal, Moacir Rossi Forim, Maria Fatima das Gracas Fernandes da Silva, Edson Rodrigues-Filho, Joao Batista Fernandes, Paulo Cezar Vieira

drmfs@power.ufscar.br (M.F.d.G.F. da Silva).

A BSTRACT

High-speed counter-current chromatography (HSCCC) with a two-phase solvent system (hexane-ethanol-acetonitrile-water 10:8:1:1, v/v) was applied to examine the leaves of _Hortica orendica_, which afforded the known limonoid spawning (1), the alkaloids' tratacepmin (2) and dictamanine (6), the dihydrocinamic acid derivatives methyl 5.7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (3), 5.8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (4), together with the new _E_-3,4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbomethoxyphenyl)cinamic acid (5). The recovery of compounds **1-6** was determined by comparison with LC-atmosphere pressure chemical ionization MS/MS data: 662.52, 93.1%, 102.5%, 301.2%, 59.0% and 84.9%, respectively. Compound **3** showed IC50 of 23.6 mM against _Plasmodium falciparum_ and 15.6 mM against _Tympanosoma brucei rhodesines_ and was not toxic to KB cells (IC50 > 100 mM).


## Page 2

and _T. brucei rhodesiense_ [8]. These promising results have stimulated us to test some 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid derivatives for activity against these parasites. Preliminary assay was performed on methyl 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**3**), which showed activity against both _P. falciparum_ and _T. brucei rhodesiense_. However, compound **3** has been isolated from _Horia oreadia_ taprots in small amount, and then the MICs were not determined. Compounds **1-3** (Fig. 1) were isolated from _H. oreadia_ taprots [3,4].

Furthermore, if it is assumed that it is possible to modify the chemical structure of compounds in order to improve activity and selectivity on the above assays, phytochemical studies of other organs of _H. oreadia_ deserve more attention. Thus, we have now examined the leaves of _H. oreadia_ since they have never been investigated before. The leaves afforded the known limonol guyanin (**1**), the alkaloids rutaeacripin (**2**) and dicramine (**6**), the dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives methyl 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**3**), 5,8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**4**), together with the new _E_-3,4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbomethoxyphenyl)cinnamic acid (**5**) (Fig. 1).

Generally, the conventional methods including silica gel, polyamide and reversed-phase liquid chromatography are often used to isolate pure products from _H. oreadia_, but they are tedious, time consuming and usually require multiple chromatographic steps [9-11]. Counter-current chromatography (CCC), a liquid-liquid partition chromatography method, has a track record of being a powerful tool in the preliminary stages of crude extract fractionation [12-15]. With the ability to attain high resolution, modern CCC and centrifugal partition chromatography (CPC) instrumentation, such as HSCC and fast-centrifugal partition chromatography (FCP), have significant potential to develop new approaches in natural product drug discovery, specifically towards reducing the expensive and time-consuming steps to isolate active constituents. Due to the lack of a solid stationary phase, CCC has no irreversible adsorption and, therefore, provides loss-less fractionation [16]. Since samples are simply partitioned between different solvents phases, there is 100% theoretical sample recovery. In crude plant extract fractionation this is particularly valuable because it minimizes the chances of losing the activity during fractionation. This benefit of CCC allows researchers to address the issues of synergy between compounds to explain biological activity in plants, without the need to address potential irreversible adsorption of active constituents to the solid stationary phase during fractionation [14,17]. Therefore, HSCC was used for separation and purification of compounds **1-6** from dichloromethane extract from leaves of _H. oreadia_.

## Experimental

### Apparatus

The HSCC instrument employed in the present study was manufactured by P.C. Inc., Potomac, MD 20854, USA. It contained a quadruple multilayer coil of 1.68 mm I.D. polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing and total capacity of 443 mL. The \(b\) value varied from 0.50 at the internal terminal to 0.85 at the external terminal and the revolution radius was 10 cm (_b_ = _r_/_R_, where \(r\) is the distance from the coil to the holder, and \(R\), the revolution radius or the distance between the holder axis and the central shaft). The sample injection loop volume was 5 mL. The revolution speed of the apparatus was regulated with a speed controller in the range between 0 and 1000 rpm. The flow rate was controlled with an FMI-50 QD-O SSY, BS/BS (Fluid Metering, NY, USA) constant-flow pump. The fractions were obtained with an automated fraction collector (Eyela, DC-1200); Liquid chromatography coupled with atmospheric pressure chemical ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-APCI-MS/MS) data were obtained using an Alliance 2695 liquid chromatography equipped with a PDA2996 photodiode array detection (DAD) system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA); mass spectral data were acquired in positive ion mode on a triple quadrupole Micromass Quattro LC spectrometer (Manchester, UK), equipped with a _Z_-Spray API ion source and a megaflow electrospray probe; nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR): on a Bruker DXB 400 and 100 MHz with tetramethylsilane (TMS) as internal standard; infrared (IR): Bomen-FT-IR; ultraviolet (UV): Varian 500 Scan UV-Vis (visible)-NIR (near infrared); gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS): low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument. For low-resolution electrospray mass spectrometry (APCI-MS), a Micromass Quattro LC instrument was used, equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source.

### Reagents

All organic solvents used for HSCC were of analytical grade and purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) and for LC-APCI-MS/MS were HPLC grade purchased from J.T. Baker (Ecatepec, Mexico).Water purified (18 M<OMEGA>) by a reverse osmosis Milli

Fig. 1: Chemical structures of compounds from _H. oreadia_.



## Page 3

Q system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) was used for all solutions and dilutions.

### Plant material

The leaves of _H. oreadia_ were collected in January 2001 in Forest Reserve Adolpho Ducke, Itacoatiara, Amazonas state, Brazil. The identification was carried out by Dr. Jose Rubens Pirani from the Department of Botany, Sao Paulo University and vouchers are deposited in the Herbarium of the same department.

### Preparation of crude sample

The leaves (3.2 kg) of _H. oreadia_ were dried carefully by forced air at 40 degC and reduced to powder. The powdered dried leaves were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH at room temperature three times. After the evaporation of the solvent under reduced pressure, crude extracts were obtained: hexane (93.0 g), dichloromethane (161.0 g) and methanol (42.0 g).

### Selection of two-phase solvent system

Small amounts of dichloromethane extract from leaves of _H. oreadia_ were dissolved in separate test tubes containing the solvent systems to be tested. The test tubes were vigorously shaken and the compounds allowed to partition between the two phases [18,19]. The distribution of the components between both phases of each the 5 solvents systems were analyzed by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) using 20 cm x 20 cm silica gel plates with a thickness of 0.20 mm (silica gel 60 F254, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), on which the crude extract was horizontally spotted. The solvent system used for the development of the TLC plates was hexane-ethyl acetate (8:2, v/v). The compounds were visualized under a UV lamp at 254 and 365 nm and developed by spraying with a solution of vanillin reagent (5 g of vanillin in 9 mL of methanol, 0.5 mL of H2SO4 and 3 drops of acetic acid) followed by heating to assist visual estimation of relative distribution of compounds into each phase. The partition coefficients were determined by GC-MS only for the best solvent system as follows: 0.5 mg of dichloromethane extract was added to a test tube, to which 5 mL of each phase of the two-phase solvent system was added. The test tube was shaken as above, and then the upper and lower phases were analyzed by GC-MS. The partition coefficients of three compounds in sample were determined according to the peak areas.

### Preparation of two-phase solvent system and sample solution

The two-phase solvent system composed of hexane-ethanol-acetonitrile-water (10:8:1:1, v/v) was used for HSCCC separation. Each solvent was added to a separatory funnel and thoroughly equilibrated at room temperature. The upper phase and the lower phase were separated and degassed by sonication for 20 min shortly before use.

Sample solutions were prepared by dissolving the dichloromethane extract in a mixture of upper and lower phase (1:1, v/v).

### GC-MS analysis

The partition coefficient and HSCCC fractions were analyzed using a Shimadzu GC-17A gas chromatograph fitted with a fused silica DB-5 (30 m x 0.32 mm LD, 0.25 mm film thickness) capillary column with helium as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min-1. The temperature was programmed initially at 100 degC for 1 min, and then increased with a rate of 10 degC min-1 to 250 degC, the latter maintained for 30 min. The injection (1 mL) was split and its temperature was 280 degC. The interface temperature was 250 degC. The chromatograph was coupled to a Shimadzu QP5000 mass-selective detector at 70 eV.

### HSCCC separation

The upper phase was used as the mobile phase and the lower phase was used as the stationary phase in the tail-to-head elution mode. First, the coiled column was entirely filled with the stationary phase (lower phase). Then the apparatus was rotated forward at 800 rpm, while the mobile phase (upper phase) was pumped into the column in a tail to head direction at a flow rate of 3.0 mL min-1. The retention of stationary phase (_SF_) was 85% (_SF_ = 0.85). After the mobile phase front emerged and the hydrodynamic equilibrium was established in the column, 5.0 mL of the sample solution containing 2.5 g of the dichloromethane extract was injected through the injection module at a flow rate of 3.0 mL min-1. A total of 34 fractions of 10 mL each were obtained with an automated fraction collector. However, with 24 fractions all compounds obtained have already eluted.

### TLC analysis of fractions obtained by HSCCC

All HSCCC fractions collected were monitored by TLC (20 cm x 20 cm, 0.2 mm thickness, silica gel 60 F254) with hexane-ethyl acetate (7:3, v/v) as the developing solvent. Based on the TLC plates monitoring, all HSCC fractions were combined into 8 analytically distinct fractions. Fractions 1-2 afforded 5.8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**4**, 0.240 g), fraction 3 furnished _E_-3,4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbomethoxyphenyl)cinnamic acid (**5**, 0.045 g) and fraction 5 yielded methyl 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**3**), (0.148 g). Fraction 4 was flash chromatographed on silica gel, eluting with _n_-hexane-Me2CO (8:2) affording guyanin (**1**, 0.04 g). Fraction 6 was applied to Sephadex LH-20 (CH2Cl2-MeOH, 6:4) to give rutaceargin (**2**, 0.11 g). Fractions 7-8 were purified as fraction 6 to yield dictannine (**6**, 0.088 g).

### LC-APCI-MS/MS

LC-APCI-MS/MS data were acquired using a 3.0 mm x 30 mm, 3.5 mm XTerra-MS C-18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA); the gradient elution system consisted of the following steps (H2O, acetonitrile and methanol in lines A, B and C respectively, each one supplemented with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA): 20% line B at the beginning then goes to 30% B and 30% C in 9 min; the column was then washed with 20% line B and 80% line C for 4 min and re-conditioned with 20% line B for 3 min; a flow rate of 1.0 mL min-1 was used for the analysis and the compounds were detected at 210-500 nm; mass spectral data were acquired in positive ion mode; a post UV-detector splitter was used to send only 0.3 mL min-1 to the ion source; nitrogen was used for nebulization (200 L h-1) and desolvation (785 L h-1); the corona discharge was set at 3.27 kV and the sample and the extractor cones at 27 and 4 V respectively; argon (Ar) was used for the fragmentation experiments and the parent ions were accelerated using a collision energy ramp of 1-25 eV. For SRM experiments, the cone voltage was maintained using tune parameters previously optimized for all compounds at 27 V, and two transitions were selected for each compound (Fig. 2): for **1**, _m/z_ 499 - 397 (monitoring) and _m/z_ 499 - 343 (quantification), using a collision energy (CE) of 20 eV; for compound \(2\), _m/z_ 288 - 244 (quantification) and _m/z_ 288 - 169 (monitoring) (CE 25 eV); for compound **3**_m/z_ 307 - 203 (monitoring) and _m/z_ 307 - 233 (quantification) (CE = 25 eV); for compound **4**_m/z_ 293 - 201 (monitoring) and _m/z_ 293 - 233 (quantification) (CE = 25 eV); for compound **5**_m/z_

## Page 4

313 \(\to\) 251, 313 \(\to\) 176, 313 \(\to\) 151 (monitoring) and \(m/z\) 313 \(\to\) 297 (quantification) (CE = 25 eV); for compound **6** \(m/z\) 200 \(\to\) 129 (monitoring) and \(m/z\) 200 \(\to\) 185 (quantification) (CE = 20 eV). The dwell time was 0.08 s, and the interscan delay was 0.1 s. The collision gas pressure (argon) was set at 1.35e\(-\)3 mbar for all experiments.

#### Software

All MS data were acquired and processed using MassJynx V4.1 software (Waters, Cheshire, UK).

#### Calibration standard and analytical curves

Stock solutions (1000 \(\mu\)g mL\({}^{- 1}\)) of compounds **1-6** were prepared in HPLC grade methanol (JT Baker, HPLC grade, Eatepec, Mexico). Working solutions were prepared at 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5 and 1.0 mg mL\({}^{- 1}\) by diluting stock solutions. Calibration standards curves were obtained in triplicates. For each point of the analytical curves, the worst value in comparison with the average was discarded. Calibration curves were obtained plotting concentration (\(\mu\)g mL\({}^{- 1}\)) in axis \(x\) per area below SRM peaks (arbitrary units) in axis \(y\) (average of three runs).

#### Sample preparation

The dichloromethane extract (30 mg) was re-suspended in 3.0 mL of HPLC grade methanol (JT Baker, Ecatepec, Mexico) in centrifuge tubes by vortex agitation (Phoenix AP56, Araraquara, SP Brazil) for 30 s at the maximum possible speed. The obtained solution was filtered (PTFE Millipore, 53a Paulo, Brazil, d. 25.0 mm and p. 0.20 \(\mu\)m), and then diluted appropriately and used for quantification of compounds **1-6** by LC-APCI-MS/MS.

### Biological assays

Stock solutions of the compounds, plus control drugs, were prepared at a concentration of 20 \(\mu\)g mL\({}^{- 1}\) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma, UK), and diluted to appropriate concentration prior to assays. IC50 values were calculated with MSXLFT (IDBS, UK).

#### P. falciparum

Chloroquine-sensitive _P. falciparum_ strain 3D7 was maintained in human A+ erythrocytes in RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma, UK) supplemented with Albumax II at 37degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. _P. falciparum_ intraerythrocytic cultures were set up as above, with 1% ring stage parasitemia, 2.5% hematocrit, in triplicate in 100 \(\mu\)L of medium in 96 well, flat-bottomed Microtest III tissue plates. Drugs were added in threefold dilution series and cultures incubated for a total of 48 h at 37degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. After 24 h, (3H) hypoxanthine (0.2 mCi) was added to each well. At the end of the assay, plates were rapidly freezetwahed, harvested using a Tomtec Mach III cell harvested (Tomtec, CT) onto a 96-well format filtermat and Meltilex solid scintillant (both Wallac, Finland) added prior to reading in a Microbeta 1450 scintillation counter (Wallac, Finland) at 1 min per well.

#### T. brucei rhodiesense

_T. brucei rhodiesense_ STIB900 blood stream form trypanastigotes were maintained in HMI-18 medium, with 15% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (HarlanSeralLab, UK) at 37degC in 5% CO2-air mixture. Prior to drugging, trypanastigotes were washed and re-suspended in fresh medium at a concentration 2 x 105 mL\({}^{- 1}\), and 100 \(\mu\)L of this suspension was added to the drug dilutions. The top concentration for the test compounds was 30 \(\mu\)g mL\({}^{- 1}\). Pentamidine was included as the standard drug. Plates were incubated for 72 h at 37degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. At 72 h AlamarBlue was added to the plates. Plates were read after 4-5 h on Gemini fluorescent plate reader (Sofimax Pro. 3.1.1, Molecular Devices, UK) at EX/EM 530/585 nm with a filter cut-off at 550 nm.

#### Cytotoxicity assays

96-well plates were seeded with KB cells at a concentration of 2 x 104 mL\({}^{- 1}\) (100 \(\mu\)L per well). Drugs at 300, 30, 3 and 0.3 \(\mu\)g mL\({}^{- 1}\) were added in fresh overlay after 24 h, in triplicate at each concentration. Plates were incubated for 72 h at 37degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. At 72 h AlamarBlue was added to the plates. Plates were read after 4-5 h on Gemini fluorescent plate reader (Sofimax Pro. 3.1.1, Molecular Devices, UK) at EX/EM 530/585 nm with a filter cut-off at 550 nm. IC50 values were calculated against the blanks

Fig. 2: Second-generation ion product spectra obtained under CID-MS/MS: Compounds **1** (20 eV); **2** (25 eV); **3** (25 eV); **4** (25 eV); **5** (25 eV); **6** (250 eV). The marked ions represent the transitions chosen for SRM experiments (AP\({}^{\ast}\)\(\rightarrow\)\(\backslash\))

## Page 5

and control samples. Toxicity was assayed against KB cells using podophyllotoxin (IC50 3.0 nM) as standard.

The IC50 are mean values from at least triplicate (the variation is a maximum of 20%).

## Results and discussion

### Ic-Apci-Ms/ms

In an attempt to establish a suitable method for quantification of compounds in dichloromethane extract from leaves of _H. orendica_, this was analyzed by HPLC-APCI-MS/MS using the SRM mode. The content of compounds in the crude extracts is important to determine their recovery in HSCC analyses. The mobile phase was determined after testing different compositions of solvents. A good chromatographic resolution was achieved using a 9 min gradient, beginning with 20% acetonitrile then going to 30% acetonitrile and 30% methanol. This mobile phase provided both excellent separation between all six compounds and good ionization levels under the APCI ion source. The SRM transitions were chosen on the basis of the stability of products obtained under collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS/MS. The second-generation product ion spectra of compounds **1-6** showed intense protonated molecules ([M + H+]) at _m/z_ 499, 288, 307, 293, 313 (_m/z_ 313 was a loss of CH2O2 moiety from the protonated molecular ion _m/z_ 359), and 200 respectively. The product ions chosen to form the transitions in SRM mode during the development and application of the method provided an excellent specificity to the method, as shown by the SRM chromatograms (Fig. 3) and second-generation ion product spectra obtained under CID-MS/MS (Fig. 2). Regression analysis of the least-square line for data acquired from the external standard calibration curves showed good linearity at a 0.01-1.0 mg mL-1 concentration range of six compounds, with a correlation coefficient above 0.997 for all curves. The content of guyanin (**1**), rutaeacrpin (**2**), methyl 5.7-dimethoxy-2.2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**3**), 5.8-dimethoxy-2.2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**4**), _E_-3,4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbomethoxyphenyl)cinnamic acid (**5**), and dictamarine (**6**) in the crude extract were 2.42%, 4.80%, 5.78%, 9.82%, 1.80%, 4.15%, respectively, and showed RSD ranging from 0.03 to 2.11%, as determined by HPLC-APCI-MS/MS (Table 1).

### CCC solvent system

The essence of a successful CCC separation is the correct choice of chromatography solvents. One of the advantages of the technique is that if a solvent is not suitable and separation is not achieved, the sample can be quantitatively recovered. However, this is time consuming and it is preferable to start with the right solvent. For efficient separation, it is important that the partition coefficient (_K_) of the target compounds should lie in the range 0.5 < \(K\) < 2.0, and the separation factor between any two components (\(\alpha = k2/k1\), \(k\)2 > \(k\)1) should be greater than 1.5. A smaller \(K\) value results in a loss of peak resolution, while a larger value produces excessive band broadening. To ensure a satisfactory retention of the stationary phase, the settling time of the solvent system should be shorter than 30 s. In order to avoid wastage of solvent, it is recommended that the two-phase system under consideration produces similar volumes of each phase [20]. It is also essential to consult solvent systems used in countercurrent chromatography that can be found in the specialised literature, e.g. [18,21,22,23].

Various techniques can be used for analysis of the best solvent system. Thin-layer chromatography is a very rapid way of guiding method development. A small amount of the sample is thoroughly mixed in a vial with equal volumes of the upper and lower phases of the chosen solvent system. The same volume of each phase is applied to a TLC plate which is then allowed to migrate in the

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Compounds & Content in the crude extract (\%) & Yielded by HSCC (g) & HSCC recovery (\%) \\ LC–APCI-MS/MS & & & \\
1 & 2.42 ± 0.03 & 0.040 & 66.2 \\
2 & 4.80 ± 2.11 & 0.110 & 93.1 \\
3 & 5.78 ± 0.05 & 0.148 & 102.5 \\
4 & 9.82 ± 1.42 & 0.240 & 101.2 \\
5 & 1.80 ± 0.18 & 0.045 & 99.0 \\
6 & 4.15 ± 0.53 & 0.088 & 84.9 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Concentration of compounds **1–6** quantified simultaneously by LC–APCI-MS/MS in dichloromethane extract from leaves of _H. orendica_.

Figure 3: SRM chromatograms obtained during the quantification of compounds **1–6** on dichloromethane extract from leaves of _H. orendica_.



## Page 6

organic phase of the two-phase solvent system. An optimal system gives an equal distribution between the two phases and Rf values of the sample components between 0.2 and 0.5. If the sample is found almost exclusively in one phase, the solvent system is obviously of no use. It should be noted that the Rf value gives only an approximate indication of the appropriateness of a particular solvent because TLC involves both partition and adsorption mechanisms, whereas CCC is based on purely liquid-liquid partition phenomena [20].

The following polar two-phase solvent systems were tested: chloroform-methanol-water (5:4:3, v/v), dichloromethane-methanol-water (4:5:3, v/v), hexane-ethanol-acetonitrile-water (10:8:1:1, v/v), hexane-ethyl acetate-methanol-water (3:7:5:5, v/v), hexane-ethyl acetate-methanol-water (1:1:1, v/v), hexane-ethyl acetate-methanol-water (5:5:4:5, v/v), hexane-ethanol-methanol-water (10:7:10:8, v/v), hexane-ethanol-methanol-water (10:10:9:11, v/v), and hexane-chloroform-methanol-water (3:6:3:2, v/v). Out of the 9 candidate biphasic solvent systems, 4 were rejected, as the settling times were either too long, emulsions were formed when extract was added, or suitable partitioning did not occur. The remaining 5 solvent systems gave reasonable separation on TLC, however, only hexane-ethanol-acetonitrile-water (10:8:1:1, v/v) showed similar distribution among the two phases with the Rf values approximately 0.3 between the components, and therefore it was used for the CCC separation. The partition coefficients determined by GC-MS with this solvent system for compounds **3-5** obtained in one-step separation were 1.6, 1.7 and 2.1, respectively. 5.8-Dimethoxy-2.2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**4**) was obtained in a pure form at tubes 1-11, _E_-3-4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbomethoxyphenyl)cinnamic acid (**5**) at tubes 12-14, and methyl 5.7-dimethoxy-2.2-dimethyl-2H-1-benzopyran-6-propionate (**3**) at tubes 20-22. The GC-MS of these compounds was shown in Fig. 4. The recovery of compounds **3-5** of 2.5 g of crude extract in a one-step separation were 102.5%, 101.2%, 99.0% (Table 1), respectively, which were determined by comparison with HPLC-APCI-MS/MS data. Guyanin (**1**) was obtained after column chromatography on silica gel, rutae-carpin (**2**) and dictamine (**6**) on Sephadex LH-20, however, their recoveries were also excellent 66.2%, 93.1% and 84.9% (Table 1), respectively.

### The structural identification of the compounds

The structures of isolated compounds were identified on the basis of spectral data, particularly 1H and 13C NMR, HSQC, HMBC, and APCI-MS/MS, and by comparison of the 13C NMR spectrum with those from the literature. Compounds **1** and **2** have previously been isolated from _Hortica regia_ [24], **3** and **4** from _H. colombiana_ [25] and dictamine (**6**) from _H. longifolia_ [26] (Fig. 1).

The new compound _E_-3.4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbo methoxyphenyl) cinnamic acid was identified as **5** (Fig. 1) on the basis of the following data: Amorphous white solid. UV _l_max/nm (CHCl3) 215, 200, 24; IR _v_max/cm-1 (lio, film) 3019, 2927, 2854 (CH), 1734 (carboxyl group), 1738 (ester), 1626; 1518, 1464, 1441, 1379, 1262, 1215, 756, 669. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): 722 (1H, \(d\), _H_-2, _J_=2.0 Hz)

## Page 7

acid with the selective action on the parasites, and **3** was not toxic to KB cells (IC50 > 100 mM). The 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acids represent a novel class of compounds tested for the first time as antimalarial and trypanediol agents. Unfortunately, the other compounds showed no appreciable activity against _P. falciparum_ and _T. brucei_ rhodesines (IC50 > 100 mM). Activity appears to be associated with a methyl ester function, since _E_-3,4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbomethoxyphenyl)cinnamic acid **5** and 5,8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid **4** were inactive against both protozoan. Thus, in order to find potential lead compounds, derivatives **4** and **5** will be converted in methyl ester and assayed again.

## Conclusion

Compounds 5,8-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**4**). _E_-3,4-dimethoxy-a(3-hydroxy-4-carbonate hoxyphenyl)cinnamic acid (**5**) and methyl 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoate (**3**) were obtained in one-step HSCCC separation. The one-step separation was more rapid (1 h and 20 min) and less solvents consuming, while conventional methods of CC for separation of guyanin (**1**), rutacargin (**2**) and dictamine (**6**) from HSCCC fraction 4, 6 and 7-8 (respectively) were rather time consuming. Fraction 4 was flash chromatographed on silica gel and compound **1** was obtained with more working time (12 h). Fractions 6 and 7-8 were applied to Sephadex LH-20 ant took less working time (4 h). The present LC-APCII-MS/MS method was successfully applied to the quantification of all six compounds from the crude extracts, and permitted to determine the recovery of compounds **1-6** in HSCCC analyses, which were excellent. The present study proved that HSCCC is a powerful technique for the isolation in one-step of compounds **3-5** from plant crude extracts for bioactivity studies.

The biological result indicated that the compound tested was active at concentrations in the micromolar range, while the controls chloroquine (IC50 3.0 nM, _P. falciparum_) and pentamidine (IC50 35 nM, _T. brucei_) were active in the nanomolar range under the same test conditions. However, if it is assumed that the IC50 required for continued investigation is <30 mM, the IC50 of compound **3** is meaningful.

Chemical transformation of the limonoid guyanin (**1**, 40 mg) and alkaloid rutacargin (**2**, 110 mg) is in progress and perhaps could improve their antibacterial activity against _X. fastidiosa_.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES), for the financial support.

## References

* (1) P.G. Waterman, M.F. Grundon (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales, Academic Press, London, 1983.
* (2) A.B. Ribeiro, P.V. Abdulment, C.F. Garcia, A. Belini, V.G.P. Severino, M.F.G.F. da Silva, J.R. Fernandes, R.C. Vieira, S.A. de Carvalho, A.A. de Souza, M.A. Machado, J. Agric. Food Chem. 56 (2008) 7815.
* (3) P.A.C. Braga, Estudo Pitropolime de Especies de Horita (Rutaceae), Importancia Quimisossternaticae Artividades Biologias dos Constitunites losdados, Doctoral Thesis, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Carlos,2005.
* (4) V.G. Severino, Estudo Pitropolime o Avaliação do Potencial Antimicrobiano de Especies de Horita (Rutaceae), Master Thesis, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Carlos, 2008.
* (5) A.H. Fairland, Trends Parasitol. 19 (2003) 488.
* (6) S.L. Cori, Parasitology 114 (1997) S3.
* (7) J. Sachs, P. Malaney, Nature 415 (2002) 680.
* (8) D.A.P. Santos, P.A.C. Braga, M.F.G.F. da Silva, J.B. Fernandes, P.C. Vieira, A.F. Magalhaes, E.G. Magalhaes, A.J. Marsaiali, V.K.S. Moares, L. Ratrray, S.L. Croft, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 61 (2009) 257.
* (9) L. Altman, S.W. Zito, Phytochemistry 15 (1976) 829.
* (10) C.N. Lin, W.L. Slight, Phytochemistry 31 (1992) 2922.
* (11) D.P. Ashok, J.F. Alan, K. Dev, O. Priscilla, B.T. Paul, J.V. Bartholomew, K.J. Randall, J. Nat. Food. 55 (2002) 624.
* (12) K. Ingkanina, A. Hazekamp, A.C. Hoek, S. Balconi, R. Verpoorte, J. Liu, Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 23 (2000) 2195.
* (13) T. Imui, E.S. E. Chou, D. D. Sozetto, H.H. Feng, S.G. Franzblau, D.C. Smith, G.F. Pauli, J. Liu, Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 28 (2005)2017.
* (14) K.A. Nju, J.L. Lio, Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 24 (2001)1765.
* (15) J.Armstrong, F.P. Borris, Q. Jimenez, N. Zamorca, G.H. Tamayo-Castillo, G. Harris, J. Liu, Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 24 (2001) 1827.
* (16) H. Oka, K. Harada, Y. Ito, J. Chromatogr. 812 (1998) 35.
* (17) I. Taui, Y. Wang, S. Deng, D.C. Smith, S.G. Franzblau, G.F. Pauli, J. Chromatogr. **8** 1151 (2007) 211.
* (18) W.D. Conway, Counteract Chromatography: Apparatus, Theory and Application, VCH, New York, 1990.
* (19) A. Weisz, D. Andrzejewski, K. Shinomiya, Y. Ito, in: W.D. Conway, R.J. Petroski (Eds.) Modern Countercurrent Chromatography, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1995, p. 203.
* (20) A. Marston, K. Hostettmann, J. Chromatogr. A 1112 (2006)181.
* (21) A. Marston, K. Hostettmann, J. Chromatogr. A 658 (1994) 315.
* (22) K. Hostettmann, A. Marston, M. Hostettmann, Preparative Chromatography Techniques-Applications in Natural Product Isolation, 2nd ed, Springer, Berlin, 1998, p. 244.
* (23) T.P. Abbott, R. Kleiman, J. Chromatogr. 538 (1991) 109.
* (24) H. Jacobs, F. Ramadyal, S. McLean, M. Perpick-Dumont, F. Puzzuoli, W.F. Reynolds, J. Nat. Prot. 50 (1987) 507.
* (25) L.E.C. Suarez, F. Menichini, F.D. Monache, J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 13 (2002)339.
* (26) D.B. Correa, O.R. Gottlieb, A.P. Padua, A.I. Rocha, Rev. Latinoamer. Quim. 7 (1976) 43.



