# 10.1016@0040-4020(95)00254-6.pdf

## Page 1



# Bioactive and Other Piperidine Alkaloids from _Cassia leptophylla_

Vanderlan da S. Bolzani,a,b A. A. Leslie Gunatilaka,a and David G. I. Kingstona,*

###### Abstract

Four new piperidine alkaloids, leptophyllin A (4), 3-acetylletophyllin A (5), leptophyllin B (8), and (-)-spectaline (1), and 3 known piperidine alkaloids, (-)-speccalinine (2), canavaline (3), and iso-6-canavaline (7), were isolated by a bioassay-guided fractionation of a leaf extract of _Cassia leptophylla_. The alkaloids 1 - 3 were active in a mechanism-based DNA-modifying yeast assay and 2 was moderately active in Vero monkey and Chinese hamster ovary cell cytotoxicity assays.

Although piperidine alkaloids are abundant in nature and many of them are known to exhibit some biological activity,1 to the best of our knowledge none have been reported to show any effect on DNA. In our search for potential anticancer agents employing a mechanism-based yeast bioassay for DNA-modifying agents,2,3 we have isolated (-)-spectaline (1), the enantiomer of the known (+)-spectaline (6), three known piperidine alkaloids, (-)-spectalinine (2), canavaline (3), and iso-6-canavaline (7) and three new piperidine alkaloids named leptophyllin A (4), 3-acetylletophyllin A (5), and leptophyllin B (8), by a bioassay-guided fractionation of a bioactive extract of the Brazilian legume, _Cassia leptophylla_. Of these, (-)-spectaline (1), (-)-spectalinine (2) and canavaline (3) were found to be active in our bioassay. The alkaloids 1 and 2 also showed cytotoxicity in the Vero monkey and Chinese hamster ovary cell cytotoxicity assays. In this paper we report the structure elucidation, the assignment of 1H and 13C NMR spectral data by application of 2D techniques, and the biological evaluation of these seven piperidine alkaloids.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A preliminary investigation of the bioactive CHCl3/MeOH (2:1) extract of the leaves of _C. leptophylla_ indicated that the bioactivity was due to its alkaloid constituents. Thus the alkaloid fraction obtained in the usual manner was subjected to CC on Al2O3 and the resulting fractions exhibiting bioactivity were further separated by combined Al2O3 CC, Si gel prep TLC, and RP-TLC as necessary to afford seven alkaloids, the structures of which were elucidated as described below. All seven alkaloids exhibited some common features in their MS, 1H and 13C NMR spectra (see Tables 1, 2, and 3, respectively). The presence of significant peaks at _m/z_ 114 and 96 in their FABMS were characteristic of a piperidine bearing methyl, hydroxyl and alkyl functionalities.4-6 These groups in the piperidine ring were located at C-2, C-3 and C-6, respectively, based on their 1H and 13C NMR data.



## Page 2

The least polar alkaloid, C20H39NO2 (HRFABMS), [a]D - 8.20, in addition to the general characteristics indicated above, had a peak at _m/z_ 265 in its MS which may be assigned to the fragment e (Table 1) suggesting that it has a C14 alkyl side chain with an oxo function, the presence of which was confirmed by its IR (vmax 1720 cm-1), and 13C NMR (d 209.3 s) spectra. The 13C NMR spectrum, interpreted with the aid of the DEPT spectrum, indicated the presence of one quaternary C, three CH's, fourteen CH2's, and two CH3's. One of the CH3 carbons appeared at d 29.8 suggesting that the molecule contained a COCH3 group. From the foregoing the structure **1** was inferred for this alkaloid. The 2D NMR data (DQCOSY, HETCOR and HMDC) supported the structure **1** proposed for this alkaloid and enabled assignment of the 1H and 13C NMR signals due to the piperidine ring and some fragments of the long alkyl chain. Thus in the HETCOR spectrum, the methine signal at dC 55.7 (C-2) correlated with the dq at dH 2.72, whilst the methine signal at dC 57.2 (C-6) correlated with the multiplet at dH 2.50; the methyl signal at dC 29.8 showed a correlation with the signal at dH 2.16. The HMDC spectrum showed 1H-13C correlations (Fig. 1) which were useful in the assignment of 1H and 13C NMR signals of the piperidine nucleus, the C-2-Me, and some portions of the side chain. The 1H and 13C NMR assignments for **1** are presented in Tables 2 and 3, respectively.

The relative configurations of the chiral carbons C-2, C-3, and C-6 in the piperidine ring of **1** were assigned mainly on the basis of 1H coupling data obtained from its 1H and DQCOSY NMR spectra and comparison of these data with those reported for related pieridines.7 It is known that in the absence of any bulky substituents in the piperidine ring, the C-3-OH group prefers the axial orientation which allows it to form an intramolecular H-bond with the lone-pair of electrons on N.8,9 This was reflected in the IR spectrum of **1** in CCl4 which showed a large H-bonded OH stretch signal at 3350 cm-1, similar to those shown by cassine10 and spectaline (**8**).9 The 1H and 13C NMR data for **1** were almost identical with those reported for spectaline.9 However, the [a]D for **1** was determined to be -8.20 whereas that reported for spectaline is +8.0o, indicating that alkaloid **1** is the enantiomer of spectaline, i.e. (-)-spectaline. Comparison of the 13C NMR data for **1** with those of (+)-spectaline (**8**)9 showed a discrepancy in the literature assignments for C-2, C-6, and C-14 and these have now been revised based on HETCOR and HMDC data (see Table 2).

Figure 1: **Some selected HMDC correlations of 1 and 5**.



## Page 3



## Page 4

Alkaloid **2**, C20H41NO2 (HRFABMS), [a]D - 8.6o, whilst having the general spectral characteristics of a 2,3,6-trisubstituted piperidine alkaloid, showed peaks at _m/z_ 267 and 249 in its MS due to the fragments f and g respectively (Table 1), suggesting the presence of a hydroxy group in the side chain. The 1H NMR spectrum was found to be similar to that reported for (-)-spectalinine.11 As 13C NMR assignments for spectalinine have not been reported previously, spectral assignment was undertaken with the aid of HETCOR, DEPT, HMBC and COLOC techniques. 13C NMR assignments for (-)-spectalinine (**2**) are given in Table 3.

Spectral data (MS, 1H and 13C NMR) of the next most polar alkaloid, C18H37NO2 (HRFABMS), closely resembled those of alkaloid **2** except that they indicated that it had two fewer CH2 units in the side chain compared with **2** [MS (Table 1) and 13C NMR (Table 3) evidence]. The comparison of 1H NMR (Table 2), MS data and [a]D of this alkaloid with canavaline (**3**)4 confirmed its identity.

Spectral data for alkaloid **4**, C13H38NO3 (HRFABMS), [a]D + 2.5o, indicated it to be new and it was therefore named leptophyllin A. The presence of a 2-methyl-3-hydroxy-6-alkylpiperidine nucleus was apparent from its MS fragmentation (Table 1) and 1H NMR data (Table 2). The MS, in addition to the general fragments depicted in Table 1, showed two prominent peaks at _m/z_ 284 and 254 corresponding, respectively, to the loss of CH2OH and CH(OH)CH2OH fragments from M+. The 1H NMR spectra, analyzed with the help of its DQCOSY spectrum, indicated the presence of two spin systems in addition to those due to the substituted piperidine ring, appearing at 8 3.69 m, 3.62 dd, and 3.40 dd and attributable to the side chain. Furthermore, the 13C NMR spectrum, analyzed with the aid of DEPT and HETCOR spectra, showed the presence of oxygenated methine (dC 72.2) and methylene (dC 66.8) carbons. The foregoing suggested the presence of a 1,2-glycol system at the terminus of the side chain. The presence of this system as well as the 

## Page 5

2-methyl-3-hydroxy-6-alkylpiperidine structural moiety was confirmed by the HMBC spectrum. The HMBC correlations observed for the side chain of **4** were similar to those observed for **5** (Fig. 1). Based on the above observations, along with analysis of its 13C NMR spectrum, leptophyllin A was identified as 2(_S_)-methyl 6(_R_)-(11',12'-dihydroxydodecyl)piperidin-3(_S_)-ol (**4**). The stereochemical dispositions of the groups at C-2, C-3, and C-6 in **4** were deduced from the corresponding 1H NMR coupling constants.8,9 However, it was not possible to assign the configuration of C(11)-OH due to the limited quantity of **4** available.

A minor alkaloid was also isolated from the crude CC fraction which contained **4**. This alkaloid had 1H and 13C NMR spectral characteristics similar to **4** except that it contained an acetyl function [6H 2.09 s (3H); &c 171.0 (s) and 21.3 (q)] and appeared to be a monoacetyl derivative of **4**. The downfield shifts observed for H-3 and C-3 in its 1H and 13C NMR spectra respectively indicated it to be 3-acetylleptophyllin A (**5**). This structure was fully corroborated by MS, 1H NMR, 13C NMR and HMBC spectra. Some important HMBC correlations observed are depicted in Fig. 1.

The physical data of the next most polar alkaloid, C17H35NO2, agreed well with those reported for isotope-canavaline (7).11 The most polar alkaloid, C14H33NO3 (HRFABMS), [a]D -3.39, named leptophyllin B, had a singlet at 8c 182.8 in its 13C NMR spectrum, indicating the presence of a CO2H group. Evidence for the attachment of CO2H to the terminal carbon of the side chain was obtained by analysis of its 1H NMR spectrum, which had a triplet due to 2H at 8H 2.46 (Table 2). The MS, 1H and 13C NMR spectral data (Tables 1, 2, and 3, respectively) were compatible with the structure **8** proposed for this alkaloid.

The biological activity data for the alkaloids **1-3**, **7**, and **8** in our mechanism-based yeast mutant bioassays2,3 are summarized in Table 4. Alkaloids **1** - **3** showed selective activities in RS 322YK and RS 321N assays compared with the wild-type RS 188N strain. Cytotoxic activities of **1** and **2** were evaluated in two cell lines (Table 4). (-)-Spectalinine (**2**) was found to be moderately active in both cytotoxicity assays.

## Experimental

### General Experimental Procedures

These are identical to those reported in ref. 3; the 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Unity 400 spectrometer at 400 and 100.57 MHz, respectively, with TMS as internal standard; DQCOSY, DEPT, HETCOR, COLOC, and HMBC NMR experiments were performed on the same spectrometer, using standard Varian pulse sequences; IR spectra were obtained on a Perkin-Elmer 727B spectrophotometer; for CC, Al2O3 (neutral) grade III was used; TLC and PTLC involved neutral Al2O3, Si gel and Whatman LKC18F plates; visualization on TLC was by spraying with Dragendorff and iodoplatinate reagents.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compound & Organism or cell line \\ RS 322YK & RS 321N & RS 188N & Vero monkey & Chinese hamster \\ (rad52Y) & & (rad+) & cell line & ovary cell line \\
1 & 15 & 17.5 & 126 & \textgreater{}20 & 15 \\
2 & 16 & 27 & \textgreater{}50 & 9.9 & 9.7 \\
3 & 16.5 & 26 & \textgreater{}50 & NTb & NTb \\
7 & \textgreater{}500 & \textgreater{}500 & 123 & NTb & NTb \\
8 & \textgreater{}200 & 157 & 126 & NTb & NTb \\ Camptothecin & 0.6 & - & 100 & 0.019 & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Bioactivity of _Cassia leptophylla_ Alkaloids and the Standard.a

## Page 6

Plant Material.The plant material was collected in Sao Paulo State, Brazil, in Jan. 1993, and identified by Dr. Claudia M. Young. A voucher specimen has been deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Gardens of Sao Paulo State, Brazil.

Bioassays.Identical to those reported in ref. 3.

Extraction and Isolation of Alkalioids.The semi-dried leaves of _C. leptophylla_ Vog. (3.5 kg) were extracted with cold CHCl3-MeOH (2:1), concentrated, redissolved in CHCl3 and the CHCl3 soluble fraction was extracted (x 3) with 2N aqueous HCl. The aqueous extracts were pooled, basified (pH = 9) with NH4OH, and successively extracted with CHCl3 and EtOHAc. The combined organic extracts were dried (Na2SO4) and evaporated to yield the crude alkaloidal mixture (256 mg). This was subjected to CC on Al2O3; elution with mixtures of CH2Cl2-MeOH of increasing polarity afforded 4 crude fractions containing alkaloids. Fraction 1 was further separated by CC on Al2O3 (solvent gradient, 1 - 10% EtOHAc in CH2Cl2) followed by RP-TLC (20% H2O in MeOH) to furnish 1 (5.0 mg) and 2 (8.0 mg). Fraction 2 was submitted to Si gel PTLC (5% MeOH in CH2Cl2, triple elution) to afford 3 (2.8 mg). From fraction 3 were isolated 4 (1.8 mg), 5 (4.8 mg), and 7 (9.8 mg) by CC on Al2O3 (solvent gradient, 1 - 10% EtOHac in CH2Cl2). Purification of fraction 4 by RP-TLC (10% H2O in MeOH) afforded pure 8 (2.8 mg).

(_-)-Spectalaine (1)._ White amorphous solid, mp 118deg; [a]P-8.2 (c = 0.32, CHCl2); IR (KBr): 3350, 2860, 1720, 1560, 1370, 720 cm-1; HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int. %): 326.3073 [M+1]+(100) (calc. for C20H4NO3: 236.3059)) for remaining MS data, see Table 1; 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

(_-)-Spectalaine (2)._ Colorless oil; [a]P-8.5 (c = 0.03, CHCl2) (lit. -8.5deg); IR (neat): 3450, 2915, 2860, 1570, 1380, 720 cm-1; HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int. %): 328.3201 [M+1]+(100) (calc. for C20H42NO2: 328.3215), for remaining MS data, see Table 1; 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

Canavaline (3).Colorless oil; HRFABMS (see Table 1); 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

Leptophyllin **A (4)**, Colorless oil; [a]P +2.50 (c = 0.02, CHCl3); HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int. %); 316.2847 [M+1]+(100) (calc. for C18H38NO3: 316.2851), for remaining MS data, see Table 1; 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

Leptophyllin **A (5)**, Colorless oil; [a]P +3.0deg (c = 0.03, CHCl3); HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int. %): 358.3025 [M+1]+(62) (calc. for C20H40NO4: 358.2957), for remaining MS data, see Table 1; 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

Leptophyllin **A (6)**, Colorless oil; [a]P -6.0deg (c = 0.05,CHCl3) (lit.11 -5.66deg ); HRFABMS, (see Table 1); 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

Leptophyllin **B (8)**, Colorless oil; [a]P -3.6deg (c = 0.03, MeOH); HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int. %): 300.2526 [M+1]+(100) (calc. for C17H34NO3: 300.2538), for remaining MS data, see Table 1; 1H NMR (see Table 2); 13C NMR (see Table 3).

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants from the National Cancer Institute under a National Cooperative Drug Discovery Group (1UO1 CA 50771) awarded to the University of Virginia (Dr. S. M. Hecht, Principal Investigator). The visit of V. da S. B. to V. P. I. & S. U. was supported by a fellowship from FAPESP and UNESP, Brazil. We thank Dr. C. M. Young (Sao Paulo Botanic Gardens, Brazil) for authentication of plant material; Dr. R. K. Johnson and Mr. G. A. Hofmann (SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Philadelphia) for the yeast strains and cytotoxicity assays; Mr. Kim Harch (V. P. I. & S. U.) and the Midwest Center for Mass Spectrometry with partial support by the National Science Foundation Biology Division (Grant No. DIR 9017262) for MS.

## References

* [1] Brown, E.; Dhal, R. _Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr._**1972**, 11, 4292-4303.
* [2] Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Kingston, D. G. I.; Johnson, R. K. _Pure & Appl. Chem._**1994**,
* [3] Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Samaranayake, G.; Kingston, D. G. I.; Hofmann, G.; Johnson, R. K. _J. Nat. Prod._, **1992**, 55, 1648-1654.
* [4] Lykhigeo, D.; Vermenge, M. J. _Tetrahedron Lett._**1967**, 1133-1137.
* [5] Khuong-Huu, Q.; Ratle, G.; Monseur, X.; Goutarel, R. _Bull. Soc. Chim. Belges_, **1972**, 81, 443-458.
* [6] Ahmed, V.U.; Basha, A.; Haque, W. Z. _Naturforsch._**1978**, 33b, 347-348.
* Structure, Preparation, Reactivity, and Synthetic Applications of Piperidine and its Derivatives,", Elsevier, Amsterdam, **1991**.
* [8] Lyle, R. E.; McMahon, D. H.; Krueger, W. E.; Spicer, C. K. _J. Org. Chem._**1966**, 31, 4164-4167.
* [9] Christofilis, I.; Welter, A.; Jodot, J. _Tetrahedron_**1977**, 33, 977-979.
* [10] Highet, R. J. _J. Org. Chem._**1964**, 29, 471-474.
* [11] Christofilis, I.; Welter, A.; Jodot, J. _Tetrahedron_**1977**, 33, 3005-3006.



