# 10.1016@S0040-4039(01)97216-8.pdf

## Page 1

Tetrahedron Letters No. 38, pp.3501 - 3504, 1971. Pergamon Press. Printed in Great Britain.

CHEMICAL CONSTITUENTS OF THE BRIGHT ORANGE APRID, APRIS HERII POSSOLOGNEL.
III. TWO MAPPHEAGUINONE METHODS OF UUSUAL STRUCTURE AND CHEMICAL BEHAVIOR *
Keith S. Brown, Jr. and Ulrich Weiss

Centro de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais
MIAND - LPB

Faculdade de Parmeida, U.F.R.J.

National Institutes of Health

Praia Vernelius, Rio de Janeiro ZG-82, BRAZIL
Bethesda, Maryland 20014, USA

(Received in UK 29 July 1971; accepted for publication 23 August 1971)
We have previously reported (1) the isolation from Aphis seril of the poly-
ketide glucosides seriaphin (I), 6-hydroxyusizin-8-Q-D-glucoside (IV), gluco-
side B (VIII), fluoraphin (X), and acetylfluoraphin (XI). An additional small
fraction of the polar pigments in the aphid extract has now been shown by NMR
spectrometry to consist of a 2:1 mixture of the 6'-monoacetyl-gluosides II and
V; this mixture was unchanged under conditions which gave a good yield of a 6'-
monotritylate from seriaphin (I) (2). An interrelation of 6-hydroxyusizin (VI)
with the plant product toroachrysone (VII) (3) was also accomplished through partial methylation of the glucoside (IV) followed by acid hydrolysis (2). An ele-

gant total synthesis of 6-hydroxymethylisinf has recently been achieved via

barakol (XII) (4,5).
B-Q
QH
R-Q
QH
I. B=Q-D-glucosyl
II. B=Q-D-glucosyl
II. B=Q-D-glucosyl
II. B=H
IV. B=B-D-glucosyl,
X. B=B-D-glucosyl
II. B=H
R' = OH
XI. B=6-Q-acetyl-B-
V.B=6-Q-acetyl-
V.B=6-Q-acetyl-
\(\beta\)-D-glucosyl,
\(\beta\)-D-glucosyl,
\(\beta\)-D-glucosyl,
\(\beta\)-OH
II. B=H
VI. B=H, R' = OH
III.
IX. R=H
VII. R=H, R'=OH,
HO
Repeated chromatography over Florisil and silica of the acetone extract of
a large batch (405 g.) of Aphis seril (prepared by Dr. Brent Aoott in Tuosen,
Arizona) yielded trace amounts of two additional compounds, easily detected and
followed on thin-layer plates by their brilliant red fluorescence.** These
*
Presented in part, including structure XIV, by U. Weiss at the Third Natural
Products Symposium, Kingston, Jamaica, January 4-8, 1970.
**
The presence of larger amounts of these two compounds was confirmed in a
second large extract of A. norii prepared in Tuosen in 1971 by David Eckert.
3501

## Page 2

3502

compounds, XIII [m.p. 118-122(resolidifies and m. 215-218\({}^{0}\) dec.), \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) 216,244,
298,412 nm (log \(\in\) 4.59,4.65,4.45,4.28), \(\nu_{\max}^{\rm LBP}\) 1700,1645,1600 on.-1] and XIV [m.p. 180-186\({}^{0}\), \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) 216,240,297,395 nm (log \(\in\) 4.63,4.56,4.58,4.25), \(\nu_{\max}^{\rm KBr}\) 1680,1650,
1600,1560 on.-1] were not reduced by aqueous sodium dithionite, but gave upon

borohydride reduction material (not isolated) with UV absorption spectrum closely

matching that of glucoside B (VIII). Their diagnostic NMR spectra (indicated

alongside their structures, in d-values below internal TMS, in CDCl3 solution)
showed that they were derived from neriaphenisin (III) and 6-hydroxynuisin (VI),

respectively, by modification of the resorcinoid ring only, eliminating one aro-

matic proton and leaving the other in a more highly shielded position, and intro-

ducing two deshielded quaternary C-methyl groups with very different magnetic en-

vironments. The compounds could not be methylated with diazomethane, but still
possessed a strongly hydrogen-bonded phenolic group (D2O-exchangeable NMR signal

near 14 ppm, and shift of the UV spectrum upon alkalinization).

The mass spectra of the two compounds revealed the addition of 68 mass units

to the aglycones III and VI (H+ 274 - 342, 232 - 300); the only significant frag-

nentations were loss of methyl and/or hydroxyl groups and water from the very stable molecular ions. The foregoing facts can best be accommodated by postulating a
condensation of the aglycones with \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm bacostyl}\), with elimination of water (CHH6O2=86, -H2O=68). Position 5 in compounds of this type is known to be highly reactive to-

wards condensations with electron-poor atoms (6,7). The resulting structures,

written as hemisostals (XIII,XIV), are uniquely consistent with the physical and

chemical data accumulated so far on these red-fluorescent entities.

In support of this formulation, it was shown to be possible to synthesize

three representative compounds of this type. The two natural compounds XIII and

XIV, and their analog XV [m.p. 180-185\({}^{0}\) dec., \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) 221,298,404 nm (log \(\in\) 4.53,
4.43,4.11), \(\nu_{\max}^{\rm KBr}\) 1645,1580 on-1] were produced by the rapid, room-temperature

condensation of one mole of bioactivity with the orude aglycones III, VI, and IX

(from acid hydrolysis of I, IV, and VIII), in the presence of Florisil or tri-

ethylamine (yields about 50%). The synthetic materials XIII and XIV were in ev-

ery way identical with those isolated from the aphid extracts. The unusual double-

ling of almost all peaks in the NMR spectra of XIII and XV may be related to slow

interconversion of two conformers of the dihydropyran ring, or to diastereoisomer



## Page 3

3503

ism due to the hemisotel carbon; a solution of XIII in tetrachlorotethylene showed partial coalescence of these doubled peaks in the spectrum measured at 115deg(2).

Mild acetylation of XIII (Ac2O-py, r.t.) gave a principal (70%) product XVI, m.p. 188-195deg, with a simplified NMR spectrum (indicated beside structure), negli-

gible fluorescence, and a UV spectrum nearly identical with that of peracetyl-I (1). The mass spectrum of this compound showed it to be triacetylated; the infra-red spectrum revealed only phenolic acetate groups, and an unsaturated ketone band of greater intensity than that of the parent XIII. This principal product has evidently undergone the re-aromatization frequently observed in quinone methides (8); in view of its UV spectral characteristics, it should have the unsaturated ketone sidechain at C-5 twisted out of conjugation with the aromatic ring by stef-

rio pressure from the neighboring acetoxy group.

The acetylation of XIII gave, besides XVI, an inseparable mixture of two triacetates with very strong yellow-white fluorescence. The UV spectrum of this mixture indicated additional conjugation to the aromatic system; an aliphatic

aoctoxy group was evident from the IR (\(\frac{\text{KBr}}{\text{max}}\) 1735 on.-1), mass (\(\text{M}^{+}\) - 59), and NMR

spectra. This latter spectrum strongly suggested the presence of a 2:1 mixture of the conjugated methylene-hemisotel acetate XVII and the vinyl ether XVIII

## Page 4

5504

No. 38

resulting from 1,6-addition of acetic acid. Clarification of the indicated NMR assignments and of the nature of the mixture was greatly aided by the use of syn-thetio model compounds, reported in the following communication (9). Acetylation of XIV apparently gave but two products (not yet fully purified), one corrosion-ding to XVI and the other (XIX) to XVIII, unmixed with XVII-analogous material.

The possibility that XIII and XIV might be artefacts produced upon Florisil chromatography of the crude aglycone-containing aphid extracts (1) could be eliminated by the observation of their presence prior to chromatography in fresh extracts of A. meril feeding on either Ascleplas equassavlos or Kerium oleander, and their detection on thin-layer plates in which live aphids were directly crushed on the origin. These compounds thus represent two of the very few known natural products (10) clearly related in part to bioostyl, rather than only to acetate units joined normally head-to-tail.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. We are indebted to Dr. Brent Aoott and Mr. David Eckert, oriented by R.B. Bates, at the University of Arizona, Tucson, for large-scale col-lection and extraction of aphids. Dr. S. Shibata provided an authentic sample of torachrysone (VII), and Dr. B.W. Bycroft information on berskol (XII). NMR spec-tra were obtained by Drs. Adelina Costa Neto and Mr. Bramuel C. Santos on the A60-A of the Institute de Guinea, U.F.B.J.; by Dr. P.M. Baker and Dr. Libero Antonacao on the T-60 of the Instituto Nacional de Tecnologia; and by R.B. Brad-ley and E.A. Sokoleski on Machines at NIH. Mass spectra were run at NIH by W.R. Landis and W.E. Comstock. Financial support is gratefully acknowledged, from the N.S.F. (Grants GB 5389X and GB 5389 XI), Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Banco Nacional do Desenvolvimento EconomSmoo, and the C.P.E.G. of the U.F.B.J.

REFERNCES
1. K.S. Brown, Jr., D.W. Cameron and U. Weiss, Tetrahedron Letters 471 (1969); K.S.Brown, Jr. and U. Weiss, Amais Acad.Bras.Cionales 42, supl., 205 (1970).
2. These experiments will be detailed in the complete paper on A.meril pigments.
3. S.Shibata, E.Morishita, M.Kaneda, Y.Kimura, M.Takido and S.Takahashi, Chem. Pharm. Bull. (Japan) 12, 454 (1969).
4. B.W.Bycroft, A.Hassanali-Walji, A.W.Johnson and T.J.King, J.Chem.Soc. (C) 1686 (1970).
5. B.W.Bycroft, personal communications to K.Brown: Sept. 25, 1969; Oct. 13, 1969; April 20, 1970; June 8,1971.
6. D.W.Cameron and H.W.-S.Chan, J.Chem.Soc. (C) 1825 (1966).
7. R.H.Thomson, Quart.Revs. (London) 10, 27 (1956).
8. A.B.Turner, Quart.Revs. (London) 18, 347 (1964); Fortschr.Chem.Org.Naturstof-fe 24, 288 (1966); S.M.Kupohan, A.Karim, and C.Maroks, J.Org.Chem. 34, 39122 (1969).
9. K.S.Brown, Jr. and P.M. Baker, Tetrahedron Letters, following communication.
10. Another example is the antitumor-active diester of butane-2,3-diol, ooxrenolide (T.Ukita and A.Tanimura, Chem.Pharm.Bull. (Japan) 9, 43 (1961); A. Tanimura, ibid. 9, 47 (1961)).



