# 10.1248@cpb.56.723.pdf

## Page 1



# Myeloperoxidase Inhibitory and Radical Scavenging Activities of Flavones from _Pterogyne nitens_

Daniara Cristina Fernandes,a Luis Octavio Regasini,a Jose Carlos Rebaglio Vellosa,b Patricia Mendonca Pauletti,a Ian Castro-gamboa,a Vanderlan Silva Bolzani,a Olga Maria Mascarenhas Oliveira,b and Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva*a

a NuBBE-Nucleo de Bioensaios, Biosinstese e Ecofisologia de Produtos Naturais, Department of Organic Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, UNESP-Sao Paulo State University; Araraquara, SP, CP 355, CEP 14801-970, Brazil; and Department of Biochemistry and Chemical Technology, Institute of Chemistry, UNESP-Sao Paulo State University; Araraquara, SP, CP 355, CEP 14801-970, Brazil.

Received December 22, 2007; accepted February 12, 2008; published online February 18, 2008

###### Abstract

Two new flavone glucosides, nitensosides A and B (1, 2), together with four known compounds, sorbifolin (3), sorbifolin 6-O-b-glucopyranoside (4), pedalitin (5), and pedalitin 6-O-b-glucopyranoside (6) were isolated from _Pterogyne nitens_. Their structures were elucidated from 1D and 2D NMR analysis, as well as by high resolution mass spectrometry. All the isolated flavones were evaluated for their myeloperoxidase (MPO) inhibitory activity. The most active compound, pedalitin, exhibited IC50 value of 3.75 nm on MPO. Additionally, the radical-scavenging capacity of flavones 1--6 was evaluated towards ABTS and DPPH radicals and compared to standard compounds quercetin and Trolox(r).

flavone; _Pterogyne nitens_; myeloperoxidase; antioxidant; radical scavenging

## Experimental

### Plant Material

Leaves of _Pterogyne nitens_ were collected in the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, in May 2003, and a voucher specimen (SP204319) has been deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Institute (SP204319). The most active compound, pedalitin, exhibited IC50 value of 3.75 nm on MPO. Additionally, the radical-scavenging capacity of flavones 1--6 was evaluated towards ABTS and DPPH radicals and compared to standard compounds quercetin and Trolox(r).

### Isotal and Purification

The shade-dried leaves (2.3 kg) of _P nitens_ were ground and defatted with _n_-hexane (1.81x3, at room temperature) and exhaustively extracted by macroactin with ethanol (2.71x3) at room temperature. The ethanol extract was concentrated under reduced pressure to yield 9.2 g of a syrupy residue. The concentrate was then diluted with MeOH: H2O (4:1) and successively partitioned with EOAc and _n_-butanol. After solvent removal using a tetraoperator, each partition phase yielded 3.0 and 4.2 g, respectively. The EtOAc residue (1.5 g) was chromatographed by gel permeation over Sephadex LH-20 eluted with methanol to afford eleven fractions (E1--E11). Chromatographic purification of fraction E5 (232 mg) by RP-HPLC [MeOH: H2O: AcOH (46:53:0.5), UV detection at 274 nm; flow rate 10 ml/ml] led to the isolation of compounds (1 (84 mg) and 6 (43 mg). Fraction E8 (112 mg) was purified by RP-HPLC [MeOH: H2O: AcOH (55:44:5.5), UV detection at 274 nm; flow rate 13 ml/ml], affording compound **3** (22 mg). TLC analysis of fraction E11 indicated it was pure, and led to its identification as compound **5** (130 mg). The butanol fraction (1.8g) was dissolved in MeOH and submitted to gel filtration on Sephadex LH-20 eluted with MeOH, affording 14 fractions (B1--B14). After TLC comparison, fractions B4--B6 were combined (333 mg) and purified by RP-HPLC (MeOH: H2O: AcOH (68:31:5.0), UV detection at 274 nm and flow rate 12 ml/min), to yield compounds **2** (66 mg) and **4** (89 mg).

### Radical Scavenging Activity (BSA)

Antisodium activity of compounds **1**--6 was determined using DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) and ABTS+ [2,2'-azinobis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)] as-reagents.14,15) Sample solutions of 1--6 and positive controls at various concentrations (33.3--1.7 _μ_m) in MeOH were individually added to 67.6 _μ_m DPPH in MeOH. The mixture was incubated in the dark at 25 degC for 30 min. Remaining DPPH was determined colorimetrically at 517 nm by comparing with methanol (negative control) in a microplate reader. ABTS+ was prepared by reacting 5 ml of ABTS (7 mm) water solution with 88 ml of 140 mm potassium persulphate (ratio: 1:0.35) and the mixture allowed to stand in the dark at room temperature for 12--16 h before use. Prior to assay, ABTS+ stock solution was diluted with KH2PO/K2HPO4 (100 mm, pH 7.0 diluted 1:10 before use) buffer solution (ratio: 1:8). ABTS+ solution (1 ml) was added to glass test tubes containing different concentrations of compounds **1--6** and positive controls (0.5--7.0 _μ_m/ml) and mixed for 15 s. Tubes were incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Scavenging capacity was read spectrophotometrically by monitoring the decrease in absorbance at 734 nm. A lower absorbance of the reaction mixture indicated higher free radical

## Page 2

scavenging activity. Anti-radical abilities against ABTS5+ and DPPH7 species were expressed by using mean values obtained from triplicates as percentage of radical reduced (% inhibition) calculated from the equation: % inhibition=[1(-(Asample/A)x100], where A is test absorbance without sample (only solvent after free radicals) and Asample is test absorbance with compounds **1**-**6** or positive controls.

**Myeloperoxidase Inhibitory Activity** Inhibitory effects of 7-me-thoxyflavones **1**-**6** on MPO were evaluated through guaiacolidation in presence of myeloperoxidase (8 ms) and hydrogen peroxide (0.3 mx).16) The reactions were spectrophotometrically followed at 470 nm, calculated from the initial linear rate of reaction using guaiued (70 mm) as substrate for the peroxidase inhibitory activity, and were compared at different sample concentrations of compounds **1**--**6** (0.50-50 nm) and in the their absence. The IC50 values were obtained from the rates calculated on the basis of % inhibition expressed in concentration-response curves.

## Results and Discussion

Nitensoside A (**1**) was obtained as yellow amorphous powder. Its IR spectrum showed absorption bands at 3427 (OH), 1656 (_a_,_b_-unsaturated C=O), 1606, 1502, 1452 (C=C, aromatic), and a broad band at 1160 cm-1, indicating the presence of a glucosyl unit (Fig. 1). The UV spectrum displayed two strong absorption bands at 274 nm and 338 nm. These results strongly suggested that compound **1** is a flavonoid glycososide.17,18) Analysis of the 1H-NMR data (Table 1) revealed characteristic resonances of aromatic and glycosidic protons (including two amomeric protons) and one methoxy group. The signals at \(d\) 4.92 (1H, d, _J_=7.0 Hz, H-1''), \(d\) 4.45 (1H, d, _J_=1.5 Hz, H-1''), \(d\) 3.40 (1H, m, H-6a''), \(d\) 3.70 (1H, dd, _J_=10.0, 1.5 Hz, H-6b''), and \(d\) 1.04 (1H, d, _J_=6.0 Hz, H-6'') suggested the presence of one _b_-glucopyranosyl and one _a_-thamopyranosyl unit in compound **1**, which was confirmed after inspection of the 13C-NMR data set (Table 1) and observation of gHMQC correlations of sugar protons to their respective carbon signals, especially those at \(d\) 102.4 (C-1''), \(d\) 100.6 (C-1''), \(d\) 66.6 (C-6'') and \(d\) 17.7 (C-6''). In the aromatic moiety of compound **1**, signals at \(d\) 7.96 (2H, d, _J_=8.5 Hz, H-2', 6'), 6.94 (2H, d, _J_=8.5 Hz, H-3', 5'), 6.87 (1H, s, H-8) and 6.81 (1H, s, H-3) suggested that the aglycone was an apigenin derivative (5,7,4'-trihydroxyfluoxyne).17,19) The singlet at \(d\) 6.87 was assigned to H-8 of the flavone A-ring on the basis of its characteristic 13C-NMR resonance at \(d\) 91.5.17) The position of the methoxy group was assigned at C-7 on the basis of observed gHMBC and NOESY correlations (Fig. 2). The NOESY 1D spectrum showed a strong interaction between the methoxy proton signal at \(d\) 3.90 and H-8 whereas a gHMBC correlation was observed between the signals at \(d\) 158.7 (C-7) and \(d\) 3.90, which confirmed the position of the methoxy group at C-7. A singlet observed at \(d\) 13.0 was assigned to the C-5 hydroxy proton. These observations confirmed the aglycone unit as 5,6,4'-trihydroxy-7-methoxyflavone (sorbifolin), which was consistent with the protonated aglycone [sorbifolin+H]+ ion at _m/z_ 301 observed in first-order LR-ESI-MS (positive mode) of compound **1**. A cross-peak between the signals for

Fig. 1: Structures of Compounds **1**—**6

## Page 3

C-6 (\(\delta\) 128.1) and the anomeric proton (\(\delta\) 4.92) in the gHMBC spectrum indicated the position of the glucopyranosyl unit at C-6 of the flavone moiety. Assignment of the inner sugar resonances was achieved by using the anomeric proton resonance at \(\delta\) 4.92 as a starting point for the interpretation of \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H-COSY and gHMQC datasets. The coupling constant of the anomeric proton (\(J\)=7.0 Hz) confirmed the \(\beta\)-linkage of the first glucosyl moiety. The downfield shift of C-6\({}^{\prime\prime}\) (+5.5 ppm) and upfield shift of C-5\({}^{\prime\prime}\) (-1.4 ppm) glucopyranosyl moiety resonances, respectively, compared to sorbifolin-6-\(O\)-\(\beta\)-glucopyranoside [19], indicated that the rhamnopyranosyl moiety was attached at C-6\({}^{\prime\prime}\). Moreover, the gHMBC correlation between the signals at \(\delta\) 100.6 (C-1\({}^{\prime\prime}\)) and \(\delta\) 3.70 (H-6\({}^{\prime\prime}\)) confirmed the C-6\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-\(O\)-C-1\({}^{\prime\prime}\) interglycosidic linkage of compound **1**. The high resolution ESI mass spectrum of compound **1** showed a deprotonated molecular ion peak [M\(-\)H]\({}^{-}\) at 607.1657 \(m/z\), in agreement with the calculated mass for the molecular formula C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{31}\)O\({}_{15}\) (607.1657).

Compound **2** was obtained as amorphous yellow powder and its HR-ESI-MS (negative mode) showed a deprotonated molecular ion at \(m/z\) 623.1600 (Caled 623.1657) associated to the molecular formula C\({}_{28}\)H\({}_{31}\)O\({}_{16}\). The UV and IR spectra of **2** were similar to those of compound **1** suggesting a 6-\(O\)-glucosylflavone derivative. The IR of **2** showed a broad hydroxyl band at 3427 cm\({}^{-1}\), and an \(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated carbonyl absorption at 1656 cm\({}^{-1}\), in addition to a C-O stretching band at 1045 cm\({}^{-1}\), indicating a glycosidic substance. The UV spectrum of **2** exhibited absorption maxima typical of a flavone at 270 nm and 349 nm. The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR data (Table 1) suggested that compound **2** had the same 7-methoxyflavone skeleton as compound **1**, except for the presence of a hydroxy group at C-3\({}^{\prime}\). In fact, the major difference between compounds **1** and **2** was the aromatic spin system displayed by the B ring hydrogens, which were resolved as one ABX spin system at \(\delta\) 7.42 (1H, dd, \(J\)=8.5, 2.0 Hz, H-6\({}^{\prime}\)), \(\delta\) 7.50 (1H, d, \(J\)=2.0 Hz, H-2\({}^{\prime}\)), and \(\delta\) 6.88 (1H, d, \(J\)=8.5 Hz, H-5\({}^{\prime}\)) for compound **2**. The \({}^{1}\)C-NMR spectrum of compound **2** presented 28 signals, deduced from distortionless enhancement by polarization transfer (DEPT) 90\({}^{\circ}\), DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\) and gHMQC experiments as one methyl, one methylene, fifteen methines, one methoxyl and ten quaternary carbons, including one \(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated ketone at \(\delta\) 182.1, which confirmed the flavone core. Similarly as for nitensoside A, the position of methoxy group and sugar units, as well as the interglycosidic linkage were deduced from gHMBC and NOESY 1D experiments. A gHMBC correlation of signals at \(\delta\) 158.7 (C-7) and \(\delta\) 3.88 (OMe) in addition to NOESY interaction of signals at \(\delta\) 3.88 and \(\delta\) 6.79 (H-8) indicated the position of the methoxy group at C-7. Cross-peaks between signals at \(\delta\) 128.0 (C-6) and \(\delta\) 4.89 (H-1\({}^{\prime\prime}\)), and between signals at \(\delta\) 66.5 (C-6\({}^{\prime\prime}\)) and \(\delta\) 4.43 (H-1\({}^{\prime\prime}\)) led to the establishment of glucosylation at C-6 and the C-6\({}^{\prime\prime}\)-\(O\)-C-1\({}^{\prime\prime}\) interglycosidic linkage in compound **2**. Further gHMBC correlations gave additional support to the structure of this new pedalitin glucoside derivative (Fig. 2). Thus based on spectrometric data analysis, the structures of flavones **1** and **2** were elucidated as sorbifolin 6-\(O\)-\(\alpha\)-rhamnopyranosyl(1\({}^{\prime\prime}\)\(\rightarrow\)6\({}^{\prime}\))-\(\beta\)-glucopyranoside, and pedalitin 6-\(O\)-\(\alpha\)-rhamnopyranosyl(1\({}^{\prime\prime}\)\(\rightarrow\)6\({}^{\prime\prime}\))-\(\beta\)-glucopyranoside, two new naturally occurring compounds named as nitensoside A and B, respectively. In addition, four known 7-methoxyflavones were isolated and identified as sorbifolin (**3**) [20], sorbifolin 6-\(O\)-\(\beta\)-glucopyranoside (**4**) [20], pedalitin (**5**) [20], and pedalitin 6-\(O\)-\(\beta\)-glucopyranoside (**6**) [13].

The antioxidant activity of the isolates was evaluated by measuring free radical scavenging effects using two different assays, the ABTS radical cation decolorization assay and the DPPH radical scavenging activity assay [14, 15]. Pedalitin derivatives had better radical scavenging activity than sorbifolin derivatives, probably due to presence of the _ortho_-dihydroxy group (catechol residue on ring B), which is responsible for enhanced free radical stabilization after one hydrogen radical donation for the antioxidant capacity [21, 22]. Pedalitin derivatives **2**, **5** and **6** showed higher scavenging activity towards ABTS radical, with IC\({}_{50}\) (_m_M) values of 5.02, 1.36 and 4.07, respectively; and towards DPPH with IC\({}_{50}\) values of 11.0, 5.22, and 8.19, respectively, than sorbifolin derivatives **1**, **3** and **4** (Table 2), evidencing a major role of the catheed moiety on the B-ring of flavonoids for enhancement of the free radical scavenging activity. Additionally, among pedalitin derivatives, increased activities were observed for pedalitin (**5**) when compared to its glucosides **2** and **6** in both assays, evidencing the influence of the free hydroxy group at C-6, to generate an additional catechol group (on ring A), and therefore potentiating its free radical scavenging activity. The presence of two catechol moieties on pedalitin provided even higher activity towards ABTS than for the reference compound quercetin (IC\({}_{50}\) 4.12 _m_M), as observed previously for glucosyl-xanthones [23]. Similarly, this trend has also been observed for sorbifolin, which showed lower IC\({}_{50}\) (5.7 _m_M towards ABTS, and 13.5 _m_M towards DPPH) than its 6-\(O\)-glucosyl derivatives **1** and **4**, thus confirming the importance of the 5,6-dihydroxy moiety on ring A for enhanced antiradi-calar activity of 7-methoxyflavones.

Although a broad spectrum of the effects on mammalian enzyme systems has already been demonstrated for flavonoids [24], few studies have been devoted to the MPO inhibitory activity of this class of natural polyphenols [25, 26]. MPO inhibitory activity has been proven to be dependent on the redox status of biological systems and has been evaluated in this study by a reference method with modifications [16]. The results have been summarized in Table 2 and evidence the importance of the cathecol system on rings A and/or B for increased MPO inhibitory activity. Compounds **2**, **5** and **6**, displaying a 3\({}^{\prime}\),\({}^{\prime}\)-dihydroxy phenolic moiety, exhibited IC\({}_{50}\) values of 19.2, 3.8, and 15.8 _m_M, respectively, indicating a higher MPO inhibitory activity than compounds **1**, **3** and **4**, which are sorbifolin derivatives, thus presenting a monohydroxy phenolic B ring. Glucosides **1**, **2**, **4** and **6** showed slightly lower activities than their free aglycones, suggesting an important role of the free hydroxyl at C-6. Altogether, these results indicate a clear positive correlation between

Fig. 2: Selected gHMBC (Single Arrow) and NOESY (Double Arrow) Correlations for Compounds **1** and **2**

## Page 4

MPO inhibitory activity and radical scavenging properties of flavonoids as shown on Table 2, which might be important for treating inflammation derived diseases.

## Conclusion

The association of antiradical properties and MPO inhibitory activity observed for flavones **1**--**6**, tested in this study, indicates this might be a rational approach in the search for bioactive natural products. In conclusion, this study has demonstrated that the isolated flavones might be considered as potential candidates for the development of anti-inflammatory agents, since they present antiradicalar properties and inhibit myeloperoxidase, a key enzyme involved in inflammatory processes.

## References

- Barnes P., Chung K. F., Page C. P. Pharmacol. Rev.50 515--596 (1998).
- D1 Rosa M., Lalenti A., Ianaro A., Sautebin L., Prostaglandins Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids54 229--238 (1996).
- Sautebin L. A., Lalenti A., Ianaro A., Di Rosa M., _Br. J. Pharmacol._, **114**, 323--328 (1995).
- Winterbourn C. C., Vissers M. C. M., Kettle A. J., _Curr. Opin. Hematol._, **7**, 53--58 (2000).
- Edwards S. W., Hallet M. B., _Immunol. Today_, **18**, 320--324 (1997).
- Dhaneshwar S. S., Kandpal M., Vadnerkar G., Rathi B., Kadam S. S., _Eur. J. Med. Chem._, **42**, 885--890 (2007).
- Regelmann W. E., Siefferman C. M., Herron J. M., Elliot G. R., Clawson C. C., Gray B. H., _Pediatr. Pulmonol._, **19**, 1--9 (1995).
- Buss I. H., Darlow B. A., Winterbourn C. C., _Pediatr. Res._, **47**, 640--645 (2000).
- Chabot F., Mitchell J. A., Gutteridge J. M., Evans T. W., _Eur. Respir. J._, **11**, 745--757 (1998).
- Lorenzi H., "Arvores brasileiras: Manual de Identificação e Cultivo de Plantas Arbores do Brasil," Vol. 1, Plantarum, Nova Odessa, 1998, p. 162.
- Burkart A., "Las Leguminosas Argentinas," Aeme Agency, Buenos Aires, 1952, p. 156.
- Crivos M., Martinez M. R., Pochetino M. L., Remorini C., Sy A., Teves L., _J. Ethnobiol. Ethnomed._, **2**, 1--12 (2007).
- Bolzani V. S., Gunatilaka A. A. L., Kingston D. G. I., _J. Nat. Prod._, **58**, 1683--1688 (1995).
- Soares J. R., Dinis T. C., Cunha A. P., Almeida L. M., _Free Rad. Res._, **26**, 469--478 (1997).
- Pellegrini N., Re R., Yang M., Rice-Evans C., _Methods Enzymol._, **299**, 379--389 (1999).
- Capeillere-Blandin C., _Biochem. J._, **336**, 395--404 (1998).
- Mabry T. J., Markham K. R., Thomas M. B., "The Systematic Identification of Flavonoids," Springer-Verlag, New York, 1970, pp. 84--120.
- Agrawal P. K., Takwr R. S., Bansal M. C., "Carbon-13 NMR of Flavonoids," Vol. 39, ed. by Agrawal P. K., Elsevier, New York, 1989, pp. 95--182.
- Markham K. R., Geiger H., "The Flavonoids: Advances in Research Since 1986", ed. by Harborne J. B., Chapman and Hall, London, 1993, pp. 441--497.
- Zhang X. F., Hu B. L., Wang S. X., _Acta Bot. Sin._, **36**, 645--648 (1994).
- Van Acker S. A. B. E., Vanden Berg D.-J., Tromp M. N. J. L., Griffioen D. H., Van Bennekom W. P., Van der Vigh J. F., Bast A., _Free Rad. Biol. Med._, **20**, 331--342 (1996).
- Seyoum A., Asres K., El-Fiky F. K., _Photochemistry_, **67**, 2058--2070 (2006).
- Pauletti P. M., Castro-Gamboa I., Silva D. H. S., Young M. C. M., Tomazela D. M., Eberlin M. N., Bolzani V. D., _J. Nat. Prod._, **66**, 1384--1387 (2003).
- Middleton E., Kandaswami C., Theoharides T. C., _Pharmacol. Rev._, **52**, 673--751 (2000).
- Kato Y., Nagao A., Terao J., Osawa T., _Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem._, **67**, 1136--1139 (2003).
- Rosco R., Vieira T. O., Leal P. C., Nunes R. J., Yunes R. A., Creezynski-Pasa T. B., _Bioorg. Med. Chem._, **14**, 6409--6413 (2006).


