# 10.1021@jf60217a066.pdf

## Page 1

with ten replications showed a high degree of accuracy. Ten replicate analyses of cotton plant samples with 10% to 15% TNC gave standard deviations of 0.28 and 0.14, respectively. The same degree of accuracy was obtained when analyzing different parts of cotton plants and lyophilized cactus pads (_Opuntia_, s.p.) harvested at different seasons of the year. These materials ranged from 10% to 70% TNC. The authors' technique can be conducted for about one-tenth the cost of other methods in use. A complete analysis can be performed in 24 h elapsed time, while other techniques require 3 to 4 days. It should also be noted that a minimum of glassware is required. This represents a saving of initial cost and routine glassware washing time. It is especially noteworthy that the detergent action of the Teles' reagent allows effective cleansing of the Folin tubes by simple rinsing four times with distilled water. In addition, it also allows the use of a flow-through curvette. The reduced number of operations make the technique more accurate and less tedious. The reagents used, in addition to being less expensive, can be prepared with distilled water with no need for deionizers or other water retreatment. The substitution of dinitrosalicylic acid (Summer and Soner, 1949) for Teles' reagent gave similar results. One technician easily analyzed an average of 96 samples in 24-h elapsed time.

In case the laboratory is equipped with only an ordinary centrifuge (maximum speed ca. 1500 rpm), the use of 4 mL of a 2% solution of neutral lead acetate (only the neutral salt) in water instead of 4 mL of distilled water before centrifugation also gives a clear supernatant. This amount of lead salt does not interfere with the analysis as was demonstrated in the course of the experiment with comparative analyses. The lead precipitation also would allow aliquot filtration, but the authors avoided this operation since it increases time and cost.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors acknowledge the assistance of Robert E. Briggs, Albert K. Dobrenz, Dwayne R. Buxton, and Ralph L. Price. They also thank Michael L. Rogers, Joseph E. Stone, and Ralph R. Taylor for their valuable help and the Wallerstein Company for supplying the enzyme used in the analyses.

LITERATURE CITED

Burris, J. S., Brown, R. H., Blaser, R. E., _Crop Sci._**7**, 22 (1967).

Greub, L. J., Weidn, W. F., _Crop Sci._**9**, 595 (1969).

Heinze, P. H., Murneek, A. E., _Mo., Agric. Exp. Stn. Res. Bull._**314** (1940).

Smith, D., _Wis., Agric. Exp. Stn. Res. Rep._**41** (1969).

Smith, D., Paulsen, G. M., Raguse, C. A., _Plant Physiol._**39**, 960 (1964).

Summer, J. B., Somers, G. F., "Laboratory Experiments in Biological Chemistry", Academic Press, New York, N.Y., 1949, p 38.

Teles, F. F. F., Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson, 1977.

Teles, F. F. F., Young, C. K., Stull, J. W., _J. Dairy Sci._**61**, in press (1978).

Weinman, H., _Plant Physiol._**22**, 279 (1947).

Yemm, E. W., Willis, A. J., _Biochem. J._**57**, 508 (1954).

**Americo J. daSilveira1**

**F. F. Feitosa Teles2**

**J. Warren Stull22**

1Department of Plant Sciences

2Department of Nutrition and Food Science

The University of Arizona

Tucson, Arizona 85721

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]



## Page 2

equipped with a stainless steel column (3 mm X 1.5 m) packed with 1.5% OV-101 on Chromosorb W programmed from 50-250 degC, at a rate of 4 degC/min, using N2 as the carrier gas.

Preparative GLC was carried out using a modified FID chromatograph (splitter 100:1) with a 9 mm X 6.5 m aluminum column packed with 20% OV-210 on Chromosorb W.

GC-MS separation was carried out with a glass column (3 mm X 1.5 m) packed with 3% OV-1 on Chromosorb W coupled to a quadrupole mass spectrometer operated at 70 eV.

Infrared spectra were obtained using liquid films.

NMR spectra were run in CCl4, using a 60 MHz instrument and TMS as internal standard. Double resonance experiments were realized with the same above conditions at room temperature.

**Extraction of the Oils.** The plant was collected in Aarripe-Ceara and transported to the laboratory in an air-conditioned vehicle. Finely ground material was steam distilled in a modified steam generator (Craveiro et al., 1976); the oils were dried with anhydrous Na2SO4 and sealed in all-glass vials under N2.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The essential oils were obtained by steam distillation of the leaves, stems, and wood in yields of 0.7, 2.5, and 0.2%, respectively. The chemical composition of the above oils is described in Table I.

The separations were performed initially with a GLC analytical column, followed by analysis with a GC-MS system. Whenever possible, preparative GLC was used to allow NMR and IR confirmations. Previous work in the essential oils of the Euphorbiaceae family, genus _Croton_ (Guenther, 1950; Bracho and Crowley, 1966; Craveiro et al., 1976) do not make any reference to the present species which is native to the Brazilian Northeast.

The presence of estragole, camphor, anethole, isoborneol, caryophyllene, \(\gamma\)-elemene, safrole, methylisoeugenol, \(n\)-heptadecane, and \(n\)-eicosane is related for the first time in the genus as far as we know. Estragole imparts to the oil the characteristic flavor similar to anise seed oil. Methyleugenol, a potent anhesetsei (Carlini et al., 1976), should be responsible for the pharmacological activity of the plant infusions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Botanical identification by Prof. Afranio G. Fernandes (Dep. Biologia-Universidade Federal do Ceara) is gratefully acknowledged.

LITERATURE CITED

Bracho, R., Crowley, J. K., _Phytochemistry_**5**, 921 (1966).

Carlini, E. A., Sell, A. B., _Pharmacology_**14**, 367 (1976).

Craveiro, A. A., Alencar, J. W., Matos, F. J. A., Andrade, C. H. S., _Cienc. Cult._, _(Sao Paul.)_, _Suppl._**28**, 180 (1976).

Craveiro, A. A., Alencar, J. W., Matos, F. J. A., _J. Chem. Educ._**53**, 652 (1976).

Guenther, E., "The Essential Oils", Vol. VI, Robert E. Krieger Publishing Co., Huntington, 1950, p 169.

Stenhagen, E., Abrahamson, S., "Registry of Mass Spectral Data", McLafferty, F. W., Ed., Wiley, New York, N.Y.,1974.

Afr\(\acute{\text{a}}\)n\(\acute{\text{a}}\)craveiro*

Carlos H. S. Andrade

F. J. Abreu Matos

J. Wilson de Alencar

Departamento de Quimica Organica e Inorganica

Universidade Federal do Ceara

Caixa Postal, 935

Fortaleza-Ceara, Brazil

Received for review October 3, 1977. Accepted December 27, 1977. This work was supported by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico Tecnologico (CNPq), Banco do Nordeste do Brasil S.A. (BNB), and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP).



