# 10.1021@np200110f.pdf

## Page 1



# Azaphilones from the Endophyte _Chaetomium globosum_

Warley S. Borges, Gabriela Mancilla, Denise O. Guimaraes, Rosa Duran-Patron, Isidro G. Collado, and Monica T. Pupo

Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Departamento de Quimica Organica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Cadiz, 11510, Puerto Real, Cadiz, Spain

# Abstract

Six new azaphilones, \(S^{\prime}\)-epichateoviridin A (7), 4'-epichateoviridin F (9), 12b-hydroxychaetoviridin C (10), and chaetivoridins G-I (11-13), and six known azaphilones, chaetivoridins A-E (1-5) and 4'-epichateoviridin A (8), were isolated from the endophytic fungus _Chaetomium globosum_ cultivated in PDB medium for 21 days. The structure elucidation and the assignment of the relative configurations of the new natural products were based on detailed NMR and MS spectroscopic analyses. The structure of compound 1 was confirmed by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis. The absolute configurations of compounds 4, 7, 8, and 12 were determined using Mosher's method. The antibiotic activity of the compounds was evaluated using an in vivo _Caenorhabditis elegans_ infection model.

1. Endophytic fungi are microorganisms that live in the inter- and intracellular spaces of the tissues of apparently healthy host plants and do so in a variety of relationships, ranging from symbiotic to pathogenic.1 Endophytes can inhabit the tissue of living plants for all or part of their life cycle and are considered relatively underexploited sources of novel bioactive compounds.2,3

As part of our bioprostypecting studies on endophytes, we isolated several endophytic fungi that produce bioactive compounds.4,5 The endophytic strain _Chaetomium globosum_, isolated from the leaves of _Viguiera robusta_ (Asteraceae), was found to produce cytotoxic chaetoglobosins in Czapek medium.6 Other recent studies on biologically active metabolites from the endophytic C. _globosum_ from _Ginkgo biloba_ led to the isolation of bioactive azaphilones.7

The azaphilones represent a structurally diverse family of natural products containing a pyrano-quinone structure. These compounds have been isolated from various fungi. Chaetoviridins were first characterized from the soil strain C. _globosum_ var. _flavo-viriade_.8 Seven chaetoridins have been reported to date: chaetivoridins A-F (1-6) and 4'-epichateoviridin A (8),89

Chaetoviridin A (1) inhibits tumor promotion by 12-_O_-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in a two-stage carcinogenesis model in mice.10 Tomoda et al.11 found that chaetoviridins A (1) and B (2) inhibited cholesteryl ester transfer protein. Chaetoviridin A (1) showed antifungal activity, inhibiting the growth of _Pyricalaria oryzae_ mycelia at 2.5 \(\mu\)g mL-18 Recently, Park et al.12 reported that chaetoviridins A (1) and B (2) also display inhibitory activity against the in vitro growth of _Magnaporte grisea_ (rice blast) and _Pythium ultimum_ mycelia with MIC values of 1.23 and 33.3 \(\mu\)g mL-1, respectively. In addition, chaetoviridins A (1) and B (2) exhibited strong in vivo antifungal activity against _M. grisea_ and _Puccinic recoride_ (wheat leaf rust).

In this paper, we describe the isolation and structural elucidation of six new azaphilones (7, 9-13) along with six previously known azaphilones (1-5, 8).89 Structures were established on the basis of spectroscopic data, mainly 1D and 2D NMR. The structure previously reported for _epi_-chaetoviridin A has been revised and corrected to 8. In addition, the in vivo anti-infective activities of the isolated azaphilones (1-5, 7-13) were evaluated using the well-studied nematode _Caenorhabditis elegans_ infected with the human opportunistic pathogen _Esterococcus faecalis_.

## 1.2. Results and Discussion

Cultured _c. globosum_ produced the known chaetivoridins 1-5 and 89,9 and six new chaetivoridins: 5'-epichateoviridin A (7), 4'-epichateoviridin F (9), 12b-hydroxychaetoviridin C (10), and chaetivoridins G-I (11-13).

The known chaetivoridins A-E (1-5) were identified by comparing their physical and spectroscopic data with literature values.89 The structure of chaetoviridin A (1) was confirmed by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis (Figure 1).

The spectroscopic data of compound 8 (Supporting Information) were coincident with those published in the literature for _epi_-chaetoviridin A, reported as the C5' primer of 1.9 The epimerization at C5' was proposed on the basis of no correlation between H-4' and H-5' in the NOESY spectrum, which had been observed in 1.9 We applied the Mosher method to unambiguously establish the orientation of the hydroxyl group at C5'. The

## Page 2

(_b_ - \(d_{S}\)) values were found for H-4' and H-4'CH3 (-0.102 and -0.314, respectively), while a positive D_d_R_S_ value was found for H-6' (+0.125). Following the MPA rules, these data indicated the _R_-configuration for C5' in **8**, which is identical to those described for **1**. In addition, C4', C5', and C6' chemical shifts of **8** are shielded compared to the same carbons in **1**, while in compound 7 C5' is deshielded compared to **1**. These data suggested that compound **8** must be the 4'-epimer, and not the 5'-epimer, or chaetworkiri Min A (**1**), as proposed by Phonkerk et al. 9 Therefore, the NMR data previously attributed to _epi_-chaetworki Min A9 are in fact in agreement with the structure of 4'-epich-aetovidin A (**8**).

The HRMS and 13C NMR spectra of compound **7** established its molecular composition as C23H25ClO6, a chaetoviridin A (**1**) isomer. Its 1H NMR spectrum showed signals very similar to those of **1** (Supporting Information). However, the upfield shift of the signal corresponding to H-4'CH3 and the deshield chemical shift of the signal corresponding to H-6' suggested that this compound was 5'-epichaetovitridin A (**7**). This hypothesis was confirmed by the application of Mosher's method. In accordance with this method, the corresponding Mosher diastereoisomeric esters **7a** and **7b** were obtained by treatment of 7 with (_R_)- and (_S_)-MPA acids, respectively. Positive D_d_R_S_ (_d__R_S_ - \(d_{S}\)) values were found for H-4' and H-4'CH3 (+0.101 and +0.105, respectively), while a negative D_d_R_S_ value was found for H-6' (-0.175). Following the MPA rules, these data indicated the _S_-configuration for C5' in 7.

The absolute configurations of C7 and C11 in chaetoviridin A (**1**) have been reported as \(S\).8 Comparison of the NMR data of chaetoviridins B (**2**) and D (**4**) with those of **1** (Supporting Information) suggested the _S_-configuration for both positions in both compounds. On the other hand, the relative configuration of the C8 and C2' positions of chaetoviridins B (**2**) and D (**4**) was suggested to be _cis_ by Takahashi et al. 8 on the basis of the magnitude of the coupling constants (10.2 Hz in **2** and 9.7 Hz in **4**). A qualitative analysis of the NOE experiments confirmed this disposition. In particular, NOE interactions were detected between H-7CH3, H-8, and H-2', supporting the _S_-configuration for C8 and C2'. Finally, the orientation of the secondary hydroxyl group at C12 in chaetoviridin D (**4**) was established by the application of the Mosher's method. In accordance with this method, the corresponding Mosher diastereoisomeric esters **4a** and **4b** were obtained by treatment of 4 with (_R_)- and (_S_)-MTPA acids, respectively. The analysis by 1H NMR of the resulting esters **4a** and **4b** revealed negative D_d_SR_ (\(d_{S}\) - \(d_{R}\)) values for H-10, H-11, and H-11CH3 (-0.14, -0.062, and -0.086, respectively) and a positive D_d_SR value for H-13 (+0.043). Following the MTPA rules, these data indicated the R-configuration for C12 in chaetoviridin D (**4**). The absolute configuration of C5' could not be determined by this method, as it was not possible to derivate the secondary alcohol linked to this carbon. On the basis of above data, the relative configurations of the chaetoviridins B and D were established as indicated in the structures of **2** and **4**.

Comparison of the NMR data of chaetoviridin C (**3**) with those of chaetoviridin A (**1**) (Supporting Information) suggested the _S_-configuration for C7 and C11. The relative configurations of the C8-C2' positions of **3** were shown to be _cis_ as in **2** and **4** by NOE difference spectra. In particular, NOE interactions were detected between H-7CH3, H-8, and H-2', supporting the _S_-configuration for C8 and C2'. The magnitude of the coupling constant between both protons H-4' and H-5' (9.1 Hz) was closer to that of 7 (8.1 Hz) than to that of **8** (3.0 Hz), suggesting

Figure 1.: ORTP drawing of the asymmetric unit of chaetoviridin A (**1**) with arbitrary atom numbering. The hydrogen atoms are represented as arbitrary radius spheres, and the ellipsoids of the non-H atoms are at the 50% probability level.



## Page 3

an _anti_-disposition between H-4' and H-5' and the _S_-configuration for C4' and C5'. From these results, the relative configuration of chaetoviridin C was established as indicated in the structure of **3**.

Compound **9** was assigned the molecular formula C23H25ClO8, as deduced from the HREIMS. The 1H and 13C NMR data of **9** (Tables 1 and 2) indicated a structure similar to that of chaetoviridin F (**6**).9 However, there were some differences in chemical shifts between both compounds. In particular, the deshielded H-5', H-6', and 4'-CH3 carbon signals suggested an opposite configuration at C4' between both compounds. On the basis of these data, the structure of **9** was assigned as 4'-epicatheoviridin F.

The molecular formula of compound **10** (C23H27ClO7) was obtained by HREIMS and corroborated by 13C NMR data. The spectroscopic data of this compound were similar to those of **3** (Supporting Information). However, the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed a signal at \(d\) 3.82 (m), which correlated in the COSY experiment with the signals corresponding to H-11 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.45) and H-13 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 1.19). Furthermore, the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) showed the presence of an additional signal corresponding to a carbon atom attached to a hydroxyl group (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 70.8), which was connected to the signal at \(d\) 3.82 (H-12) in the HSQC experiment. These data suggested that compound **10** is a hydroxyl derivative of **3** at C12. Due to the small amount obtained of this compound, it was not possible to determine the absolute configuration of the hydroxyl group by Mosher's method. However, the comparison of the NMR data of **10** (Tables 1 and 2) with those of chaetoviridin D (**4**) (Supporting Information) suggested the _R_-configuration for C12. The configurations of C7 and C11 were assigned to be \(S\), similar to those reported for azablinches.8 On the other hand, the relative configurations of the C8-C2 positions were shown to be _cis_ as in **3** by NOE difference spectra. In particular, NOE interactions were detected between H-7CH3 and H-8 and between H-2' and H-8, supporting the _S_-configuration for C8 and C2'. Finally, the protons of the side chain at C2' showed chemical shifts very similar to those of **3** (Supporting Information). These data together with the magnitude of the coupling constant \(J_{\Psi^{-}S^{\prime}}\) (9.3 Hz) suggested an _anti_-disposition between H-4' and H-5' and the _S_-configuration for C4' and C5'. On the basis of these data, the structure of **10** was assigned to 12_b_-hydroxychaetoviridin C.

Chaetoviridin G (**111**) has the molecular formula C23H25ClO8 by HREIMS. Its 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2) showed signals very similar to those of chaetoviridin E (**5**).9 However, the appearance of two doublets at \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 4.11 and 4.37, showing a vicinal coupling (_J_ = 12.2 Hz), suggested that **11** was the 8,2'-dihydro derivative of **5**. The configurations at C7 and C11 were assigned to be \(S\), similar to those reported for azablinches.8 The configurations at C2'--C8 were confirmed to be _cis_ by NOE

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c}  & \multicolumn{6}{c}{\(\delta_{\text{C}}\), type} \\ position & 7 & **9** & **10** & **11** & **12** & **13** \\
1 & 152,7 C & 157,7 C & 146,2 C & 147,0 C & 152,7 C & 961,C \\
3 & 157,1 C & 157,7 C & 157,2 C & 157,7 C & 155,4 C & 1560,CH \\
4 & 103,5 M & 103,5 M & 105,5 M &

## Page 4

experiments. In particular, NOE interactions were detected between H-7CH3 and H-8 and between H-8 and H-2', which is only possible in the case of a b-disposition of the protons H-2' and H-8. Finally, the geometry of the double bond C4'-C5' was also inferred on the basis of NOE experiments. Irradiation of the signal at dH 1.94 (H-6') led to enhancement of the signals at dH 1.83 (H-4' CH3) and 6.80 (H-5'). These results indicated that the configuration of the C4'-C5' double bond is \(E\).

The molecular formula C23H26O6 was assigned for chaotividin H (**12**) by HREIMs. This compound corresponds to a dechlorinated derivative of chaotividin A (**1**). The 1H and 13C NMR data of this compound were similar to those of **1** (Supporting Information), except for the presence of a signal at dH 5.31 (s). This singlet was connected to a sp2 carbon at dC 105.7 (C3) in the HSQC experiment and to three carbons at dC 111.0 (C88), 107.9 (C4), and 87.7 (C7) in the HMDE experiment. The remaining signals in the 13C NMR spectrum along with the chemical shifts and coupling constants appearing in the 1H NMR spectrum were consistent with the structure shown for compound **12**. The configurations of C7 and C11 were assigned as \(S\) by comparison of the NMR data of **12** with those of **1** (Supporting Information). On the other hand, the orientation of the secondary hydroxyl group was established by the application of the Mosher's method. The (_R_)- and (_S_)-MPA esters **12a** and **12b** were obtained by treatment of **12** with (_R_)- and (_S_)-MPA acids, respectively. The negative value of \(\Delta\delta^{RS}\) (d_R_g - d_S_) for H-4' CH3 (-0.063) and the positive value of \(\Delta\delta^{RS}\) for H-6' (+0.205) indicated the _R_-configuration for C5' in chaetovvidin H (**12**). Finally, the configuration at C4' was assigned as \(S\) on the basis of the magnitude of the coupling constant \(J_{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{ \mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{\mathit{ \mathit{ \mathit{ \mathit{ \mathit{ }}}}}}}}}{{}}}{{}}}{{}}{{}}{{}}{{}}{{}{{}{{}{{}{{}{{}{}{{}{}{{}{}{{}{}{}{{}{}{}{{}{}{}{}{}{}{{}{}{}{}{}{}{{}{}{}{}{}{}{{}{}{}{}{

## Page 5

1-5 and 7-11 were recorded on gas chromatography/mass spectrometry Agilent-LR and Finnigan Mat95 S instruments, and mass spectra of 12 and 13 were obtained on an Ultro-TOF (Bruker-Daltonics, Billilaria, MA, USA). HPLC was performed with a Hitachi/Merck L-7100 apparatus equipped with a differential refractometer detector (RI-L7490) and an Intel Pentium computer for analytical system control, data collection, and processing (software Borwin). Purification by means of HPLC was carried out with a silica gel column (LIChroCART 250/10 LIChrospher S160, 10 _m_m, 1 cm wide, 25 cm long, or LIChroCART 250/4 LIChrospher S160, 5 _m_m, 0.4 cm wide, 25 cm long). TLC was performed on Merck Kiesegel 60 F254, 0.25 mm thick. Si gel (Merck) type 9385 was used for column chromatography.

### Fungal Material

The fungus was isolated from the leaves of _Viguixa robusta_ and identified on the basis of its rDNA sequence as previously reported.6 A voucher specimen has been deposited at "Laboratorio de Quimica de Micro-Organismos", FCFRP, USP. The strain is maintained in both sterile water and silica gel (6-12 mesh, grade 40, desiccant activated) at 10 degC.

### Culture Conditions

The general procedure adopted for cultivation of the microorganisms followed the methodology described by Park et al.12 C. _globoum_ was grown in 40 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL) containing 200 mL of potato dextrose broth (PDB). Each flask was inoculated with 6 mycelium plugs (1 cm diameter each) from a 7-day-old culture grown on PDA agar and then incubated for 21 days at 25 degC on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm.

### Extraction and Isolation

The culture broth (8 L) was separated from the mycelium by vacuum filtration and partitioned with ethyl acetate (EtOAc) three times. The mycelium was extracted by maceration with EtOAc. The organic solvent was evaporated under vacuum, and the EtOAc extracts were combined after TLC analysis. The crude combined EtOAc extract, a yellow oil (3.50 g), was separated by means of column chromatography using silica gel 60 eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (7:3), EtOAc/MeOH (1:1), and MeOH 100%, yielding eight fractions. Subtraction 4 yielded compound **1** (1.87 g). Fraction 3 (89 mg) was subjected to HPLC using a LiChroCART 250-10-LiChrospher Si 60 (10 _m_m) column eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (7:3) at a flow rate of 3 mL min-1, yielding two subfractions. Subtraction 3.1 (62.4 mg) was submitted to HPLC purification in a normal-phase column (LiChroCART 250-4-LiChrospher Si 60, 5 _m_m) using _n_-hexane/EtOAc (4:1) as mobile phase at a flow rate of 3 mL min-1 to yield 5 (44 mg) and **11** (16 mg). Fraction 5 (80 mg) was also submitted to both HPLC purification procedures described for fraction 3. In the first HPLC step fraction 5 yielded two subfractions. In the second step subtraction 5.1 (28 mg) yielded **9** (22 mg). Fraction 6 (270 mg) was also submitted to the same first HPLC purification procedure described for fraction 3 to give five subfractions. Subfractions 2-5 correspond to compounds **3** (32 mg), 7 (12 mg), 8 (25 mg), and 2 (141 mg), respectively. Fraction 7 (501 mg) was subjected to silica gel 60 column chromatography eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (2:3) and EtOAc 100%, yielding six subfractions. Subtraction 7.1 (65 mg) was subjected to normal-phase HPLC (LiChroCART 250-10-LiChrospher Si 60, 10 _m_m) with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (3.2) as mobile phase at a flow rate of 3 mL min-1, yielding **12** (32 mg) and 13 (11 mg). Subtraction 7.5 (88 mg) was also subjected to normal-phase HPLC using the same conditions used for purification of fraction 1, except for _n_-hexane/EtOAc (1:4) used as mobile phase, yielding four subfractions. Subtraction 7.5.1 (6 mg) yielded **10** (4 mg) after purification in normal-phase HPLC (LiChroCART 250-4-LiChrospher Si 60, 5 _m_m, eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (2:3) at flow rate of 1 mL min-1), subfraction 7.5.2 (26 mg) yielded 4 after crystallization, and subtraction 7.5.3 (12 mg) also yielded 4 (total of 24 mg) after normal-phase HPLC purification (11chroCART 250-4-LiChrospher Si 60, 5 _m_m, eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (4:1) at flow rate of 1 mL min-1).

-Epichetovitridin A (7): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +40 (_c_ 0.002, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3) _k_max nm (log _e_) 307 (0.66), 367 (0.53), 431 (0.15); IR (KBr) _n_max 3462, 2966, 2918, 1767, 1685, 1645, 1514, 756 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (%) 432 (M]+ (4), 390 (16), 345 (25), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for \(\text{C}_{\text{23}}\text{H}_{\text{25}}\text{ClO}_{\text{6}}\) [M]+ 432.1340, found 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin A (8): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +16 (_c_ 0.002, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3) _k_max nm (log _e_) 306 (1.72), 367 (1.16), 430 (0.33); IR (KBr) _n_max 3477, 2965, 1765, 1621, 1513 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (14), 390 (52), 345 (42), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for C23H25ClO6 [M]+ 432.1340, found 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin F (9): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +106 (_c_ 0.002, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3) _k_max nm (log _e_) 306 (1.72), 367 (1.16), 430 (0.33); IR (KBr) _n_max 3477, 2965, 1765, 1621, 1513 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (14), 390 (52), 345 (42), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for C23H25ClO6 [M]+ 432.1340, found 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin A (8): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +36 (_c_ 0.003, 0.68), 430 (0.18), IR (KBr) _n_max 3462, 2966, 2918, 1767, 1685, 1645, 1514, 756 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (14), 390 (52), 305 (42), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for C23H25ClO6 [M]+ 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin G (10): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +16 (_c_ 0.002, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3) _k_max nm (log _e_) 306 (1.72), 367 (1.16), 430 (0.33); IR (KBr) _n_max 3477, 2965, 1765, 1621, 1513 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (14), 390 (52), 305 (42), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for C23H25ClO6 [M]+ 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin G (12): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +32 (_c_ 0.003, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3) _k_max nm (log _e_) 306 (1.72), 367 (1.16), 430 (0.33); IR (KBr) _n_max 3477, 2965, 1765, 1621, 1513 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (14), 390 (52), 305 (42), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for C23H25ClO6 [M]+ 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin G (13): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +32 (_c_ 0.005, 0.003, 0.68), 430 (0.18), IR (KBr) _n_max 3462, 2966, 2918, 1767, 1685, 1645, 1514, 756 cm-1; 14 Jan13C NMR data see Tables 1 and 2; EIMS _m/z_ (14), 390 (52), 305 (42), 332 (100); HREIMS clad for C23H25ClO6 [M]+ 432.1344.

-Epichetovitridin G (14): orange, amorphous solid; \(\left[ \alpha \right\rbrack_{\text{D}}^{\text{20}}\) +35 (_c_ 0.003, 0.68), 430 (0.18), IR (KBr) _n_max 3462, 2975, 1774, 1781, 1617, 1650, 1516, 1247, 1094, 1209, 1167, 1247, 1094, 1210, 1211, 1107, 1211, 1105, 1211, 1107, 1211, 1105, 1211, 1

## Page 6

0.045 mmol), and (_R_)-MTPA or (_S_)-MTPA (11.25 mg, 0.048 mmol), and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 24 h. Evaporation of the solvent under reduced pressure yielded a residue that was purified by silica gel column chromatography eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc (7:3) to obtain 4.2 mg (0.006 mmol) of (_R_)-MTPA ester **4a** and 3.6 mg (0.005 mmol) of (_S_)-MTPA ester **4b**.

_Preparation of (R_)- _and (S_)-MPA Esters of 5'-Eplicatorvidin _A (7a and 7b)_. Treatment of a solution of 7 (10 mg, 0.023 mmol) in dichloromethane with DMAP (catalytic amounts), DCC (10.03 mg, 0.048 mmol), and (_R_)-MPA or (_S_)-MPA (8.65 mg, 0.036 mmol) as described above yielded 3.45 mg (0.006 mmol) of (_R_)-MPA ester **7a** and 2.90 mg (0.005 mmol) of (_S_)-MTPA ester **7b**.

_Preparation of (R_)- (_S_)-MPA Esters of 4'-Eplicatorvidin _A (8a and 8b)_. Treatment of a solution of 8 (10 mg, 0.023 mmol) in dichloromethane with DMAP (catalytic amounts), DCC (10.03 mg, 0.048 mmol), and (_R_)-MPA or (_S_)-MPA (8.65 mg, 0.036 mmol) as described above yielded 4.04 mg (0.007 mmol) of (_R_)-MPA ester **8a** and 2.68 mg (0.005 mmol) of (S_)-MTPA ester **8b**.

_Preparation of (R_)- _and (S_)-MPA Esters of Chearovitidin H (12a and 12b)_. Treatment of a solution of 12 (10 mg, 0.025 mmol) in dichloromethane with DMAP (catalytic amounts), DCC (10.88 mg, 0.052 mmol), and (_R_)-MPA or (S_)-MPA (9.39 mg, 0.040 mmol) as described above yielded 6.50 mg (0.012 mmol) of (_R_)-MPA ester **12a** and 6.80 mg (0.012 mmol) of (_S_)-MTPA ester **12b**.

**Antibacterial Assays.**_Escherichia coli_ OP50 and _Enterococcus faecalis_ MMIF594 were grown on brain-heart infusion (BHI, Difco) media at 37 degC. C. _elegans gly-4(btn2ts);sick-1(km4)_ mutant animals were maintained using standard practices by feeding them with _E. coli_ strain OP50.22 Synchronized L4 stage to young adult worms were infected with _E. faecalis_ according the protocol previously described.13 All compounds were tested according to the protocol described by Moy et al.13 at a final concentration of 100 and 50 _m_g mL-1 in 19% BHI, 80% M9 buffer, 80 _m_g mL-1 kanamycin, and 1% DMSO. Each compound was tested in triplicate using 96-well plates sealed with gas-permeable membranes (Breath-Easy, Diversified Biotech) at 25 degC, 80-85% relative humidity, without agitation for a total period of 168 h. Worm survival was scored at 3, 48, 120, and 168 h as described13. A positive control was carried out using ampicillin at a range of 25-0.39 _m_g mL-1.

## Associated Content

### Supporting Information.

Spectroscopic data of the compounds **1**, **2**, **3**, **4**, **4a**, **4b**, **5**, **7**, **7a**, **7b**, **8a**, **8b**, **9**-**11**, **12**, **12a**, **12b**, and **13**. Chromatograms of the isolation of compounds **2**-**5 and **7**-**13**. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org).

### Author Information

#### Corresponding Author

* (LG.C.) Tel: 34-956016365. Fax: 34-956016193. E-mail: isidro.gonzalez@uca.es. (M.T.P.) Tel: 55-16-36024710. Fax: 55-16-36024178. E-mail: mtpupo@fcfrp.usp.br.

#### Present Addresses

* WSB Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Espirito Santo, 29075-910, Vitoria, ES, Brazil.

## Acknowledgment

The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), and Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) for financial support and for granting research fellowships. This work was financed, in part, by grants from the Spanish Science Innovation and Technology Ministry through projects AGL-2009 13359-CO2-01 and PHB 2008-0067-PC. The authors acknowledge Dr. T. Soler of the Alicante University for the X-ray crystallographic analysis of chaetoviridin A and Prof. N. P. Lopes (FCFRP-USP) for the obtainment of HRESIMS spectra. We also thank Prof. F. M. Ausubel and T. I. Moy, Ph.D., from Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, for the C. _elegans_ assays.

## References

-111


