# 10.1016@S0031-9422(98)00249-0.pdf

## Page 1



# ACETylated DNA-damaging Clerodane

Diterpenes from _Casearia sylvestris_

Paulo Roberto F. de Carvalho, Maysa Furlan, Maria Claudia M. Young, David G. I. Kingston

# Abstract

In addition to the known diterpene casearin G (**1**), two new clerodane diterpene casearins type, casearin S (**2**) and casearin T (**3**), were isolated from an acetylated bioactive CH2Cl2/MeOH extract from leaves of _Casearia sylvestris_. The diterpenes **1-3** exhibited moderate but selective activity towards the DNA-repair deficient yeast _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ mutants RAD 52YK and RS 321. The structures of **1-3** were established on the basis of NMR spectroscopic experiments (c) 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

## INTRODUCTION

As a part of our ongoing search for natural product-based anticancer agents from Brazilian plant species [1-3], we have screened the CH2Cl2/MeOH (2:1, v/v) extract obtained from the leaves of _Casearia sylvestris_ SW (Flacourtiaceae). The genus _Casearia_, with about 1000 described species [4], has not been subjected to extensive investigations [5-9]. _C. sylvestris_ is reported to be a source of casearins, diterpenes known to have cytotoxic activity against V-79 cells [9-11]. Bioactivity-directed fractionation of an extract of leaves of _C. sylvestris_, collected in Sao Paulo State, Brazil, led to the isolation of the known clerodane diterpene, casearin G (**1**), and the two new clerodane diterpenes, casearin S (**2**) and T (**3**), as the main components responsible for the DNA-damaging activity of this extract. This is the first report of the DNA-modifying activity of clerodane diterpenes.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A preliminary investigation of the bioactive CH2Cl2/MeOH (2:1) extract of the leaves of _C. sylvestris_ indicated that its bioactivity was due to diterpene components. The resulting fractions exhibiting bioactivity were further separated by silica gel CC and prep. TLC to afford five bioactive fractions containing oxygenated diterpenes as their main constituents. A small amount of each fraction was acetylated in order to improve the process of purification and also to assure that the acetylated products maintained their bioactivities. As the acetylated fractions remained active, the non-acetylated mixtures were subjected to acetylation followed by the usual purification to yield three acetylated bioactive clerodane diterpenes, named casearins G, S and T. Casearin G (**1**) is a known compound previously isolated from the same source [11], while casearins S (**2**) and T (**3**) are new bioactive diterpenes. Their structures were confirmed by extensive spectroscopic studies and comparison of their spectra with those in the literature for related casearins [8-11].

Casearin S (**2**), C27H38O7 (EIMS), [a]D0 +-18.0deg, exhibited 1H and 13C NMR spectral data very similar to those observed for casearin G [11] (Tables 1 and 2). However, the triplet attributed to H-18 at d

## Page 2

6.67 (\(J\) = 1.5 Hz) in the low field region of the 1H NMR spectrum of **1** was absent in diterpene **2**. The other signals attributed to H-2, H-7, H-12, H-14, H-15 and H-19 were almost superimposable, when compared with **1**, indicating that the only modification in the structure of **2** was related to C-18. In fact, the 13C NMR spectrum of **2** (Table 2) resembled that of casearin G, with the major differences being due to the lack of the signal at \(\delta\) 94.5 (d) attributed to C-18, and the presence of an additional signal at \(\delta\) 172.6 (s), typical of a lactone carbonyl function. Analysis of the 1H NMR spectral data showed that the signal of H-3 resonates at \(\delta\) 6.79 (br s), while this proton in compound **1** resonates at \(\delta\) 5.99 (br s). The only explanation of this chemical shift difference (D_d_ 0.81) observed for H-3 must be that the hemiacetal function at C-18 in **1** is converted to a carbonyl group in **2**. The presence of only one acetyl and one butunayly group in **2** was also confirmed by 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2). The locations of the acetyl moieties were defined by 1H-13C long-range COLOC spectra. The hydrogen linked to the C-19 methine showed a correlation with the C-18 carbonyl carbon of the lactone ring (\(\delta\) 172.6). The modification of the chemical shift values in the 13C NMR spectrum of C-3 and C-4 (\(\delta\) 132.4 and 142.0, respectively) corroborated the assignment of the carbonyl function to C-18 [12]. As the position and configuration of the methoxy group of the casearin analogue compounds were determined in C-2 by INADEQUATE spectra [10] and X-ray analysis [10], the butanoyl group was defined as linked to C-7, although no correlation was observed in long-range spectra between H-7 and the carbonyl of the butanoyl group. The equatorial orientation of the butanoyl function at C-7 was inferred by considering the coupling constants observed for H-7 in **2** and comparison with those of casearin G. The relative configuration of the stereogenic carbon C-2 in **2** was assigned on the basis of 1H-1H COSY spectra and comparison of these data with those reported for casearin analogues [11].

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} H & **1**[lit.10] & **2** & **3** \\
2 & 3.86 br s & 3.85 br s & 3.88 br s \\
3 & 5.99 br s & 6.79 br s & 6.02 br s \\
6 & & 5.37 d (4.7) \\
7 & 4.90 d (4.7; 11.6) & 4.98 d (4.5; 11.5

## Page 3

Caserarin T (**3**) was obtained as a colorless oil after acetylation. This diterpene also showed 1H and 13C NMR spectral characteristics similar to other casearins [8-12]. Compound **3** has a marked structural resemblance to casearins B, P and Q, due the presence of a acetyl group at C-6 [8,10]. The spectral data (Tables 1 and 2) obtained for **3** were consistent with the structural features of casearins, usually characterized by methoxy, acetoxy and butanoylay moieties. In the case of **3**, the 13C NMR spectral data (Table 2) were compatible with the structure proposed for this diterpene. One methoxy function at C-2, three acetoxy groups at C-18, C-19, C-6, and one butanoyloxy group at C-7 were assigned by analysis of 1H-13C long-range COLOC correlations. Again, the correlation between H-7 and the carbonyl of the butanoyl group was not observed. However, correlations of H-6, H-18 and H-19 with carbonyl groups at \(d\) 170.2, 170.4 and 170.0 respectively, attributed to acetoxy functions linked to the corresponding carbons, provided clear evidence for the location of these groups and consequently for the structure of **3**. Further, the proton signal of H-6 (_d_ 5.37) in **3** was coupled with H-7 (_d_ 5.17) by 4.7 Hz, completely different for C-6 (_d_ 5.19, \(J\) = 10.6 Hz) in casearins B and Q [10,11]. Since the acetoxy groups in these latter compounds are in equatorial positions, the acetoxyl function in **3** must be \(b\) and axial. Further evidence for the _b_-disposition of the functional group at C-6 in **3** was provided by the chemical shift value of C-8 at \(d\) 37.1, shielded by 2 ppm in relation to casearins B and Q [9,10].

The biological activity data for diterpenes **1-3** in the mechanism-based yeast mutant bioassay are given in Table 3. All three diterpenoid compounds showed selective activity in the Rad 52Y and RS 321 assay compared with the wild type Rad + strain [13].

## Experimental

### Instrumentation and chromatography materials

Silica gel (Merck, 230-400 and 70-230 Mesh) was used for all column chromatography unless otherwise stated, and solvents were relistilled prior to use. The 1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker spectrometer at 200 MHz with TMS as internal standard. 13C NMR and 2D NMR were performed at 50 MHz with TMS as internal standard. Mass spectra were taken on a Platform II spectrometer. Optical activities were measured on a Carl Zeiss Jena Polamat A. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer.

### Plant material

The aerial parts of _Casearia sylvestris_**SW** (Flacourtiaceae) were collected at the Florestal Reserve at Martinho Prado (Sao Paulo State, Brazil) in October 1994. A voucher specimen is deposited at the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### Bioassay

Identical to those reported in Ref. [13].

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

The dried and powdered leaves of _C. sylvestris_ (3.5 kg) were sequentially extracted with cold _n_-hexane and a mixture of CH2Cl2/MeOH (2:1, v/v). The latter extract (13.5 g) was subjected to gel filtration with elution by _n_-hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOHAc and MeOH. The bioactive CH2Cl2 fraction was concentrated _in vacuo_ to afford a brown gum (1.2 g),

## Page 4

which was subjected to Si gel CC (40 g) eluted with hexane containing increasing amount of EtOAc to give 33 fractions. Fraction F-17 (50 mg) after acetylation [50 mg on 0.2 mL Py, 0.3 mL Ac2O, overnight] was separated by Prep TLC, using EtOAc:Hex (8.5:1.5) as solvent. This step afford three main fractions (17A-17C); fraction 17A consisted of caesarin G (1) (9.0 mg). The fraction F-19 (113 mg) was separated by a silica gel column, eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH (9:1), yielding impure caesarin S (2) (26 mg). Rechromatography on Si gel Prep TLC eluted with hexane:EtOAc (8:2) yielded pure caesarin S (5.2 mg). F-22 (213 mg) was also submitted to acetylation [213 mg on 1 mL Py, 1.5 mL Ac2O, overnight] and the acetylated mixture was subjected to Si gel CC (230-400 Mesh) (25 g), eluted with increasing amounts of EtOAc in hexane to give 20 fractions. Fraction 19 was applied to a Si gel column, eluted with hexane with increasing amounts of EtOAc to give five fractions. F-19-2 (12.0 mg) was chromatographed on Si gel Prep TLC, eluted with CH2Cl2:MeOH (8:2) to give casein-arin T (3) (4.8 mg).

#### _Caserin G (1)_

Colorless oil [a]D + 28.5deg (_c_ 0.25, CHCl3,), lit. [8] [a]D + 29.5 (_c_ 0.25, CHCl3). EIMS _m/z_ (%) 518 (M+, 10), 458 (M+ -1HOAc, 2), 398 (M+ -2HOAc, 20), 370 (5), 186 (100). UV _l_max, EtOH (_c_): 204 (7200), 233 (13500). IRmax CHCl3 cm-1: 3100, 3000, 1775, 1745, 1450, 1220, 1090, 990. Identified by lit. [8].

#### _Caserin S (2)_

Colorless oil. [a]D + 18deg (_c_ 0.25, CHCl3). IRmax KBr cm-1: 3000, 2960, 1765, 1685, 1540, 1380, 1180, 1080, 980. EIMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 474 [M]+ (3), 459 (M+-CH3), 414 (M+ -HOAc, 25), 397 (50), 222 (100). UV _l_max, EtOH (_c_): 234 (17200), 1H NMR: and 13C NMR: see Tables 1 and 2.

#### _Caserin T (3)_

Colorless oil [a]D + 37.5deg (_c_ 0.3, CHCl3). IRmax KBr cm-1 2990, 2980, 1755, 1370, 1230, 1180, 1080, 980. EIMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 576 [M]+ (2), 544 (M+-MeOH, 5), 516 (10), 396 (80), 171 (100). UV _l_max, CHCl3 nm (_c_): 203 (8500), 234 (17500). 1H NMR and 13C NMR: see Tables 1 and 2.

#### _Acknowledgements_

This work was funded by grants from FAPESP and CNPq. V. da S. Bolzani, M. Furlan and M. C. M. Young are grateful to CNPq for fellowships, and P. R. F. de Carvalho thanks CNPq for providing a scholarship.

## References

* [1] Bolzani, V. da S., Gunatilaka, A. A. L. and Kingston, D. G. I., _Tetrahedron_, 1995, **51,** 5929.
* [2] Bolzani, V. da S., Gunatilaka, A. A. L. and Kingston, D. G. I., _J. Nat. Prod._, 1995, **58,** 1683.
* [3] Corsino, J., Bolzani, V. da S., Pereira, A. M. S., Franca, S. C. and Furlan, M., _Phytochemistry_ 1998, **48,** 137.
* [4] Correa, M. P. _Dicionario das Plantas Uteis e Exoticas Cultivadas_, V. II, Ministerio da Agricultura, Rio de Janeiro, 1931.
* [5] Talapatra, S. K., Ganguly, N. C., Goswani, S. and Talapatra, B., _J. Nat. Prod._, 1983, **46,** 401.
* [6] Shaari, K. and Waterman, P. G., _J. Nat. Prod._, 1994, **57,** 720.
* [7] Gray, A. I., Gibbons, S. and Waterman, P. G., _Phytochemistry_, 1996, **41,** 565.
* [8] Itokawa, H., Totsuka, N., Takeda, K., Watanabe, K. and Obata, E., _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, 1988, **34,** 1585.
* [9] Hunter, S. M., Corley, G. D., Carron, P. C., Rowold, E., Kilpatrick, K. F. and Durley, C. R., _J. Nat. Prod._, 1997, **60,** 894.
* [10] Itokawa, H., Totsuka, N., Morita, H., Takeda, K., Iitaka, Y., Schenkel, E. P. and Motidome, M., _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, 1990, **38,** 3384.
* [11] Morita, H., Takeya, K., Schenkel, E. P., Motidome, M., Kojima, M., Nakayama, H. and Itokawa, M., _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, 1991, **39,** 693.
* [12] Escquiel, B., Hernandez, L. M., Cardenas, J., Ramamoorthy, T. P. and Rodrigues-Hahn, L., _Phytochemistry_, 1989, **28,** 1648.
* [13] Gunatilaka, A. A. L., Samaranayake, G. and Kingston, D. G. I., _J. Nat. Prod._, 1992, **55,** 1648.



