# 10.1590@S0102-695X2012005000106.pdf

## Page 1



# Bioactive extracts and chemical constituents of two endophytic strains of _Fusarium oxysporum_

Andrea M. do Nascimento, Rajhad Candi, Yeabel C. Tartati, Bruno C. Cavalcanti, Leticia V. Costa-Loutfo, Claudia Pessoa, Manuel O. de Moraes, Yu Yiviane Manfrin, Juliano S. Toledo, Angela K. Cruz, Monica T. Pupo

# Abstract

Ethyl acetate extracts of cultures grown in liquid Czapek and on solid rice media of the fungal endophyte _Fusarium oxysporum_ SS46 isolated from the medicinal plant _Smallanthus sonkifolious_ (Poepp.) H. Rob., Asteraceae, exhibited considerable cytotoxic activity when tested _in vitro_ against human cancer cells. Chromatographic separation yielded anhydrostraini (**1**) and beauvericin (**2**) that were identified based on their \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{15}\) NMR data. Compounds **1** and **2** showed the strongest cytotoxic activity against different cancer cell lines. Compound **2** also showed promising activity against _Leishmania brasiliensis_. Hexaine extract of \(F\)_: oxysporum_ SSC50 grown on solid rice media also afforded a mixture of compounds that displayed cytotoxic activity against different cancer cell lines. Chemical analysis of the mixture of compounds, investigated by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), showed that there was a predominance of methyl esters of fatty acids and alkanes.

## Introduction

Microorganisms are recognized as prolific producers of bioactive natural products, many of them useful as clinical drugs (Gunatilaka, 2006; Newman & Cragg, 2012). Newman and Gragg (2012) recently emphasized that efforts to discover new bioactive natural products should focus on microorganisms living in interactions with their hosts. Endophytes are one type of such microorganisms, since they spend the whole or part of their lifespan inside the healthy tissues of the host inter- and/or intracellularly without causing discernible symptoms of plant disease (Borges et al., 2009). Natural products from fungal endophytes have a broad spectrum of biological activities, such as antimicrobial, immunosuppressant, anticancer, and also may act as biocontrol agents (Gunatilaka, 2006; Borges et al., 2009).

As part of our ongoing research on endophytic fungi found in association with Asteraceae species we have identified several bioactive extracts and compounds, as well as novel natural products (Gallo et al., 2009; Guimaraes et al., 2010; Borges et al., 2011).

In this paper, we report the chemical and biological of two fungal strains of _Fusarium oxysporum_, coded as SS46 and SS50, isolated as endophytes from the medicinal plant _Smallanthus sonchifolious_ (Asteraceae).

## Materials and Methods

### General procedures

1D (regular \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{15}\)C) and 2D nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded in CDCl, on Bruker spectrometer (DPX-500), working at 500 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H, and at 125 MHz for \({}^{15}\)C. Tetramethylsilane (TMS) was used as internal reference. Column chromatographies were performed over silica gel 60, 230-280 mesh

## Page 2

(Ultra Chem) or Sephadex LH-20. Vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC) was carried out silica gel 60 H, 70-230 mesh (Merck). Thin-Layer chromatography (TLC) was performed on silica gel 60 GF234 (Merck). Spots were located by spraying with anisaldehyde-sulfuric acid reagent, heated at 110 degC.

### Isolation of strains

The endophytic fungal strains were isolated from the roots of _S. sonchofilus_ according to the procedure described by Gallo et al. (2009). After collection, the plant material was washed with water and surface sterilized by immersion in 70% aqueous ethanol (2.5 min), followed by 2.5% aqueous sodium hypochlorite (30", 60" or 90"), and finally with 70% aqueous ethanol (1 min). After these procedures, the leaves and roots were rinsed with sterilized water. This latter water was incubated in Petri dishes to ensure the elimination of all epiphytic microorganisms. Small pieces of the leaves and roots were excised and placed on agar in Petri dishes containing potato dextrose agar (PDA) medium at 30 degC. Individual hypal tips of the emerging fungi were removed and placed on PDA slants.

### Fermentation and extraction procedures

Both _F. oxysporum_ strains were cultured in liquid Czapek and solid ice media. Liquid cultures were conducted in two steps. First, the silica stored fungi were inoculated onto PDA-containing medium in Petri dishes and incubated at 30 degC for seven days. After this period, the pre-inoculum was prepared by transferring the agar plugs (0.5 cm diameter) cut from the 7-day-old original cultures into 50 mL Falcon flasks containing 10 mL of rich medium (5 g tryptone, 10 g dextrose, 3 g yeast extract, 10 g malt extract, in 1000 mL final volume of H2O, pH 6.2 +- 0.2), and incubated for three days at 25 degC, 120 rpm. After this period, the pre-inoculum (20 mL) was transferred to a 1000 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 200 mL of Czapek medium and incubated at 25 degC for 14 or 21 days (120 rpm). Nine Erlenmeyer flasks were used for a large scale extract production, aiming to isolate secondary metabolites. After 21 days 200 mL of ethanol were added to each flask, the resulting suspension was vacuum-filtered and the filtrate fractionated by liquid-liquid partition with ethyl acetate. The resulting organic layer was evaporated under reduced pressure to produce the ethyl acetate extracts (EaL). Fermentations of _F. oxysporum_ SS46 and _F. oxysporum_ SS50 carried out for fourteen days yielded, respectively, 1.4289 g (coded SS46-EaL4) and 1.0884 g (coded SS50-EaL4) of EaL extracts. After 21 days of incubation, _F. oxysporum_ SS46 yielded 0.8082 g of EaL extract (coded SS46-EaL). _F. oxysporum_ SS50 was cultured only for 14 days. A Falcon flask containing seed medium without inoculum was submitted to the same preculture conditions. The resulting pre-inoculum was transferred to Czapek medium and treated in the same way for control purposes.

The solid fermentation experiments were carried out in ten 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 90 g of parboiled rice in 90 mL distilled water per flask, previously twice autoclaved at 120 degC for 40 min for each fungal strain. Agar plugs (about 2 x 2 cm) cut from the 7-day-old original cultures on PDA agar were used for inoculation. One flask, without inoculum, was kept for control use. After 21 days incubation in a BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) device at 30 degC, 150 mL of methanol were added to each flask and the contents were allowed to stand overnight at room temperature. The methanol was filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure yielding the methanol extract, which was submitted to the liquid-liquid partition with hexane and ethyl acetate. The resulting organic layer was evaporated under reduced pressure to produce the hexanic and ethyl acetate extracts. Solid culture of _F. oxysporum_ SS46 afforded 0.41 g of the hexanic extract (SS46-HxS) and 2.89 g of the ethyl acetate extract (SS46-EaS). Fermentation of _F. oxysporum_ SS50 yielded 0.16 g of the hexanic extract (SS50-HxS) and 0.84 g and ethyl acetate extract (SS50-EaS).

### Isolation of compounds

The SS46-EaS extract (2.77 g) was chromatographed by vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC) on silica gel and eluted with hexane, hexane/ethyl acetate (gradient), ethyl acetate/methanol (gradient) and methanol to give ten fractions (F1-F10). Fraction F5 (100 mg) was purified by chromatography on a Sephadex LH-20 column using methanol as eluent to give **1** (5.2 mg). The SS46-EaL extract (89 mg) was purified by chromatography on a column packed with silica gel 60. Elution with hexane/ethyl acetate 8:2 and 2:8, (crescent gradient), ethyl acetate/methanol 19:1 and methanol 100% afforded twenty fractions, which were combined in nine sub-fractions according to TLC analysis. The sub-fraction 7 (6.1 mg) was identified as **2**. The SS50-HxS extract (155.4 mg), obtained after 21 days on rice medium, was investigated by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS).

### Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)

The SS50-HxS extract was analyzed on a Shimadzu QP-2010 gas chromatograph interfaced to a mass spectrometer (GC-MS). The following conditions were used: DB-5MS column (30 m x 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm); helium (99.999%) carrier gas at a constant flow of 1.1 mL/min; 1 mL injection volume; injector split ratio of 1:40; injector temperature 240 degC; electron impact 

## Page 3

mode at 70 eV; ion-source temperature 280 degC. The oven temperature was programmed from 100 degC (isothermal for 5 min), with an increase of 10 degC/min to 250 degC (isothermal for 5 min), and 10 degC/min to 280 degC (isothermal for 15 min). A mixture of linear hydrocarbons (C,H2O

## Page 4

The SS50-HxS extract was analyzed by GC-MS. Twenty-seven components were detected in this extract, and twelve of them (76.8%) were identified by the GC-MS data (Table 2). According to our results, there is a predominance of alkanes and fatty acid methyl esters in this extract and the main constituents are: (92,122)-octadecadienoic acid methyl ester (54.45%), methyl hexadecanoate(97.3%)and(92)-octadecenoic acid methyl ester (4.70%). Fifteen compounds remained unidentified because the spectral data could not be associated with any compound database system (Wiley lib 7). The analysis of hexane rice-control extract (without fungus), showed that there is little correlation in their chemical composition. There are only five compounds in common in the extracts: 1,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, bis(2-methylpropyl) ester, dimethyl hexadecanoate, (92)-octadecenoic acid methyl ester, clionasterol and stigmasteral-4-en-3-one. Therefore, seven compounds differentiate the SS50-HxS extract from the culture medium control extract: (2\(E\), 4_E_)-decadienal, pentadecane, hexadecane, heptadecane octadecane, (92,122)-octadecadienoic acid methyl ester and dehydroegosterol. All extracts analyzed in this study differed considerably in their secondary metabolites. The SS50-HxS showed pronounced cytotoxicity against the three human cancer cell lines. As the major components of the hexane extract are a mixture of three methyl esters (methyl hexadecanoate, (92)-octadecenoic acid methyl ester and (92,122)-octadecadienoic acid methyl ester), which represents 68.88% of the extract, presumably they should be responsible for the high cytotoxic activity of the crude extract. The culture medium control extract did not show cytotoxic activity (Table 1). This extract also contains a fatty acid methyl esters mixture, but a mixture of two and only a lesser amount, methyl hexadecanoate or methyl palmitate, (92)-octadecenoic acid methyl ester, representing only 17.41% crude extract.

Previously reported data found that another mixture of three fatty acid methyl esters (methyl myristate, methyl palmitate and methyl iserate), isolated from the ascidian _Didemnum psammatodes_, also showed high cytotoxic activity and antiproliferative effects against four cell lines leukemia. The mechanism of action of these fatty acid methyl esters was found to involve inhibition of DNA synthesis and induction of both necrosis and apoptosis (Takeara et al., 2008). The major constituent of this mixture is the methyl palmitate or methyl hexadecanoate, also identified as one of the three constituents of the mixture of methyl esters present in the SS50-HxS extract. Still according to the literature, when each methyl ester blend was tested separately, the cytotoxic activity decreased, suggesting that a synergistic effect of the mixture of fatty acid methyl esters (Takeara et al., 2008).

The SS46-EaS extract exhibited high cytotoxicity against the colon cancer cells (84.82%) and moderate cytotoxicity against central nervous system cancer cells (67.02%) (Table 1). This extract was subjected to vacuum liquid chromatography, and subsequent purification of the resulting fractions by chromatographic techniques resulted

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline \multirow{2}{*}{Crode extract**} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Inhibition of cell growth (\%)} \\ \cline{2-4}  & HCT-S & MD-AMB435 & SF295 \\ \hline SS46-HxS & 55.83 & 16.53 & 43.61 \\ SS50-HxS & 97.72 & 90.53 & 83.78 \\ Solid medium control Hx-extract** & 35.41 & 1 & 1 \\ SS46-EaS & 84.82 & 36.23 & 67.02 \\ SS50-EaS & 43.45 & 1 & 0.77 \\ Solid medium control Ea-extract** & 31.53 & 5.74 & 1 \\ SS46-EaL & 100.00 & 99.32 & 100.00 \\ Liquid medium control extract & 1 & 1 & 1 \\ Doxorubicin & 97.30 & 98.27 & 96.94 \\ \hline \multicolumn{4}{l}{* SS: final strain; Hx: hexane; Ea: ethyl acetate; S: solid free medium; L: liquid Crapek medium for 21 days; “Extract from culture media without fungus; HCT-S: colon cancer cells; MDA-MB435: melanoma cells; SF295: brain cancer cells; high activity: \(\sim\)79%; moderated activity: 50 to 75%; low activity: \(\sim\)50 %; I: inactive.} \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: _In vitro_ cytotoxic activity of the extracts obtained from the endophytes _F. oxysporum_ SS546 and _F. oxysporum_ SS50 after 21 days of fermentation (50 mg/mL).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline \multirow{2}{*}{peak} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{RT} & \multirow{2}{*}{Compound} & \multirow{2}{*}{(\%)} & \multirow{2}{*}{Kl exp.*} & \multirow{2}{*}{Kl lit.*} \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\ \hline
1 & 9.248 & (2\(E\),4_E_)-decadienal & 0.32 & 1320 & 1319 \\
2 & 15.191 & pentadecane & 0.37 & 1500 & 1500 \\
3 & 18.770 & hexadecane & 0.62 & 1599 & 1600 \\
4 & 22.337 & heptadecane & 0.51 & 1699 & 1700 \\
5 & 25.821 & octadecane & 0.68 & 1800 & 1800 \\
6 & 27.688 & 1,2- & 0.62 & 1855 & * \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & &

## Page 5

in the isolation of **1**. The SS46-EaL extract showed the higher cytotoxicities against the three human cancer cell lines: colon (100.0 %), melanoma (99.32%) and central nervous system (100.0%). The SS46-EaL extract was fractionated by column chromatography resulting in the isolation of compound **2**. Analysis of the 1H NMR, 1oC NMR, HMQC and HMBC spectra, together with HRESIIMS data and comparison to literature data, led to the identification of compounds **1** and **2** as the naphthoquinone anhydrousrba and the cyclo-hexadepispeptide beauvericin, respectively (Kurobane et al., 1980; Zhan et al, 2007). The occurrence of naphthoquinone **1** and cyclo-hexadepispeptide **2** has been previously reported in the genus _Fusarium_ (Tatum & Baker, 1983).

The cytotoxic activities of compounds **1** and **2** were evaluated _in vitro_ against the three cancer cell lines. Anhydrofusarubin (**1**) and beauvericin (**2**) presented significant cytotoxicity against all the evaluated cancer cells, and the IC50 values ranged from 2.39 to 9.85 mg/mL (Table 3). Anhydrofusarubin (**1**) was recently isolated from a marine _Fusarium_ sp. strain and showed selective cytotoxicity against human oral carcinoma cell lines (KB cells) and breast cancer (MCF-7) (Trisuwan et al., 2010). It has been reported previously in the literature _in vitro_ cytotoxic activity of beauvericin (**2**), also isolated from an endophytic _F. oxysporum_ strain, in other cell lines of human cancer (Zhan et al., 2007). Compound **2** is an ionophore able to transport cations across the membranes, especially calcium, leading to the cytotoxic effects (Zhan et al, 2007; Wang & Xu, 2012). As part of our research interest in finding antiparasitic compounds, beauvericin (**2**) was tested in vitro against promastigotes of _Leishmania brasiliensis_, and showed EC50 1.86 mM. Therefore, compound **2** can be considered an interesting leishmaniasis natural product for further structure diversification. Beauvericin (**2**) had already been reported as a bioactive compound against other cancer lines, HIV1 virus and bacterial strains (Wang & Li, 2012). We now report the activity of beauvericin against different cancer lines and, for the first time, against _L. braziliensis_.

This study demonstrated that strains of fungal endophytes, identified as the same species and isolated from the same plant tissue, may vary considerably in the class of secondary metabolites produced. They may also produce different compounds depending on culturing conditions. _F. oxysporum_ SS46 produced compound **1** in solid medium, and the cyclo-hexadepispeptide **2** in liquid medium, both compounds extracted with ethyl acetate after 21 days of fungal fermentation. These compounds have important antiproliferative properties selective for cancer cells that might explain the cytotoxicities observed for the extracts. There was no production of these compounds by _F. oxysporum_ SS50, which synthesizes predominantly fatty acid methyl esters and alkanes in solid medium.

###### Acknowledgements.

 The authors are grateful to FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES for financial aid. This work was carried out in the INCT-INBEQMeDI (Instituto Nacional de Biotecnologia Estrutural e Quimica Medicinal em Doencas Infecciosas).

## References

* [1] Adams RP 1995. _Identification of essential oil components by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry._ Illinois: Allured Publ.
* [2] Borges WS, Borges KB, Bonato PS, Said, S, Pupo MT 2009. Endophytic fungi: natural products, enzymes and biotransformation. _Curr Org Chem 13_: 1137-1163.
* [3] Borges WS, Mancilla G, Guimaraes DO, Duran-Patron R., Colado IG, Pupo MT 2011. Azaphilones from the endophyte _Chaetomium globosum. J Nat Prod 74_: 1182-1187.
* [4] Dutta A, Bandyopadhyay S, Mandal C, Chatterjee M 2005. Development of a modified MTT assay for screening antimonial resistant field isolates of Indian visceral leishmaniasis. _Parasyl Int 34_: 119-122.
* [5] Gallo MBC, Chagas FO, Almeida MO, Macedo CC, Cavalcanti BC, Barros FWA, Moraes MO, Costa-Loutfo LV, Pessoa C, Bastos JK, Pupo MT 2009. Endophytic fungi found in association with _Smallanthus sonchofiloins_ (Asteraceae) as resourceful producers of cytotoxic bioactive natural products. _J Basic Microbiol 49_: 142-151.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline \multirow{2}{*}{Compound} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Cell lines - IC50 μg/mL (IC95)} \\ \cline{2-4}  & HCT-8 & MDA-MB435 & SF295 \\ \hline Compound 1 & 9.85 & 6.23 & 6.32 \\  & (7.50–12.79) & (4.99–7.78) & (4.38–9.11) \\ Compound 2 & 3.02 & 3.17 & 2.39 \\  & (2.73-3.34) & (2.56-3.93) & (1.89-3.02) \\ Doxorubicin & 0.04 & 0.2 & 0.04 \\ (positive control) & (0.02-0.06) & (0.1 – 0.34) & (0.01-0.005) \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: _In vitro_ cytotoxic activity of compounds **1** and **2**, IC50.



## Page 6

Gallo MBC, Cavalcanti BC, Barros FWA, Moraes, MO, Costa-Lotuffo LV, Pessoa CO, Bastos JK, Pupo MT 2010. Chemical constituents of _Papulargam immersa_, an endophyte from _Smallanthus ssoncholfias_ (Asteraceae), and their cytotoxic activity. _Chem Biodivers 7_: 2941-2950.
* Guimaraes _et al._ (2010) Guimaraes DO, Borges WS, Vieira NJ, Oliveira LF, Silva CHTP, Lopes NP, Dias LG, Duran-Patron R, Collado IG, Pupo MT 2010. Diketopiperazines produced by endophytic fungi found in association with two Asteraceae species. _Pytrochemistry 71_: 1423-1429.
* Gunatilaka (2006) Gunatilaka AAL 2006. Natural products from plant-associated microorganisms: distribution, structural diversity, bioactivity, and implications of their occurrence. _J Nat Prod 69_: 509-526.
* Kurobane _et al._ (1980) Kurobane I, Vining L, Meinnes AG, Walter JA 1980. Use of \({}^{1}\)C in biosynthetic studies. The labeling pattern in dihydrofusarubin enriched from [\({}^{1}\)C]- and [\({}^{1}\)C, \({}^{1}\)H] acetate in cultures of _Fusarium solani. Can J Chem 58_: 1380-1385.
* Mosmann (1983) Mosmann T 1983. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. _J Immunol Methods 65_: 55-63.
* Newman _et al._ (2012) Newman DJ, Cragg GM 2012. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the 30 years from 1981 to 2010. _J Nat Prod 75_: 311-335.
* Takeara _et al._ (2008) Takeara R, Jimenez PC, Wilke DV, Moraes MO, Pessoa C, Lopes NP, Lopes JLC, Lotufo TMC, Costa-Lotufo LV 2008. Antileukemic effects of _Didemann spasmamatodes_ (Tunicata: Asciidaeea) constituents. _Comp Biochem Physiol Part A 151_: 363-369.
* Tatum (1983) Tatum JH, Baker RA, 1983. Naphthoquinones produced by _Fusarium solani_ isolated from citrus. _Pytrochemistry 22_: 543-547.
* Trisuwan _et al._ (2010) Trisuwan K, Khanthong N, Rukachasiriikul V, Phongpaichit S, Preedanon S, Sakayaroj J 2010. Anthraquinone, cyclopentanone, and nphthoquinone derivatives from the sea fan-derived fungi _Fusarium_ spp. PSU-F14 and PSU-F135. _J Nat Prod 73_: 1507-1511.
* Van den Dool (1963) Van den Dool H, Kratz PD 1963. A generalization of the retention index system including linear temperature programmed gas liquid partition chromatography. _J Chromatogr 11_: 463-471.
* Wang _et al._ (2012) Wang Q, Lijian X 2012. Beauvericin, a bioactive compound produced by fungi: a short review. _Molecules 17_, 2367-2377.
* Zhan _et al._ (2007) Zhan, J Burns AM, Liu MX, Faeth SH, Gunatilaka AAL 2007. Search for cell motility and angiogenesis inhibitors with potential anticancer activity: beauvericin and other constituents of two endophytic strains of _Fusarium oxysporum_. _J Nat Prod 70_: 227-232.

\({}^{\bullet}\)**Correspondence**

Monica T. Pupo

Departamento de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo,

14040-903 Ribeiro Preto-SP, Brazil

mpupo@fcfp.usp.br

