# 10.1590@1809-43921984143453.pdf

## Page 1

THE CHEMISTRY OF BRAZILIAN LEGUMINOSAE, LXI. (+)-METHYL VOUACAPENATE FROM VOUACAPOUA MALIDIOR.

Silvia M.C. Dias (*)

J. Guilherme S. Maia (**)

Zenadie S. Ferreira (***)

Otto R. Gottlieb (***)

SUMMARY

_The wood of Voucacapoua patlidar (Leguninosae-Caesaronioidesae) contains (+)-methyl voucacapenate._

The genus **Vouacapoua** Aubl. (family Leguninosae-Caesalpinioideae) comprises three arboreous species found in tropical South America where they are popularly known under the collective designation "acapu". Their wood is of great durability and has been exploited in construction, mostly of flooring and furniture, for so many years that the trees are nearing extinction (Rizzini & Mors, 1976).

**V. americana** Aubl. and V. macropetala Sandw. have been examined previously with respect to their chemical constituents. Wood samples of both species were found to contain (+)-methyl voucapenate (Sploelstra, 1930; King et al., 1955). In continuation of our work on the chemistry of Leguninosae (for Part LX see Dias et al., 1982), we wish to re port that the trunk wood of **V.pallidor** Ducke also contains a substantial quantity of the same compound. Methyl voucapenate.is also accessible through total synthesis (Spencer et al., 1971).

EXPERIMENTAL

Trunk wood of V.pallidor (voucher INPA herbarium 58.612) was collected at the

(*) Instituto Biologico, Secretaria de Agricultura e Abastecimento do Estado de Sao Paulo, 04014 - Sao Paulo, SP

(**) Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia - INPA/CNPq - Caixa Postal 478 -69000 Manaus, AM

(**) Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo - 05508- Sao Paulo, SP

ACTA AMAZONICA 14(3-4):451-453. 1984.



## Page 2



## Page 3

References

Dias, S.M.C.; Maia, J.G.S.; Ferreira, Z.S.; Gottlieb, 0.R. - 1982. The Chemistry of Brazilian Leguminosae, LX. Indolyacetic acid form Tachigalia paniculata. Acta Ama- zonica, 12(4): 805-807.

King, F.E.; Godson, D.H.; King, T.J. - 1955. The structure of diterpenes from Vouaca- poua species. J. Chem. Soc., p 1117-1125.

Rizzini, C.T. & Mors, W.B. - 1976. Botanica Economica Brasileira. Sao Paulo, Ed. Univer - dade de Sao Paulo. 111p.

Spencer, T.A.; Smith, R.A. J.; Storn, D.L.; Villarica, R.M. - 1971. Total syntheses of (+)-methyl vinhaticoate and (+)-methyl vouacapenate. J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 93: 4856-4864.

Spoelstra, D.B. - 1930. The essential oil and crystalline ester from the heartwood of Vouacapoua americana. Rec. Trav. Chim., 49: 226-236.

(Aceito para publicacao em 11/04/84).



