# 10.1515@znc-2002-5-602.pdf

## Page 1



# New Spirorotenoids from _Tephrosia candida_

Cesar C. Andrei

Paulo C. Vieira

Joao B. Fernandes

M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva

Edson Rodrigues Fo

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Londrina, Londrina, PR, BrazilDepartamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil. E-mail: paulo@dq.ufscar.brAuthor for correspondence and reprint requestsZ. Naturforsch. **57****,** 418-422 (2002); received January 22/February 18, 2002

###### Abstract

The ethyl acetate extract of roots of _Tephrosia candida_ afforded three new spirorotenoids belonging to a new class of spirocompounds, named tephrospirolactone, tephrospiroketone I, and tephrospiroketone II. The structures of these compounds were determined mainly based on spectral analysis. The only known spirorotenoid described in the literature is amorphiprotonone, isolated from _Amorphi fruitcosa_.

## Introduction

The genus _Tephrosia_ belongs to the family Fabaceae, which is well-known to be a rich source of flavonoids, besides the rotenoids among their secondary metabolites. Rotenoids, an interesting class of compounds showing mainly activity against insects, have also shown powerful ictiotoxic activity, fish poison. Rotenone was the first roenoid identified and had been used as insecticide before the advent of the organosynthetic insecticides (Jacobson, 1971). Recently, properties as anticarcinogenic activities have also been attributed to rotenoids. Tephrosin and amorphiprotonone (**1**) isolated from _Amorphi_ species have shown a potential use against tumours including skin cancer (Konoshima _et al._, 1993 and Li _et al._, 1993).

We have been interested in the chemistry of _T. candida_ and have described the isolation of rotenoids from this plant (Andrei _et al._, 1997 and Pereira _et al._,1998). In continuation of the study of the roots of _T. candida_ we now describe the isolation and identification of three spirorotenoids, which represent a new spiroclass system formed by the rings B and C, a different spiro system type of amorphiprotonone, the only known spirorotenoid (Li _et al._,1991).

## Materials and Methods

### General experimental procedures

A Bruker DRX-400 spectrometer, operating at 400.13 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H and 100.62 MHz for \({}^{13}\)C NMR was used. All spectra were run in CDCl\({}_{3}\) and with TMS as internal standard. Optical rotations were measured with a Perkin-Elmer polarimeter. Mass spectra were obtained with a HP 5987A spectrometer.

### Plant material

Roots of _T. candida_ (Roxb.) DC were collected and identified in the Instituto Agronomico do Parana, PR, Brazil, January 1988. Voucher specimens are deposited at the Herbario of Instituto Agronomico, Londrina, PR, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of compounds

The roots were dried in an open stove at 60 \({}^{\circ}\)C and powdered affording 2.7 kg. Exhaustive extraction with ethyl acetate after hexane extraction, gave 36.5 g of crude extract (dry weight). A part of the ethyl acetate extract (8.0 g) was submitted to droplet countercurrent chromatography (DCCC) using an ascending system obtained from the mixture of the following solvents hexane::CHCl3:CH3CN (10:3:7 v/v/v). A fraction (2275 mg) was submitted to column chromatography (70-230 mesh) eluted with hexane and ethyl acetate with increasing polarity. Purification of the fractions with silica gel columns (230-400 mesh), preparative _tlc_ on silica eluted with hexane:CH2Cl2:MeOH (50:49:1 v/v/v) and recycling preparative HPLC on silica gel using as eluent a mixture hexane:CH2Cl2:-PrOH (80:10:1 v/v/v) afforded tephrospiolactone (**2**)

## Page 2

(7.3 mg), tephrospiroketone \(I\) (**3**) (5.2 mg) and tephrospiroketone _II_ (**4**) (1.2 mg).

Tephrospiolactone (**2**): [a]b5 +9.5deg (4.5 mg/ml - CH2Cl2). IR Vmax KBr cm-1: 1748, 1681, 1611, and 1583. EIMS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 424(4), 222(3), 203(30), 202(27), 187(100) and 180(14). 1HNMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): Table I. 13CNMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): Table II. HMBC (CDCl3, 100/400 MHz): Table III.

Theprospiroketone \(I\) (**3**): [a]b5 +30.9deg (4.2 mg/ml - CH2Cl2). IR Vmax KBr, cm-1: 1716, 1675, 1607, and 1507. EIMS: _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 408(32), 393(17), 213(26) and 180(100). 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): Table I. 13CNMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): Table II.

Tephrospiroketone _II_ (**4**): 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): Table I. 13C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): Table II.

## Results and Discussion

The infrared spectra showed absorption of carbonyls at 1681, 1748 and 1675 cm-1, and 1716 cm-1 for **2** and **3** respectively. The absorption 1748 cm-1 was attributed to a carbonyl of an a,b-dihydro-b-lactone ring and the one 1716 cm-1 to the a,b-dehydro-cyclopentanone, while absorptions close to 1680 cm-1, are usually observed for carbonyls of 6a, 12a-dihydrotonoids

The 1H NMR of the three compounds displayed an AB coupling system for two geminal hydrogens, neighbouring the quaternary carbon of the spirorings (Table I). This system has never been observed before for any rotenoids. Other signals showed to be characteristic of hydrogens in the rings A, D and E, exhibiting differences of the chemical shifts, in comparison with deguelin (**5**) (Andrei _et al._ 1997) and rotenone (**6**) (Birch _et al._ 1985) as models. The chemical shifts observed for H-1 and H-4 in the ring A (Table I) exhibited accentuated differences indicating the presence of an electron withdrawing substituent at the aromatic system. The hydrogens in the D and E rings showed closer chemical shifts when compared with those of the above deguelin and rotenone. The pair of doublets attributed to H-6 in the spirocompounds showed similar chemical shifts with those of the homoisoflawanone scillasscillin (**7**). The diastereotopic protons of this compound (H-2) appear as an AB system, displayed at 8 4.52 and 4.62 (\(J=11.0\) Hz) (Heller and Tamm, 1981).

The 13C NMR chemical shifts were attributed to the carbons of compounds **1**, **2** and **3**, having rotenone (**6**) (Crombie _et al._, 1975) and deguelin (**5**) (Andrei _et al._,1997) as models (Table II). The chemical shifts of C-6a and the additional carbonyl in C-12a of the new compounds have never been described for common rotenoid skeleta before. The data of Table II are in agreement with the proposed structures.

When compared with the model compounds the main differences observed were: deshielding of C-3 and C-4a (D ~ 8 ppm), suggesting the addi

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l l} H & Tephrospiro-lactone (**2**) & Deguelin (**5**) & Tephrospiro-ketone 1 (**3**) & Tephrospiro-ketone II (**4**) & \\
1 & 7.18 \(s\) & 6.72 \(s\) & 7.27 \(s\) & 7.27 \(s\) & 6.77 \(s\) \\
4 & 6.51 \(s\) & 6.38 \(s\) & 6.53 \(s\) & 6.53 \(s\) & 6.46 \(s\) \\
6α & 4.54 \(d\) (12) & 4.11 \(d\) (12.4) & 4.63 \(d\) (12.4)

## Page 3

tional withdrawing effect of the conjugated carbonyl at C-12a; C-6 is deshielded (Dd ~ 5 ppm) due to b-effect of the quaternary carbon (6a); C-7a of the spiroketones showed deshielding of 9 ppm due to their presence in a five membered ring; the spirolactone with a six member ring showed a shielding for C-11a (Dd ~ 6.1 ppm) that can be explained by the electron donor effect of the lactone oxygen to C-12 and the chemical shifts for C-7a, C-8, C-9 and C-10 of spiroketones are deshielded in comparison with the models, while C-11 are shielded of 4 ppm in both cases.

The HMBC spectrum of tephrospiolactone (**2**)(Table III) showed cross peaks between hydrogens and carbons (2\(J\) and 3_J_) that confirmed the proposed structure. The main correlation was observed between C-6a and the diasterotopic hydrogens at C-6.

EI/MS also corroborated the structures proposed for the spirocompounds. The spectrum showed two possibilities of a retro Diels-Alder rearrangement. The base peak for **2**, could be explained by a retro Diels-Alder between C and D rings, followed by a common loss of a methyl

Fig. 1: Structures of rotenoids amorphispironone (**1**), tephrospiolactone (**2**), tephrospiroketone \(I\) (**3**), tephrospiroketone _II_ (**4**), deguelin (**5**), rotenone (**6**) and scillascillin (**7**).



## Page 4

group of the chromene ring. Mass spectrum of **3**, also presented the base peak due to the only one retro Diels-Alder type fragmentation.

Rotenoid biosynthesis is already well-known (Crombie, 1984 and Crombie and Whitting, 1998). These two last reviews show the main biosynthetic pathways. The biosynthetic pathway for amphiphilic spironne **1**, isolated from _Amorpha fruitcosa_ (Li _et al._, 1991; Terada _et al._,1993) was discussed by Li (1991), and also mentioned by Crombie (1998). For the spiroketones **3** and **4**, a similar first step mechanism with an epoxidation, like in amorphispronone, can be suggested. Therefore, the starting compound should be the 6a,12a-dehydrodeguelin. The epoxidation should occur between C-6a and C-12a. In a hydrate form at C-12 carbonyl, a pinacol-pinacolone type rearrangement could lead to the spiro compounds, after interconversion to the carbonylated form and oxidation of C-12a into a keto group. Subsequent oxidation by a Baeyer-Villiger reaction type at C-12 and expansion to a six membered lactone ring could explain the formation of the spirolactone **2**.

### Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to FAPESP, CNPq, FINEP and CAPES for the financial support, to Alberto S. Pereira and Dr. Angelo Cunha Pinto (Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro), for the mass spectra of _tephrospiolactone_. We also thank Dr. Sueli de Carvalho, Instituto Agronomico do Parana de Londrina - PR - Brazil, for collecting and identifying _Tephrosia candida_. C. C. A. thanks CAPES/PICDT for the award of a scholarship.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c} \hline C & Tephrospiro- & Degueicin (**5**) & Tephrospiro- & Tephrospiro- & Retenone (**6**) \\  & lactone (**2**) & & ketone I (**3**) & ketone II (**4**) & \\ \hline
**1a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 109.8 & 105.3 & 106.4 & 107.0 & 104.7 \\
1 & 107.1 & 110.7 & 106.9 & 106.6 & 110.4 \\
2 & 145.5 & 144.1 & 145.2 & 145.3 & 143.9 \\
3 & 157.4’ & 149.8 & 157.2 & 157.3 & 149.5 \\
4 & 100.0 & 101.2 & 100.1 & 100.2 & 100.9 \\
4a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 157.7 & 147.7 & 158.2 & 158.3 & 147.4 \\
6 & 71.7 & 66.5 & 71.0 & 71.0 & 66.3 \\
6a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 95.6 & 72.7 & 86.7 & 86.7 & 72.2 \\
7a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 150.5 & 150.0 & 161.8 & 168.8 [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 156.1 \\
8 & 108.8 & 109.4 & 112.2 [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 113.1 [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 113.0 \\
9 & 159.3a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 160.3 & 169.0 & 169.7 [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 167.4 \\
10 & 112.3 & 111.7 & 113.3 & 109.5 & 104.7 \\
11 & 130.0 & 128.9 & 125.1 & 126.5 & 130.0 \\
11a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 106.9 & 113.0 & 113.2 [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 114.2 [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 114.7 \\
12 & 159.64 & 189.4 & 182.9 & 183.0 & 188.9 \\
12a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: Multiplicity obtained by PENDANT & 181.3 & 44.6 & 193.0 & 192.7 & 44.6 \\
4′ & 114.5 & 116.0 & 114.4 & 31.5 & 31.3 \\
5′ & 130.0 & 128.9 & 129.2 & 88.3 & 87.8 \\
6′ & 77.9 & 77.9 & 78.3 & 142.6 & 143.0 \\
7′/8′ & 28.2/28.5 & 28.4/28.7 & 28.4/28.5 & 112.2/17.1 & 112.6/17.2 \\ OMe(2) & 56.2 & 56.1 & 56.2 & 56.3 & 55.8 \\ OMe(3) & 56.5 & 56.7 & 56.4 & 56.5 & 56.3 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: 13C NMR data* for spiroretonoids (CDCl3, 100 MHz). Rotenone (Crombie _et al._, 1975) and deguelin (Andrei _et al._, 1997) were used as models.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c} \hline H/C & \({}^{2}\)_J_ & \({}^{3}\)_J_ \\ \hline
6a & 6a & 4a \\
68 & 6a & 4a and 12a \\
11 & — & 7a, 9 and 12 \\
4 & 3 and 4a & 1a and 2 \\
1 & — & 3 and 4a \\
4′ & 6′ & 8 \\ Me (7′/8′) & 6′ & 5′ \\ OMe (2) & — & 2 \\ OMe (3) & — & 3 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Correlation observed in the HMBC spectrum for tephrospiolactone (**2**) (CDCl3, 100/400 MHz).



## Page 5

Andrei C. C., Vieira P. C., Fernandes J. B., da Silva M. F. G. F. and Rodrigues Fo. E. (1997), Dimethyl-chromene tectonics from _Tephrosia candida_. Phytochemistry **46**, 1081-1085.
* Birch et al. (1985) Birch N., Crombie L. and Crombie M. W. (1985), Rotemoids of _Lonocarbagus ssaladorensis_: Their effectiveness in protecting seeds against bruchild predation. Phytochemistry **24**, 2881-2883.
* Crombie (1984) Crombie L. (1984), Rotemoids and their biosynthesis. Nat. Prod. Rep. **1**, 3-19.
* Crombie and Whitting (1998) Crombie L. and Whitting D. A. (1998), Biosynthesis in the rotenoid group of natural products: Applications of isotope methodology. Phytochemistry **49**, 1479-1507.
* Crombie et al. (1975) Crombie L., Kilbee W. and Whiting D. A. (1975), Carbon-bon-13 magnetic resonance spectra of natural rotemoids and their relatives. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. **1**, 1497-1499.
* Heller and Tamm (1981) Heller W. and Tamm C. (1981), Homoisoflavanones and biogenetically related compounds. Progress in chemistry of organic natural products. New York. Springer **40**, 117-120.
* Jacobson and Crosby (1971) Jacobson M. and Crosby D. G. (1971), Naturally Occurring Insecticides Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 71-73.
* Konoshima et al. (1993) Konoshima T., Terada H., Kokumai M., Kozuka M., Tokuda H., Estes J. R., Li L., Wang H. and Lee K. (1993), Studies on inhibitors of skin tumour promotion, XIL. Rotenoids from _Amorpha fruitosa_. J. Nat. Prod. **56**, 843-848.
* Li et al. (1993) Li L., Wang H., Chang J., Mcphail A. T., Mcphail D. R. H., Konoshima T., Kokumai M., Kozuca M., Estes J. R. and Lee K. H. (1993), Antitumour agents 138. Rotonoids and isoflavones as cytotoxic constituents from _Amorpha fruitosa_. J. Nat. Prod. **56**, 690-698.
* Li et al. (1991) Li L., Wang H. K., Fujioka T., Chang J. J., Kozuka M., Konoshima T., Estes J. R., Mcphail D. R., Mcphail A. T. and Lee K. H. (1991), Structure and stereochemistry of amorphisprionone, a novel cytotoxic spirone type rotenoid from _Amorpha fruitosa_. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1652-1653.
* Pereira et al. (1998) Pereira A. S., Pinto A. C., Cardoso J. N., Aquino Neto R., Vieira P. C., Fernandes J. B., da Silva M. F. G. F. and Andrei C. C. (1998), Analysis of rotenoids by high resolution gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J. High Resol. Chromat. **21**, 513-518.
* Terada et al. (1993) Terada H., Kokumai M., Konoshima T., Kozuka M., Haruna M., Kazuo I., Estes J. R., Li L. P., Wang H. K. and Lee K. H. (1993), Structural elucidation and chemical conversion of amorphispironone, a novel spirone from _Amorpha fruitosa_, to rotenoids. Chem. Pharm. Bull. **41**, 187-190.



