# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)97301-1.pdf

## Page 1



**LEGUIMINOSAE**

THE ISOFLAVONES OF _PTERODON PUBESCENS_**+**+

R. Braz Filho**++

Laborotorio de Produtos Naturais da Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brasil

R. M. Viegas Assumpcao

Divisao de Madeiras, Instituto de Pesquisas Tecnologicas do Estado de Sao Paulo, Brasil

_(Received 25 March 1971)_

_Pterodon pubescens_ Benth. (Leguminosae-Lotoideae) contains 3',4',6,7-tetramethylarosflavone (Ia), 2',6,7-trimethoxy-4',5'-methylenedioxyisoflavone (Ib) and 2',3',4',6,7-penta-methoxyisoflavone (Ic)._

_Pterodon pubescens_ Benth. (Leguminosae-Lotoideae) is native to the savannahs of Central and Southern Brazil. The fruits contain geranylgeraniol, all-_trans_-(--)-14,15-epoxygeranylgeraniol,3 besides two additional diterpenes4 and alkaloids.5 The wood is suitable for joists and railroad ties.6 Fractional crystallization of its benzene extract yielded a new compound, in addition to 3',4',6,7-tetramethylarosflavone (Ia), which was synthesized7 prior to its isolation from the heartwood of _Cordyla africana_,8 and 2',6,7-trimethoxy-4',5'-methylenedioxyisoflavone (Ib, milldurone), a constituent of _Cordyla africana8_ and of _Millettia dura_.9

The IR and UV spectra showed that the new compound, C20H20O7, was an isoflavone. This indication was reinforced by the NMR spectrum which contained the signal at 2:05 \(\tau\) due to the isoflavonoid 2-H, and revealed the presence of 5 methoxyls and of 4 aromatic protons. The chemical shifts of two singlets (2:35, 3:10 \(\tau\)) allocated two of these protons to the _para_-positions of ring A, while the chemical shifts and coupling constant of two doublets (3:25, 2:93 \(\tau\), \(J\) 9:1 Hz) allocated the remaining two protons to the 5',6'-positions of ring B. Hydrogenation to the isoflavanone caused the following diamagnetic shifts of the aromatic

## Page 2

proton signals: \(\Delta_{\rm 5\_H}\) 0\(\cdot\)25 ppm, \(\Delta_{\rm 8\_H}\) 0\(\cdot\)42 ppm, \(\Delta_{\rm 5\_^{\prime}\_H}\) 0\(\cdot\)11 ppm, \(\Delta_{\rm 6\_^{\prime}\_H}\) 0\(\cdot\)25 ppm. These values are comparable to reported data on other isoflavone-isoflavanone pairs,8 and corroborate the analysis leading to constitution Ic. This is isomeric with the known 2\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\),5\({}^{\prime}\),6,7-pentamethoxyisoflavone (Id).8 Indeed, the mass spectra of these compounds are very similar, both showing a strong M-31 peak which, in the case of isoflavones, is diagnostic of a methoxyl at C-2\({}^{\prime}\).

## EXPERIMENTAL

For experimental techniques see Ref. 10.

_Isolation of Ia, b and c._ The ground wood (5\(\cdot\)0 kg) was extracted with hot benzene. The benzene solution was evaporated and the residue was fractionally crystallized from EtOH, appearing in order of increasing solubility Ib (205 mg), Ia (35 mg) and Ic (30 mg).

3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\),6\({}^{\prime}\),7-_Tetramethoxyisoflavone_ (Ia) and 2\({}^{\prime}\),6,7-trimethoxy-_4\({}^{\prime}\),5\({}^{\prime}\)-methylenedioxyisoflavone_ (Ib). M.p., IR, UV, NMR and mass spectra of these compounds were identical to Ref. 8 values. Direct comparison with an authentic sample of milldurone9 confirmed the identity of Ib.

2\({}^{\prime}\),3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\),6,7-_Pentamethoxyisoflavone_ (Ic), m.p. 170-172\({}^{\circ}\) was obtained as fine colourless crystals from EtOH. (Found: C, 64\(\cdot\)3; H, 5\(\cdot\)5. C\({}_{20}\)H\({}_{20}\)O\({}_{7}\) requires: C, 64\(\cdot\)5; H, 5\(\cdot\)4\(\%\).) \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm KBr}\) (cm\({}^{-1}\)): 1626, 1600, 1500, 1260, 11

