# 10.1016@0305-1978(94)90107-4.pdf

## Page 1

Limonoids from _Toona ciliata_ and Speculations on their Chemosystematic and Ecological Significance

SUELI M. M. AGOSTINHO, M. FATIMA DAS G. F. DA SILVA, JOAO B. FERNANDES, PPAULO C. VIEIRA, AND ANTONIO L. PINHEIRO, AND EVALDO F. VIEELAS

# Abstract

Evolution of limonoids in the Meliaceae appears to be consistent with the resistance of Meliaceae against the shooter _Hypospira_. The limonoid chemistry of _Toona_, which has shown absence of attacks of _H. grandella_, is reminiscent of Melidoideae. An investigation of _T. ciliata_, has led to the identification of two novel meiacin butenolides, 21-hydroxycedrelonelide and 23-hydroxycedrelonelide, two known limonoids, cedrelone and 23-hydroxytoonacillide, and sitosterol, _a_-amyrin and b-amyrin acylated with fatty acids. Three known coumarins, siderin, scopoletin and isofrazidin were also isolated. All structures were established from spectral data. Some \({}^{9}\)C NMR signals for cedrelone are reassigned.

## Introduction

Efforts to establish large-scale homogeneous plantations of native Meliaceae have almost invariably failed due to larval attacks by the shoot borer _Hypospira_ (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae). The host range of this oligophagous pantropical genus is limited principally to the Switenioideae. Of this sub-family, important species of the genera _Khaya_ and _Entandrophragma_ in Africa, _Swietenia_ and _Cedrela_ in Latin America and _Toona_ in Asia and Australia are attacked. However, _Toona ciliata_ introduced to Brazil shows excellent growth and an absence of attacks by _H. grandella_, in contrast to the native _Cedrela odorata_. The latter has been grafted to stems of _T. ciliata_ and the resistance has been translocated from the _Toona_ stock to the _Cedrela_ graft (Grijipma, 1970).

To determine the phytochemical basis of this resistance we have now undertaken a further investigation of the stem of the exotic _T. ciliata_.

## Materials and Methods

_General_ NMR spectra were run at 25degC using a 5 mm 1H or 3degC probe with observation frequencies of 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, containing TMS as internal standard, 1H-3degC COSY long-range correlation: 3_C_H = 7 Hz. MS: 70 eV, direct probe insert and elevated temperature.

_Isolation of constituents. T. ciliata_ was collected in Viçosa, MG, Brazil, and a voucher is deposited in the Herbarium of Departamento de Engenharia Flowstal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, MG. The stems (840 g, 15-year old tree and stems worked with a diameter of 3 cm) were dried, powdered and extracted with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH. The hexane extract (32.0 g) was chromatographed on silica gel sitting with hexane, then hexane containing increasing amounts of CH2Cl2 and finally with eClOac yielding in order 4 (400 mg), 23-hydroxytoonacillide (40 mg), a mixture of sitosterol, _a_-amyrin and b-amyrin acylated with fatty acids, and a mixture of 2 (5 mg) and 3 (27 mg). The last compound was then purified by TLC (MeOH-Isopropanol-

## Page 2

hexane, 4:10:30). The triterpenes and sitosterol, obtained by hydrolysis, were acylated with acetic anhydride in pyridine prior to analysis by low resolution GC-MS.

Similar treatment of the MeOH extract (40 g) yielded (in order) siderin (280 mg), scopoletin (20 mg) and isofrazidin (15 mg).

_Photo-oxidation of 4._ A solution containing 20 mg of 4 and rose bengal (5 mg) in dioxane was irradiated with visible light for 30 min. The solvent was then eliminated giving a mixture of 2 and 3. The mixture was separated by preparative TLC (MeOH-isopropanol-hexane, 4:10:30).

_Sitosterol._ _a_-arrhythm, b-amyrrin, _23-hydroxytonoanaclis, siderin, scopoletin, isofrazidin. All were identified by comparison with published data (HalsaII and Troke, 1975; Kraus and Grimminger, 1980).

_Cedrelone_ (4). Amorphous solid. 1H NMR (200 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 10C NMR (50.32 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2.

_21-hydroxycedreloneide_ (2). Amorphous solid, [a]0, 0,0 (it was recorded with a very small amount of 2 and appear to be uncorrected). IR _v_max cm-1 (KBf): 3419, 1746, 1679; 1H NMR (200 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 10C NMR (50.32 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2. MS _m/z_ (tel. int.): 409 (M-CO2H+)+ (10), 281 (50), 207 (100), 55 (80).

_23-hydroxycedreloneide_ (3). Amorphous solid, [a]0-5.8'(CHCl3, c 0.3). IR _v_max cm-1 (KBr): 3315, 1758, 1681; 1H NMR (200 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR (50.32 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2. MS _m/z_ (tel. int.): 259 (associated with retro-Diels-Alder cleavage of ring B, followed by loss of three hydrogens from C-11, C-12 and C-30)+ (10), 207 (10), 129 (100), 55 (50).

## Results and Discussion

_Evolution of limonoids in the Cedreloideae_

Chemically, the family Meliaceae is distinguished by the frequent occurrence of extremely characteristic limonoids which are easily connected by mechanistically justifiable biogenic reasoning from a common precursor (Scheme 1). This precursor, 1, suffers oxidative opening of rings B/D to give 1.1 and 1.1.1, or of rings A/B/D to 1.2, or of rings A/B to 1.2 and 1.2.1, or of ring C to 1.3.

Genera of Swietenioideae contain meliacins formed along only one biosynthetic route (1, 11, 11.1, 11,2, Scheme 1). In contrast, genera of Meliodeae, the other major

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} H & 2 & 3* & 4 & 5 & 6 \\
1 & 6.91 \(d\) & 6.80 \(d\) & 6.88 \(d\) \\  & (9.9) & (9.9) & (9.9) \\
2 & 6.14 \(d\) & 5.89 \(d\) & 6.08 \(d\) \\  & (9.9) & (9.9) & (9.9) \\
9 & & & 2.66 \(m\) \\
11/168 & & & 1.72–1.97 \(m\) \\
12x & & & 2.06 _br dd_ \\  & & & (12) \\
128 & & & 1.66 _br dd_ \\  & & & (12) \\
15 & 3.63 \(s\) & 3.65 \(s\) & 3.77 \(s\) \\
16a & & & 2.27 _dd_ \\  & & & (14, 6.5) \\
17 & & & 2.76 _dd_ \\  & & & (14, 6.5) \\
18 & 0.87 \(s\) & 0.71/0.661 \(s\) & 0.73 \(s\) \\
19 & 1.25 \(s\) & 1.16 \(s\) & 1.27 \(s\) \\
21 & 5.84 _br s_ & 7.12 _br s_ & 5.93 \(m\) \\
22 & 5.90 _br s_ & 6.95 _br s_ & 6.16 _br s_ & 6.02 \(m\) & 6.95 \(m\) \\
23 & & 6.09 _br s_ & 7.34 _br s_ & 6.14 \(m\) \\
28 & 1.58 \(s\) & 1.46 \(s\) & 1.55 \(s\) \\
29 & 1.50 \(s\) & 1.37 \(s\) & 1.47 \(s\) \\
30 & 1.12 \(s\) & 0.98 \(s\) & 1.10 \(s\) \\ OH & 6.42 \(s\) & 6.60 \(s\) & 6.46 \(s\) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: 1H NMR CHEMICAL SHEITS FOR 2–4 AND SELECTED PROTONS IN 5 AND 6

## Page 3

subfamily of the Meliaceae which possess resistance for _Hypsipyla_, contains meliacins formed along several biosynthesis routes (1, 1,1, 1.2, 1.2.1, 1.3, Scheme 1) (Silva _et al._, 1984; Silva and Gottlieb, 1987).

The situation regarding the Cedreloideae, represented by _Cedrela_ and _Toona_, is more complex. Pennington and Styles, in their more recent monograph, include Harms' Cedreloideae into the Swietenioideae and particularly the Cedreleae (Harms, 1940; Pennington and Styles, 1975). The known limonoids (1, 1, Scheme 1) from _Cedrela_ are typical of the Swietenioideae subfamily (Silva _et al._, 1984). On the other hand, the limonoid chemistry of _Toona_ (1, 1.2, Scheme 1) is reminiscent of Melioideae, since the known compounds comprise intact ring-D and ring-A/ring-B dilatones, a feature typical of _Trichilia_ limonoids (1, 1.2.1, Scheme 1) (Silva _et al._, 1984; Silva and Gottlieb, 1987). Thus, the affiliation of _Toona_ to the Swietenioideae is rather problematic.

The difference in meliacin composition in Pennington's tribe Cedreleae appears to be consistent with the resistance of exotic _Toona_ to native _H. grandella_. The elucidation of the toxicant(s) present in _Toona_ could clarify the basis for resistance.

#### Isolation of compounds

The hexane extract from the stem of _T. ciliata_, afforded two new meliacin buttonelides **2** and **3**, besides two known limonoids cedrelone (**4**) and 23-hydroxytoonacilide, and a mixture of sitosterol, a-amyrin and b-amyrin acylated with fatty acids. The known compounds were characterized by comparison with published spectral data (Halsall and Troke, 1975; Kraus and Grimminger, 1980).

Compound **2** exhibited similar spectral data to cedrelone (**4**). The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1), instead of signals for a furan unit, showed two broad singlets

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} C & **2** & **3** & **4** & **5** & **6** \\
1 & 152.0 & 152.2 & 152.3 \\
2 & 127.5 & 126.5 & 127.2 \\
3 & 204.0 & 203.3 & 203.6 \\
4 & 48.6 & 47.9 & 48.5 \\
5 & 134.2 & 132.9 & 133.8 \\
6 & 141.1 & 141.0 & 141.1 \\
7 & 197.5

## Page 4

(d 5.90 and 5.84) suggesting a \(\gamma\)-hydroxybutyrolactone. This was corroborated by the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 2) which showed signals for a hemiacetal carbon (d 98.2 C-21) and an \(\alpha\),b-unsaturated-\(\gamma\)-lactone (d 151.9, C-20; 119.8, C-22 and 168-2, C-23). These signals indicate the presence of a 21-hydroxy-20(22)-ene-21,23-\(\gamma\)-lactone by comparison with the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{3}\)C NMR data published for isominocinoid (d) and nimocinoid (d) (Siddiqui _et al._, 1986). Moreover, the chemical shifts of the ring A-D carbons were comparable with those reported for cedrelone (Halsall and Troke, 1975) (Table 2). The new natural product is therefore 21-hydroxycedreloneide (2).



## Page 5

The \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{3}\)C COSY and DEPT experiments on cedrelone, permitted minor corrections to previous \({}^{3}\)C NMR assignments (Halsall and Troke, 1975) (Tables 1-3). Table 2 shows that the signals for C-9, 11, 12, 17, 21, 23 and 28 were reassigned.

The methanol extract from the stem of _7. ciliata_ gave three coumarins which were identified by comparison with published data as scopoletin (Wagner and Bladt, 1975), siderin (Nagasampagi _et al._, 1975) and isofraxidin (Borris _et al._, 1980). This appears to be the first record of isofraxidin from Meliaceae or from the allied families of the order Rutales (Rutaceae, Simaroubaceae, Creoraceae and Burseraceae).

As a result of this study _T. ciliata_ has been shown to have a chemical profile that is closely comparable to that of _Trichilia_ (Silva _et al._, 1984; Silva and Gottlieb, 1987). The occurrence of the meliacin butenolides is a feature of both _Toona_ (Kraus and Grimminger, 1980) and _Trichilia_ (Arenas and Hahn, 1990; Cortez _et al._, 1992). Thus, the

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} H & C \\
1 & 3 (203.6); 5 (133.8); 10 (40.2) \\
2 & 10 (40.2) \\
15 & 17 (41.7) \\
18 & 14 (69.8); 17 (41.7)

## Page 6

chemical evidence at hand does not seem to favour the affiliation of _Toona_ to the Swietenioideae.

The resistance of exotic _T. ciliata_ and _Trichilia_ species to native _Hypsipyla_ may well be owing to the presence of the A,B-seco limonoids (1.2, 1.2.1). The B-seco limonoids,toonacilin and its 6-acetoxy derivative and their oxidized furan derivatives, isolated from _T. ciliata_, have shown activity as feeding repellents against the Mexican bean beetle _Epilachna varivestis_ (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) (Champagne _et al._, 1992). However, it is premature to draw any conclusions about the role of limonoids in a possible coevolutionary relationship between Meliaceae and _Hypsipyla_, until isolated limonoids can be evaluated in direct bioassays with this insect.

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Technologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP).

## References

* [Arenas and Hahn1990] Arenas, C. and Hahn, L. R. (1990) Limonoids from _Trichilia havanensis. Phytochemistry_**29**, 2953-2956.
* [Bornis _et al._1980] Bornis, R. P., Cordell, G. A. and Farnsworth, N. R. (1980) Isofrakidin, a cytotoxic coumarin from _Micrandra elasto_ (Euphorbiaceae). _J. Nat. Prod._, **43**, 641-643.
* [Champagne _et al._1992] Champagne, D. E., Koul, O., Isman, M. B., Scudder, G. G. E. and Towers, G. H. N. (1992) Biological activity of limonoids from the Rutales. Phytochemistry_**31**, 377-394.
* [Cortez _et al._1992] Cortez, D. A. G., Vieira, P. C., Fernandes, J. B., Silva, M. F. das G. da and Ferreira, A. G. (1992) Limonoids from _Trichilia hirta. Phytochemistry_**31**, 625-628.
* [Grijlpma1970] Grijlpma, P. (1970) Immunity of _Toona ciliata_ M. Roem. var _australis_ (F. v. M.) C.DC and _Khaya ivorensis_ A. Chev. to attacks of _Hypsipyla grandella Zeller. Turinlaba_, **20**, 85-93.
* [Halsall and Troke1975] Halsall, T. G. and Troke, J. A. (1975) The structures of three new meliacins isolated from _Khaya antiotheca_ heartwood. _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin I_, 1758-1764.
* [Harms 1940] Harms, H. (1940) Angiospermae: Reihe Gernaniales. In _Die naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien_ (Engler, A. and Prantt, K., eds), 2nd edn; Band 19a, 1-172.
* [Kraus and Grimminger1980] Kraus, W. and Grimminger, W. (1980) 23-(\(P_{S}\))-Hydroxytoonacilid und 21-(\(P_{S}\))-hydroxytoonacilid, zwei neue B-seco tetranor-triterpenolde mit insketenfrasshemmender Wirkung aus _Toona ciliata_ M.J. Roem. Var. _australis_ (Meliaceae). _Nouveau J. Chimie_, **4**, 651-655.
* [Nagasampagi _et al._1975] Nagasampagi, B. A., Sriraman, M. C., Yankov, L. and Dev, S. (1975) Siderin from _Cedrela toona_. _Photochemistry_**14**, 1673.
* [Pennington and Styles1975] Pennington, T. D. and Styles, B. T. (1975) A generic monograph of the Meliaceae. _Blumea_, **22**, 419-540.
* [Powell1966] Powell, J. W. (1966) Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy: A correlation of the spectra of some Meliacins and their derivatives. _J. Chem. Soc. (C)_, 1794-1798.
* [Siddiqui _et al._1986] Siddiqui, S., Faizi, S., Mahmood, T. and Siddiqui, B. S. (1986) Two new insect growth regulator meliacins from _Azadirachta indica_ A. Juss (Meliaceae). _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin I_, 1021-1025.
* [Silva _et al._1987] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da and Gottlieb, O. R. (1987) Evolution of quassinoids and limonoids in the Rutales. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**15**, 85-103.
* [Silva _et al._1984] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Gottlieb, O. R. and Dreyer, D. L. (1984) Evolution of limonoids in the Meliaceae. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**12**, 299-310.
* [Wagner and Bladt1975] Wagner, H. and Bladt, S. (1975) Cumarine aus sudafrikanischen Pelargoniurn-artn. Phytochemistry_, **14**, 2061-2064.



