# 10.1590@S0102-695X2009000100002.pdf

## Page 1

Screening of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme inhibitors

Ana C. Leite,1 Alessandra R. P. Ambrozin,1 Marcelo S. Castilho,2 Paulo C. Vieira,1 Joao B. Fernandes,*1 Glaucius Oliva,2 Maria Fatima das G. F. da Silva,1 Otavio H. Thiemann,2 M. Ines S. Lima,3 Jose R. Pirani4

# Abstract

The inhibitory activity of crude extracts of Meliaceae and Rutaceae plants on glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) enzyme from _Trypanosoma cruzi_ was evaluated at 100 mg/mL. Forty-six extracts were tested and fifteen of them showed significant inhibitory activity (IA % >= 50). The majority of the assayed extracts of Meliaceae plants (_Cedrela fissilis, Cipadessa fruticosa_ and _Trichilin ramalho_) showed high activity to inhibit the enzymatic activity. The fractionation of the hexane extract from branches of C. _fruticosa_ led to the isolation of three flavonoids: flavone, 7-methoxyflavone and 3',4',5',5',7-pentametheoxyflavone. The two last compounds showed high ability to inhibit the gGAPDH activity. Therefore, the assayed Meliaceae species could be considered as a promising source of lead compounds against Chagas' disease.

## INTRODUCTION

Chagas' disease, caused by the protozoan _Trypanosoma cruzi_, affects some 16-18 million people, mostly from South and Central America, where 25 % of the total population are at risk of contamination (WHO, 2007). Control of the insect vector (_Triatoma infestans_) in endemic areas has led to the virtual elimination of transmission by insect bites, and as consequence, blood transfusion and congenital transmission are the major causes for the spread of the disease (Dias, 1993). Its treatment is still a challenge, since the only drug commercially available (benzmidazole) has strong side effects (De Castro, 1993).

The bloodstream form of parasites of the family Trypanosomatidae possesses a microbody-like

## Page 2

organelle, where glycolysis takes place, the glycosome (Opperdoes & Borst, 1977). The bloodstream form of the parasite _T. cruzi_ has no functional tricarboxylic acid cycle, and it is highly dependent on glycolysis for ATP production. This great dependence on glycolysis as a source of energy makes the glycolytic enzymes attractive targets for trypanocidal drug design (Souza et al., 1998). Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) is a glycolytic enzyme which catalyzes the oxidative phosphorylation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BGP). The three dimensional structure of _T. cruzi_ gGAPDH previously determined shows differences, when compared to the homologous human enzyme that could be exploited for selective inhibition (Souza et al., 1998).

The need for the development of more efficient drugs against Chagas' disease has stimulated us to initiate a project aiming at the discovery of lead compounds from several plants of Rutales order. In this way, we have proposed the utilization of the glycolytic enzyme gGAPDH as a target for the search of new natural trypanocides (Tomazela et al., 2000; Vieira et al., 2001; Pavao et al., 2002; Moraes et al., 2003). In this paper, we report the gGAPDH inhibition activity of 46 crude extracts of Meliaceae and Rutaceae plants, along with three flavones isolated from an active fraction.

## MATERIAL AND METHODS

### Plant material

The fruits, branches, stems, roots, and leaves of _Cedrela fissillis_ Vell. were collected in 01/06/01 in Sao Carlos (Sao Paulo, Brazil) and identified by Dr. Maria Ines Salgueiro Lima from the Department of Botany, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, where a voucher specimen (6701) was deposited. The fruits, branches and leaves of _Cipadessa fruiticosa_ BI. were collected in 01/20/01 in Vicosa (Minas Gerais, Brazil) and identified by Dr. Jose R. Pirani from the Department of Botany, Universidade de Sao Paulo and deposited at the herbarium from this department with a voucher number 110.664. The branches of _Almeidea coerulea_ A. St.-Hil., _Conchocarpus heterophyllus_ (A. St.-Hil.) Kallunki & Pirani, _Galipea carinata_ Pirani (sp. nov.) and _Trichilia ramalhoi_ Rizzini were collected in Southeastern Brazil, and identified by Dr. Jose R. Pirani from the Department of Botany, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil. The specimens were deposited at the Herbarium of that Department. The voucher numbers and the dates of collection were described in Ambrozin et al. (2004).

### Preparation of crude extracts

The powdered air-dried plant material (branches, fruits, leaves, roots, and/or stems) was extracted by maceration three times with hexane, at room temperature for 72 h. This process was repeated with dichloromethane and methanol for _C. fissillis_ and _C. fruiticosa_, and only with methanol for the other species. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure by rotary evaporation and the extracts obtained were assayed on _T. cruzi_ gGAPDH enzyme.

### Isolation of compounds

The hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (12.2 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel using a hexane-dichloromethane-ethyl acetate-methanol gradient. The ethyl acetate fraction (6.8 g) was chromatographed on silica gel, eluting with a hexane-dichloromethane-acetone gradient to give 9 fractions. Fraction 3 was fractionated as above, using hexane-dichloromethane-acetone (6:3:1), affording 9 fractions. Fraction 5 was three times chromatographed through column chromatography on silica gel, eluting with hexane-dichloromethane-methanol (7:2.5:0.5) to afford compounds **1** (16.7 mg) and **2** (8.2 mg). Fraction 6 was twice submitted to column chromatography with hexane-dichloromethane-methanol (6:3:1) giving compound **3** (30.6 mg). Compounds **1-3** were characterized by comparison of 13C NMR data with the literature (Kingsburry & Looker, 1975; Passador et al., 1997) and submitted to the enzymatic assay.

### Preparation and purification of recombinant _T. cruzi_ gGAPDH

TcGAPDH was overexpressed and purified as reported by Souza et al. (1998). It is maintained in the Crystallography Laboratory of the Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil.

_T. cruzi_ gGAPDH inhibitory activity

gGAPDH activity was determined according to a previously reported procedure (Barbosa & Nakano, 1987; Vieira et al., 2001). Reduced NADH was spectrophotometrically measured at 340 nm during 30 s. The reaction medium contains 50 mmol L-1 Tris-HCl pH 8.6 buffer, 1 mmol L-1 EDTA, 1 mmol L-1 \(\beta\)-mercaptoethanolanol, 30 mmol L-1 Na2HAsO4, 2.5 mmol L-1 NAD-, 0.3 mmol L-1 glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and 0.15 mg protein, in a total volume of 500 mL. The reaction was initiated by the addition of substrate. The extracts were tested at a final concentration of 100 mg/mL.

## RESULTS

In this work, we evaluated the inhibitory activity of 46 extracts of Meliaceae and Rutaceae plants on _T. cruzi_ gGAPDH enzyme (Table 1). Fifteen of them showed high ability in inhibit the enzyme (IA % >= 50) at 100 mg/mL.



## Page 3

The hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (CFGH) and the methanol extracts from Meliaceae plants were the most active ones, whereas the extracts from Rutaceae did not present significant results.

The investigation of the ethyl acetate fraction (inhibitory activity = 81.9 % at 100 mg/mL) from the hexane extract from branches of _C. fruticosa_ (CFGH) led to the isolation of three flavonoids: flavone (**1**), 7-methoxyflavone (**2**) and 3',4',5',5',7-pentamethoxyflavone (**3**). The flavones **1** and **2** were assayed (Table 2) and the results showed that only **2** presented high inhibitory activity against gGAPDH enzyme.

## Discussion

The results indicated that, among the assayed species, _C. fissilis_, _C. fruticosa_ and _Trichilia ramalhoi_ are promising sources of lead compounds for the rational design of new trypanocidal drugs. The inhibitory activity of the flavones **1** and **2** against gGAPDH has been reported for the first time. Recently, Ambrozin et al. (2004) published their activity against trypanostigote forms of _T. cruzi_ and Tadesmir et al. (2006) described the trypanocidal activity of some flavones. A previous study showed that compound **3** completely inhibited the gGAPDH activity at 268.8 mmol/L (Tomazela et al., 2000). Thus, the activity of the studied extract (CFGH) (Table 1) is probably related to the presence of the active flavones **2** and **3**. However, their enzymatic activity were considered weak, particularly in comparison with chalepin, a coumarin isolated from _Pilocarpus spicatus_ (Rutaceae), which reduced the gGAPDH activity by 75 % at 93 mmol/L (IC50 = 64 mmol/L) (Vieira et al., 2001; Pavao et al., 2002; Menezes et al., 2003; Moraes et al., 2003; Leittao et al., 2004).

Similar studies involving the enzyme gGAPDH have been reported by our group. Vieira et al. (2001) showed the enzymatic activity of several plants of Rutaceae and Meliaceae families and thirteen coumarins isolated from different species, which are considered as one of the most promising class of substances with gGAPDH inhibitory activity. Moreover, the gGAPDH activity of several flavonoids isolated from Meliaceae, Rutaceae and Leguminosae plants, including pyrano chalcones, flavones, flavanones, flavonoids and isoflavones, have also been reported (Tomazela et al., 2000; Moraes et al., 2003). Recently, Januario et al. (2005) described the activity of 7-hydroxy-4',6-dimethoxyisoflavone on gGAPDH. All these data support the hypothesis that highly oxygenated flavones possess the structural requirements to inhibit gGAPDH.

The family Meliaceae is characterized by the frequent occurrence of limonoids (da Silva et al., 1984). This class of compounds has been attracted considerable interest because of their biological properties and diversity of structures (Champagne et al., 1992).

Previous studies of _C. fissilis_ showed the isolation of limonoids and triterpenes (Taylor, 1984; Zelnik, 1966, 1970; Leite et al., 2005a; Ambrozin et al., 2006) and _C. fruticosa_ has been reported to contain _ent_-clerodanes and labdanes diterpenoids (Rojatkar and Nagasampagi, 1994; Rojatkar et al., 1994), limonoids, steroids, sesquiterpenoids, henicosene derivatives and one coumarin (Luo et al., 2000, 2001; Leite et al., 2005a,b). There are no phytochemical studies about _T. ramalhoi_, but several compounds have been isolated from the _Trichilia_ genus, such as, limonoids (Cortez et al., 1992; Garcez et al., 1997; Garcez, et al., 2000; Cortez et al., 2000), lignin glycosides (Cortez et al., 1998), o-phenyl alkanoic and alkenoic acids (Pupo et al., 1996), terpenoids, steroids (Pupo et al., 2002; Pupo et al., 1996) and g-lactones (Pupo et al., 1998). Phytochemical studies with other active extracts from these plants are in progress and shall reveal molecules that can be used as potential lead compounds in the search for potent and selective _T. cruzi_ gGAPDH inhibitors.

In conclusion, most of the active extracts belong to the family Meliaceae. New investigations with these extracts are undertaken in order to find inhibitors that could act as potential lead molecules on the described assay. Moreover, the isolated flavonoids bring about the enzymatic inhibition, showing that these compounds are potential lead molecules for the development of new drugs against Chagas' disease.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support.

Figure 1: Compounds isolated from _Cipadessa_



## Page 4



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c} \hline Family/species & Plant part & Extraction solvent & Crude extract & IA \% \\ \hline MELIACEAE & & & \\ _Cedrela fissills_ & fruits & hexane & CFRH & 50.8 \\  & & dichloromethane & CFRD & 70.7 \\  & & methanol & CFRM & 94.0 \\  & branches & hexane & CGH & 32.4 \\  & & dichloromethane & CGD & 85.4 \\  & & methanol & CGM & 93.2 \\  & stems & hexane & CCH & 25.4 \\  & & dichloromethane & CCD & 9.8 \\  & & methanol & CCM & 94.2 \\  & roots & hexane & CRH & 3.1 \\  & & dichloromethane & CRD & 5.0 \\  & & methanol & CRM & 94.4 \\  & leaves & hexane & CFH & 36.2 \\  & & dichloromethane & CFD & 65.5 \\  & & methanol & CFM & 91.6 \\  & fruits & hexane & CFFRH & 12.2 \\  & & dichloromethane & CFFRD & 9.6 \\  & & methanol & CFFRM & 84.8 \\  & branches & hexane & CFGH & 98.3 \\  & & dichloromethane & CFGD & 11.7 \\  & & methanol & CFGM & 90.2 \\  & leaves & hexane & CFFH & 0 \\  & & dichloromethane & CFFD & 0 \\  & & methanol & CFFM & 66.7 \\  & branches & hexane & TRGH & 9.7 \\  & & methanol & TRGM & 95.3 \\  & & hexane & TRFH & 73.5 \\  & & methanol & TRFM & 92.4 \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\  & & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: gGAPDH inhibitory activity of Meliaceae and Rutaceae extracts at 100 μg/mL.



## Page 5



## References

* Ambrozin et al. (2004) Ambrozin ARP, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, de Albuquerque S 2004. Trypanocidal activity of Meliaceae and Rutaceae plant extracts. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 99_: 1-5.
* Ambrozin et al. (2006) Ambrozin ARP, Leite AC, Bueno FC, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, Bueno OC, da Silva MFGF, Pagnocca FC, Hebling MJA, Bacci Jr M 2006. Limonoids from andiroba oil and Cedrela fistills and their insecticidal activity. _J Braz Chem Soc 17_: 542-547.
* Barbosa and Nakano (1987) Barbosa VM, Nakano M 1987. Muscle d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase from._Anas_ sp. 1. Purification and properties. _Comp Biochem Physiol 88B_: 563-568
* Champagne et al. (1992) Champagne DE, Koul O, Isman MB, Scudder GGE, Towers GHN 1992. Biological activity of limonoids from the Rutales. _Phytochemistry_ 31: 377-394.
* Cortez et al. (1992) Cortez DAG, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, Ferreira AG 1992. Limonoids from _Thichilia hitra_. _Phytochemistry 31_: 625-628.
* Cortez et al. (1998) Cortez DAG, Fernandes JB, Cass QB, Vieira PC, da Silva MFGF, Ferreira A.G, Pirani JR 1998. Lignan glycosides from _Trichilia estupilata_. _Nat Prod Lett 11_: 255-262.
* Cortez et al. (2000) Cortez DAG, Fernandes JB, Vieira PC, da Silva MFGF, Ferreira AG 2000. A limonoid from _Thichilia estipulata_. _Phytochemistry 55_: 711-713.
* da Silva MFGF et al. (1984) da Silva MFGF, Gottlieb OR, Dreyer DL 1984. Evolution of limonoids in the Meliaceae. _Biochem Syst Ecol 12_: 299-310.
* de Castro (1993) de Castro SL 1993. The challenge of Chagas' disease chemotherapy: an update of drugs assayed against _T Trypanosoma cruzi_. _Acta Trop 53_: 83-98.
* Dias (1993) Dias JCP 1993. Transfusional Chagas' disease in Brazil. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 88(Suppl.)_: 63-64.
* Garcez et al. (1997) Garcez FR, Garcez WS, Tsutsumi MT, Roque NF 1997. Limonoids from _Trichilia elegans_ ssp. _elegans_. _Phytochemistry 45_: 141-148.
* Garcez et al. (2000) Garcez FR, Garcez WS, Roque NF, Castellano EE, Zukerman-Schepector J 2000. \(\gamma\)P-Oxygenated limonoids from _Trichilia elegans_ ssp. _elegans_. _Phytochemistry 55_: 733-740.
* Januario et al. (2005) Januario AH, Lourenco MV, Domezio, LA, Pietro, RCLR, Castilho MS, Tomazela DM, da Silva MFGF, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, Franca, FC 2005. Isolation and structure determination of bioactive isoflavones from callus culture of _Dipterx odorata_. _Chem Pharm Bull 53_: 740-742.
* Kingsbury and Looker (1975) Kingsbury CA, Looker JH 1975. Carbon-13 spectra of methoxyflavones. _J Org Chem 40_: 1120-1124.
* Leitao et al. (2004) Leitao A, Andricopulo AD, Oliva G, Pupo MT, de Marchi AA, Vieira PC, da Silva MFGF, Ferreira VF, de Souza MCBV, Sa MM, Moraes VRS, Montanari CA 2004. Structure-activity relationships of novel inhibitors of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. _Bioorg Med Chem Lett 14_: 2199-2204.
* Leite et al. (2005a) Leite AC, Bueno FC, Oliveira GG, Fernandes JB, Vieira PC, da Silva MFGF, Bueno OC, Pagnocca FC, Hebling MJA, Bacci Jr M 2005a. Limonoids from _Cipadessa fruitcosa_ and _Cedrela fissilis_ and their insecticidal activity. _J Braz Chem Soc 16_(6B): 1391-1395.
* Leite et al. (2005b) Leite AC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, Vieira PC 2005b. Limonoids from _Cipadessa fruitcosa_. _Z Nanforsch B 60_: 351-355.
* Luo et al. (2000) Luo X, Wu S, Ma Y, Wu D 2000. Components of _Cipadessa baccifera_. _Phytochemistry 55_: 867-872.
* Luo et al. (2001) Luo X, Wu S, Ma Y, Wu D 2001. Studies on chemical constituents of _Cipadessa baccifera_. _Zhongcaoyao_ 32_: 778-780.
* Menezes et al. (2003) Menezes IRA, Lopes JCD, Montanari CA, Oliva G, Pavao F, Castilho MS, Vieira PC, Pupo MT 2003. 3D QSAR studies on binding affinities of coumarin natural products for glycosomal GAPDH of _Trypanosoma cruzi_. _J Comput Aid Mol Dis 17_: 277-290.
* Moraes et al. (2003) Moraes VR, Tomazela DM, Ferracia RJ, Garcia CF, Sannomiya M, Soriano MPC, da Silva MFGF, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, Rodrigues Filho E, Magalhaes EG, Magalhaes AF, Pimenta EF, de Souza HF, Oliva G 2003. Enzymatic inhibition studies of selected flavonoids and chemosystematic significance of polymethoxylated flavonoids and quinoline alkaloids in _Neoarputia_ (Rutaceae). _J Braz Chem Soc 14_: 380-387.
* Opperdoes and Borst (1977) Opperdoes FR, Borst P 1977. Localization of nine glycolytic enzymes in a microbody-like organelle in _Trypanosoma brucei_: the glycosome. _FEBS Lett 80_: 360-364.
* Pavao et al. (2002) Pavao F, Castilho MS, Pupo MT, Dias RLA, Correa AG, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, Mafezoli J, Vieira PC, Oliva G 2002. Structure of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ glycosomal glyceroldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase complexed with chalepin, a natural product inhibitor, at 1.95 A resolution. _FEBS Lett 520_: 13-17.
* Passador et al. (1997) Passador EAP, da Silva MFGF, Rodrigues Filho E, Fernandes JB, Vieira PC, Pirani JR 1997. A pyrane chalcone and a flavanone from _Neoarputia magnifica_. _Phytochemistry 45_: 1533-1537.
* Pupo et al. (1996) Pupo MT, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF 1996. A cycloartane triterpenoid and o-phenyl alkanoic and alkenoic acids from _Trichilia claussenii_. _Phytochemistry 42_: 795-798
* Pupo et al. (1998) Pupo MT, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF 1998. \(\gamma\)-Lactones from _Trichilia claussenii_. _Phytochemistry 48_: 307-310.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Compound & Concentration (\(\mu\)mol/L) & \% IA \\
**1** & 450 & 9.7 \\
**2** & 397 & 78.3 \\
**3*** & 268 & 100.0 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: gGAPDH inhibitory activity of flavone **(1)**, 7-methoxyflavone **(2)** and 3’,4’,5’,5,7-pentamethoxyflavone **(3)**.



## Page 6

Pupo MT, Adomo MAT, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, Pirani JR 2002. Terpenoids and steroids from _Trichilia_ species. _J Braz Chem Soc 13_: 382-388.
* [Rojatkar et al.1994] Rojatkar SR, Chiplunkar YG, Nagasampagi BA 1994. A diterpene from _Cipadesa fuitucosa_ and _Grangea madexagana_. _Phyrochemistry 37_: 1213-1214.
* [Rojatkar et al.1994] Rojatkar SR, Nagasampagi BA 1994. Diterpenes from _Cipadesa fruitucosa_. _Phyrochemistry 37_: 505-507.
* [Souza et al.1998] Souza DHF, Garratt RC, Araujo APU, Guimaraes BG, Jesus WDP, Michels PAM, Hannaert V, Oliva G 1998. _Trypanosoma cruzi_ glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase: structure, catalytic mechanism and targeted inhibitor design. _FEBS Lett 424_: 131-135.
* [Tasdemir et al.2006] Tasdemir D, Kaiser M, Brun R, Yardley V, Schmidt TJ, Tosun F, Ruedi P 2006. Antitrypanosomal and antileishmanial activities of flavonoids and their analogues: in vitro, in vivo, structure-activity relationship, and quantitative structure-activity relationship studies. _Antimicrob Agents Chemother 50_: 1352-1364.
* [Taylor1984] Taylor DAH 1984. The chemistry of the limonoids from Meliaarea. _Fort Chem Org Naturas 45_: 1-102.
* [Tomazela et al.2000] Tomazela DM, Pupo MT, Passador EAP, da Silva MFGF, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB, Rodrigues Filho E, Oliva G, Pirani JR 2000. _Phyrochemistry 55_: 643-651.
* [Vieira et al.2001] Vieira PC, Mafezoli J, Pupo MT, Fernandes JB, da Silva MFGF, de Albuquerque S, Oliva G, Pavao F 2001. Strategies for the isolation and identification of trypanocidal compounds from the Rutales. _Pure Appl Chem 73_: 617-622.
* [WHO2007] WHO 2007. World Health Organization. [http://www.who.int](http://www.who.int), accessed on July 2007.
* [Zelnik1966] Zelnik R 1966. Le Fissinolide. _Tetrahedron Lett 52_: 6441-6444.
* [Zelnik1970] Zelnik R 1970. Tetranortripterpenoids from _Cedrela fissilis_. _Phyrochemistry 10_: 1955-1956.



