# 10.1016@S0031-9422(97)00167-2.pdf

## Page 1



# ANDROSTANE AND PREGNANE 2\(b\),19-HEMIKETAL STEROIDS FROM _Trichilia Claussenii_

Monica T. Pupo, Paulo C. Vieira, Joao B. Fernandes, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Via Washington Luis Km 235, C.P. 676, CEP 13565-905, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

The methanol extract of stems of _Trichilia claussenii_ yielded three new steroids: 2a,3a-dihydroxy-androstan-16-one 2\(b\),19-hemiketal, 2a,3b-dihydroxypregnantan-16-one 2\(b\),19-hemiketal, 2\(b\),3b-dihydroxypregnantan-16-one. Two known steroids 2\(b\),3\(b\),4_b_-trihydroxypregnantan-16-one, 2a,3a,4b-trihydroxypregnantan-16-one and a mixture of sitosterol and stigmasterol _b_-_O-D-glucopyranoside were also isolated. The structures of the isolated compounds were determined on the basis of spectroscopic analysis. \(\copyright\) Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

## INTRODUCTION

The Meliaceae is known to be a rich source of limonoids, which possess interesting biological activities against insects such as antifeeding, deterrent and inhibitors of ecdyasis [1]. As part of our interest in the chemistry of the family Meliaceae, we have recently reported the isolation of cycloartane triterpenoids, carcyophyllene epoxide and a mixture of _o_-phenyl alkanoic and alkenoic acids from the leaves of _Trichilia claussenii_ DC. collected in Brazil [2]. In continuation of the study of this species, we have investigated the stems extracts of _T. claussenii_. We have not found limonoids in this plant, but here we report the isolation and identification of steroids from stems of _T. claussenii_.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The methanol extract of the stems of _Trichilia claussenii_ was submitted to solvent partition followed by several column chromatographies. This procedure led to the isolation of a series of steroids which were identified as following.

The DCIMS of **1** showed the [M + H] peak _m/z_ 321 and the 13C NMR spectrum showed 19 carbon signals. The multiplicities of the carbons determined by DEPT 135 led to the attribution of: 4 C, 5 CH, 9 CH2 and 1 CH3, allowing us to propose the molecular formula \(C_{16}H_{2}O_{4}\) for compound **1**, an androstane steroid. Among the quaternary carbons one was attributed to a hemiketal (_d_ 107.8), one CH carbonic (_d_ 73.2), one CH2 carbonic (_d_ 66.1), one carbonyl (_d_ 217.8) and only one methyl carbon (_d_ 17.8). The presence of only one methyl group led us to propose that the second one for androstane steroids was replaced by a hydroxymethylene group which is part of the cyclic hemiketal moiety (_d_ 4.10, 3.89, both \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz). The 1H NMR spectrum of 1 showed another AB coupling system for 2H-1 (_d_ 2.30, 2.40, both \(d\), \(J\) = 11.2 Hz), which led us to propose the position of the hemiketal ring between C-2 and C-19. Other possibilities of ring closure of the hemiketal were ruled out mainly through analysis of the NMR data. Analysis of HMBC, HMQC and NOEDIF of **1**, together with the 1H-1H COSY of its acetate **1a** confirmed the positioning of the hemiketal ring. In the 1H-1H COSY a "H" coupling was observed between H-3 (_d_ 5.41, _ddd_, \(J\) = 1.7, 2.7, 3.3 Hz) and H-1b (_d_ 2.50, _dd_, \(J\) = 1.7, 11.5 Hz), indicating an _a_-configuration for the hydroxyl at C-3. In the HMBC experiment the following were the most important correlations observed: C-2/H-3, C-3/H-1b, C-5/H-1b, C-5/H-1a and C-3/H-5, other correlations are described in Table 3. NOEDIF was also used to confirm the structure for compound I: when H-19a was irradiated an NOE was observed with H-1b, H-11b and H-8. Irradiation of H-19b caused a NOE for H-4b, H-6b and II-8, other NOEs are described in Table 4.

All the information above confirmed the structure of **1** with this new arrangement containing the hemiketal between C-2 and C-19.



## Page 2

Compound **2** was also found to be a steroid very closely related to **1**. The _m_/_z_ 349 [M + H]- peak observed for **2** in the DCIMS requires two more carbon atoms in relation to **1**, and this was confirmed by the 13C NMR spectrum which showed 21 signals. The combination of the data above with the 1H NMR spectrum showing a methyl signal (d 1.04, \(t\), \(J\) = 7.2 Hz) led to the molecular formula C21H2O4 for this pregnane steroid. As observed for compound **1**, compound **2** also displays a hemiketal ring between C-2 and C-19. This observation was deduced on the basis of spectral analysis 1H NMR, 13C NMR, HMBC, HMQC and NOEDIF (Tables 1-4). For compound **2** the coupling constants obtained for H-3 (d 4.15, _dd_, \(J\) = 6.0, 10.4) allowed us to propose a _b_-configuration for the hydroxyl group at C-3. Other differences observed in the 1H NMR spectra of compounds **1** and **2** refer to the chemical shifts for H-1a and H-1b which are very close for compound 1 (D  d 0.10) and more distinct for **2** (D  d 1.17), this difference might be due to the influence of pyridine and its different association to the hydroxyl groups. To check and confirm this possibility 1H NMR spectra for both compounds were run in methanol-_d_d, and both H-1a and H-1b were taken in the same experiment. The 1H

## Page 3

were shown to be more shielded in comparison with the chemical shifts observed in pyridine-_d__s_. When **2** was submitted to acetylation with acetic anhydride in pyridine and catalytic amounts of DMAP, two diacetates were obtained. One referring to the acetylation of the alcohol and hemiketal **2a**, and the second **2b** corresponding to the diacetate which originated from the opening of the hemiketal.

Compounds **3** and **4** were isolated from _T. schomburgkii_[3, 4] for the first time. All 13C NMR spectra obtained for compounds **3** and **4** are in agreement with those reported in the literature (Table 1). However, in the 1H NMR spectra for compounds **3** and **4**, it was not possible to observe the multiplicities for the carbonicit protons (H-2, H-3 and H-4), in spite of the fact that they displayed the same chemical shifts, when the spectra were run in the same solvent. However, the compounds were obtained as triacetate derivatives **3a** and **4a**,where the multiplicities of H-2, II-3 and H-4 were the same as observed for the natural products described in the literature. Compound **3a** showed in the 1H NMR spectrum a _W_-coupling between H-2 and H-4, as described for the natural product 3 isolated from _T. schomburgkii_[3]. In the HIMBC experiments due to the very close chemical shifts observed for C-2 and C-3 it was not possible to assign unequivocally each correlation. The following correlations for the carbonicit protons were observed for **3**: C-10/H-2, C-10/H-4,C-2 or C-3/H-2, C-2 or C-3/H-4, C-2 or C-3/H-3 and C-4/H-4. For compound **4** the correlations observed for the carbonicit protons were: C-1/H-3, C-10/H-4, C-2/H-4, C-3/H-2, C-3/H-3 and C-4/H-4. In the literature [3] the long-range 1H-13C correlations observed for a monoacetate of **3** are limited to those involving methyl hydrogens. Compounds **3** and **4** showed different melting points and [a]D from those described in the literature. However, the duplication of the Me-18 signals observed in the 1H NMR for compounds **2** and **4** suggests the epimerization of C-17 when the NMR spectra were run in pyridine.

The 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectra for compound **5** were very similar to those for **3** and **4**. The only difference observed was due to the presence of only two hydroxyl groups attached to the ring A. The positioning of the hydroxyls and their stereochemistry were determined through analysis of 1H NMR and 13C NMR of **5** and its diacetatc **5a**. The signals (_d_ 4.04, \(m\), and \(d\) 3.65 _ddd_, \(J\) = 4.0, 4.8, 11.2 Hz) displayed in 1H NMR of **5** led us to propose a _cis_-relationship between H-2 and H-3, where H-2 is equatorial and H-3 is axial. This was confirmed by the 1H-1H COSY spectrum of **5a** which showed that the acetylcarbonic protons are coupling to each other, and with two other different protons. Therefore, the hydroxyls are vicinals and located at C-2 and C-3. The comparison of the chemical shifts and multiplicities of H-2 in **5**,

## Page 4

with the data of **3** and **4**, allowed us to propose the configuration for H-2 equatorially oriented, and H-3 axially. Therefore, both hydroxyls have the \(\beta\)-configuration. The possibility of different stereochemistry for both hydroxyls was ruled out through comparison of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR with models from the literature [5].

The androstane (**1**) and pregnane (**2**) _2B_,19-hemiketal represent a novel group of steroids from plants [6]. The closest analogues of this nucleus would appear to be the pregnane-10,2-carbolactones isolated from the sponge species _Strongylophora_ sp. [7]. Pregnane derivatives have been isolated from the Meliaceae (_Melia azedarach_ var. _japonica_[8], _Melia toosendon_[9, 10], _Turrea villosa_[11] and _Trichilia schomburgki_[3, 4]), Simaroubaceae (_Allanthus grands_[12]) and from Burseraceae (_Compinibora mukul_[13]). Thus, compounds **1** and **2** show a significant enlargement of the patterns of pregnanes production previously noted in the Rutales, and a significant chemotaxonomic evidence in favour of the link between these three families.

## Experimental

_General._ IR: KBr. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra were recorded at 400 and 100 MHz, respectively, with TMS as int. standard. MS: VG Platform II, PCDI (i-C_**i**,_th_).

_Plant material._ Stems of _T. claussenii_ were collected in Rio Claro, SP, Brazil, and a voucher is deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil. The stems were dried, powdered and extracted with MeOH.

_Isolation of constituents._ The MeOH extract (45.7 g) was suspended in MeOH-H2O (1:3) and partitioned with CH2Cl2-EtOAc-_n_-BuOH. The CH2Cl2 fr. was coned and then partitioned with hexane-MeOH. The MeOH fr. afforded 9 frs. after dry silica gel column using as eluent hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (10:10:1). Fr-8 after silica gel flash column hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (10:10:1), gradient elution afforded

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} H & **1** & Observed NOE \\ H & **1** & **2** \\
1a & H-19b, H-1β, H-11β, H-8 & H-19b, H-1β, H-8 \\
3 & H-4a, H-4β & H-4a, H-1α \\
1β & * & H-19a, H-11α, H-1α \\
19b & H-19a, H-4β, H-6β, H-8 & H-19a, H-4β, H-6β, H-8 \\
15α & * & H-17, H-14 \\
4a & * & H-

## Page 5

26 frs. Fr. 8-11 afforded compound **5** (8.0 mg) after chromatography on silanized silica gel (Me\({}_{x}\)CO-H\({}_{2}\)O, 1:1). Column chromatography of fr. 8-12 on florisil (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{7}\)-MeOH, 19:1) yielded 7 new frs. Fr. 8-12-5 after chromatography on silanized silica column (Me\({}_{2}\)CO-H\({}_{2}\)O, 1:1), afforded **5** (17.0 mg). Compound **5** (5 mg) was acetylated (Ac\({}_{2}\)O-pyridine) to yield 1.2 mg of **5a**. CC of fr. 8-13 on silanized silica gel (Me\({}_{2}\)CO-H\({}_{2}\)O, 1:1) afforded **2** (32.0 mg). 6 mg of **2** were acetylated (Ac\({}_{2}\)O-pyridine) and the acetate obtained was purified on flash silica gel column (hexane-CHCl\({}_{7}\)-Me\({}_{2}\)CO, 10:10:1.2) to yield **2a** (2.0 mg) and **2b** (3.0 mg). Fr. 8-15 afforded, after chromatography on florisil column (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{7}\)-MeOH, 19:1), compound **1** (45.0 mg). Compound **1** (6 mg) was acetylated (Ac\({}_{2}\)O-pyridine and catalytic amounts of DMAP) to yield **1a** (5.5 mg). Fr. 8-17 afforded after CC on florisil (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{7}\)-MeOH, 19:1) compounds **3** (20.0 mg) and **4** (6.0 mg). Compound **3** (5 mg) was acetylated (Ac\({}_{2}\)O-pyridine) to yield **3a** (2.6 mg). As described above fr. 8-18 yielded after CC on (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{7}\)-MeOH, 19:1) and then silanized silica (MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O, 1:1) compound **4** (47.0 mg). Compound **4** (5 mg) was acetylated (Ac\({}_{2}\)O-pyridine) to yield **4a** (4.5 mg). Fr. 8-19, after CC on silica gel (hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{7}\)-MeOH, 5:15:1.5), afforded a mixt. of stosterol and stigmasterol glycosides (9.0 mg).

_2a,3a-Dihydroxyandrostan_-16-_one_ _2b,19-hemiketal_ (**1**). Amorphous solid, mp 208-211\({}^{\circ}\), [a]\({}_{\rm{D}}\)\(-\)108.4\({}^{\circ}\) (MeOH, \(c\) 0.078). DCIMS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 321 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (100), 320 [M]\({}^{+}\) (33), 303 (58), 285 (14), 255 (13), 233 (21), 215 (8), 60 (54). \({}^{15}\)C NMR: Table 1, 'H NMR: Table 2, HMDE: Table 3, NOEDIF: Table 4.

_2a,3a-Dihydroxyandrostan_-16-_one_ _2b,19-hemiketal_ (**1a**). \({}^{15}\)C NMR: Table 1. 'H NMR (CDCI\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 5.41 (_dd_, \(J\) = 1.7, 2.7, 3.3 Hz, H-3), 4.06 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-19a), 3.86 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-19b), 2.50 (_dd_, \(J\) = 1.7, 11.5 Hz, H-18\(\beta\)), 2.20 (_dd_, \(J\) = 7.2, 18.0 Hz, H-15\(\alpha\)), 2.13 (_d_, \(J\) = 18.0 Hz, H-17a), 2.07 (_s_, OCOMe), 2.00 (_s_, OCOMe), 1.99 (_d_, \(J\) = 11.5 Hz, H-1a), 1.95 (_d_, \(J\) = 18.0 Hz, H-17b), 1.87 (H-15\(\beta\)), 1.75 (H-4a), 1.73 (H-4b), 1.67 (H-5), 1.48 (H-14), 1.24 (H-6a), 1.01 (H-6b), 0.85 (_s_, H-18).

_2a,3b-Dihydroxypregnant_-16-_one_ _2b,19-hemiketal_ (**2**). Amorphous solid, mp 140-143\({}^{\circ}\), [a]\({}_{\rm{D}}\)\(-\)93.9\({}^{\circ}\) (MeOH, \(c\) 0.055). DCIMS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 349 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (53), 348 [M]\({}^{+}\) (44), 331 (100), 313 (24), 283 (18), 261 (7), 108 (6), 94 (7), 81 (10), 70 (12), 60 (34). \({}^{15}\)C NMR: Table 1, 'H NMR: Table 1, 'H NMR: Table 2, HMDE: Table 3, NOEDIF: Table 4.

_2a,3b-Diacetoxypregnan_-16-_one_ _2b,19-hemiketal_ (**2a**). \({}^{15}\)C NMR: Table 1. 'H NMR (CDCI\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 5.37 (_dd_, \(J\) = 6.4, 9.6 Hz, H-3), 4.04 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-19a), 3.87 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-19b), 2.50 (_d_, \(J\) = 12.0 Hz, H-1/b), 2.23 (_dd_, \(J\) = 7.6, 18.0 Hz, H-15\(\alpha\)), 2.11 (_H-4a), 2.08 (_s_, OCOMe), 2.06 (_s_, OCOMe), 2.03 (_d_, \(J\) = 12.0 Hz, H-1/a), 1.73 (H-15\(\beta\)), 1.42 (H-4b), 1.38 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.2 Hz, H-21), 1.03 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.2 Hz, H-21), 1.03 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.2 Hz, H-21), 1.05 (_s_, H-18).

_2b,3b-Diacetoxypregnan_-2,16-_one_ _(**3a**). Amorphous solid, mp 234\({}^{\circ}\) (decomposition), [a]\({}_{\rm{D}}\)\(-\)44.0\({}^{\circ}\) (MeOH, \(c\) 0.041). DCIMS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 351 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (27), 333 (69), 315 (76), 297 (42), 246 (21), 86 (40), 60 (100). \({}^{15}\)C NMR: Table 1. 'H NMR (pyridine-_d_); \(\delta\) 4.56 (_sl_, \(H\) 2-4), 419 (_sl_, \(H\) 4-3), 3.82 (_sl_, H-3), 2.34 (_dd_, \(J\) = 3.2, 14.0 Hz, H-1\(\beta\)), 2.20 (_dd_, \(J\) = 7.6, 18.0 Hz, H-15\(\alpha\)), 1.62 (_s_, H-19), 1.05 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.2 Hz, H-21), 0.59 (_s_, H-18).

_2b,3b,4b-Triacetoxypregnan_-16-_one_ _(**3**a**). \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 1. 'H NMR (CDCI\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 5.34 (_dd_, \(J\) = 3.6 Hz, H-2), 5.27 (_dd_, \(J\) = 1.2, 2.8, 3.6 Hz, H-4), 4.93 (_t_, \(J\) = 4.0 Hz, H-3), 2.22 (_dd_, \(J\) = 7.6, 18.4 Hz, H-15\(\alpha\)), 2.09 (_s_, OCOMe), 1.98 (_s_, OCOMe), 1.25 (_s_, H-19), 1.02 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.6 Hz, H-21), 0.69 (_s_, H-18).

_2x,3a,4b-Triheroxypregnan_-16-_one_ _(**4a**). Amorphous solid, [a]\({}_{\rm{D}}\)\(-\)86.9\({}^{\circ}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\) \(c\) 0

## Page 6

Ensino Superior (CAPES) for the award of a scholarship.

## References

* [1] Champagne, D. E., Koul, O., Isman, M. B., Scudder, G. G. E. and Towers, G. H. N., _Phytochemistry_, 1992, **31**, 377.
* [2] Pupo, M. T., Vieira, P. C., Fernandes, J. B. and Silva, M. F. G. F., _Pytochemistry_, 1996, **42**, 795.
* [3] Tinto, W. F., Jagesar, P. K., Ketwaru, P., Reynolds, W. F. and McLean, S., _Journal of Natural Products_, 1991, **54**, 972.
* [4] Ketwaru, P., Klass, J., Tinto, W. F., McLean, S. and Reynolds W. F., _Journal of Natural Products_, 1993, **56**, 430.
* [5] VanAntwerp, C. L., Eggert, H., Meakins, G. D., Miners, J. O. and Djerassi, C., _Journal of Organic Chemistry_, 1977, **42**, 789.
* [6] Deepak, D., Khare, A. and Khare, M. P., _Phytochemistry_, 1989, **28**, 3255.
* [7] Corgiat, J. M. and Scheuer, P. J., _Tetrahedron_, 1993, **49**, 1557.
* [8] Nakatani, M., Takao, H., Miura, I. and Hase, T., _Pytochemistry_, 1985, **24**, 1945.
* [9] Nakanishi, T., Kobayashi, M., Murata, H. and Inada, A., _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_, 1988, **36**, 4148.
* [10] Inada, A., Kobayashi, M. and Nakanishi, T., _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_, 1988, **36**, 609.
* [11] Chiplunkar, Y. G., Nagasampagi, B. A., Tavale, S. S. and Puranik, V. G., _Phytochemistry_, 1993, **33**, 901.
* [12] Hung, T., Stuppner, H., Ellmerer-Muller, E. P., Scholz, D., Eigner, D. and Manandhar, M. P., _Pytochemistry_, 1995, **39**, 1403.
* [13] Bajaj, A. G. and Dev, S., _Tetrahedron_, 1982, **38**, 2949.



