# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)94227-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Neoligans of _Virola Surinamensis_

Lauro E. S. Barata, Paul M. Baker, Otto R. Gottlieb, Edmundo A. Rueda

# Abstract

Elemicin, galbacin, veraguensin and two new neoligans, surinamensin and violin, were isolated and characterized from the leaves of _Virola surinamensis_.

## Introduction

In connection with a project designed to provide naturally occurring compounds active against the penetration of cercaria of _Schistosoma mansoni_, more than 40 plant species were collected at the delta of the Amazonas river and submitted to biological testing [1]. Since the hexane extract of the leaves of _Virola surinamensis_ (RoI) Warb. (Myristiaceae) showed the strongest activity, effort was devoted to the isolation and structural elucidation of the components.

The isolation, which involved solvent fractionation and Si gel column chromatography of the extract, led to elecmicn **1**, the known 8,8'-neoligans, galbacin **2** and veraguensin **3**, and the new neoligans of type 8-_0-4_', surinamensin **4a** and violin **4b**[2]. The synthesis of **4a** and related compounds, prepared to confirm the proposed structures, was also undertaken. The biological activity of the extract was shown to be due only to compounds **4a** and **4b**.

## Results and discussions

The fractions that contain the neoligan surinamensin were resistant to all attempts at separation on a preparative scale, and most of the work on its constitution was carried out on a mixture of two components. By repetitive analytical HPLC a 3 mg pure sample was obtained, which by high resolution MS revealed the composition of the natural product, C2H2H2SO6. The strong IR band at 3500 cm-1 revealed the presence of an OH group, that was shown to be alcoholic, since no shift was observed by addition of alkali in the UV spectrum and by comparison of the PMR spectrum of surinamensin and its acetate (Table 1). The 100 MHz PMR spectrum, further to corroborating the existence of an OH group (d 3.3, _br_ s, disappearing on the addition of 1 drop of D2O), indicated the presence of 4 OMe groups (d 3.82, 3.86 and 3.90) and

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c}  & Me-9 & Me-9\({}^{\prime}\) & H-7 & H-8 & H-7\({}^{\prime}\) & H-8\({}^{\prime}\) & OMe & Ar-2.6 & Ar3\({}^{\prime}\),5\({}^{\prime}\),6 & Others \\ \hline Surinamensin & 1.19 & 1.87 & 4.62 & 4.14 & 6.37 & 6–6.24 & 3.82, 3.86, 3.9 & 6.61 & 6.9 & 3.3 \\  & _d, J_ = 6 & _d, J_ = 5.5 & _d, J_ = 8 & \(m\) & _d, J_ = 16 & \(m\) & (3,8, 3.5, 3.65)† & \(s\) & \(m\) & _br_ s, →OH \\ Surinamensin & 1.17 & 1.82 & 5.85 & 4.54 & 6.32 & 6–6.2 & 3.81, 3.84 & 6.58 & 6.86 & 2.00 \\ acetate & _d, J_ = 7 & _d, J_ = 6 & _d, J_ = 7 & \(m\) & _d, J_ = 16 & \(m\) & \(s\) & \(m\) & OCOCH3 \\ Surinamensis & 1.2 & 1.87 & 4.85 & 4.36 & 6.39 & 6.1–6.28 & 3.82, 3.84, 3.88 & 6.62 & 6.94 & 3.62 \\ (synthetic) & _d, J_ = 6 & _d, J_ = 5.5 & _d, J_ = 3 & \(s\) & \(s\) & \(m\) & _d, J_ = 16 & \(m\) & 3.92 & \(m\) & \(s\), →OH \\  & & & & & & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & & & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: PMR data for surinamensin and surinamensin acetate*

## Page 2

other features of the structure of surinamensin. The doublets centred at \(d\) 1.19 (3H, \(J\) = 6 Hz) and \(d\) 1.87 (3H, \(J\) = 5.5 Hz) could be ascribed to C-9 and C-9' Me groups, while the doublet at \(d\) 4.62 (1H, \(J\) = 8 Hz) and the multiplet at \(d\) 4.14 (1H), were assigned to the methines at C-7 and C-8. The aromatic protons of C-2 and C-6 appeared as a singlet at \(d\) 6.61 and the remaining ones as a multiplet at \(d\) 6.9. Two additional signals, a doublet at \(d\) 6.37 and a multiplet (1H, \(d\) 6-6.24), were assigned to the protons of the _trans_ double bond moiety at C-7' and C-8'. Double irradiation experiments at 100 MHz confirmed most of the above assignments. Irradiation at \(d\) 1.87 simplifies the olefinic pattern, showing two doublets with \(J\) = 16 Hz, while irradiation at \(d\) 1.19 transforms the multiplet at \(d\) 4.14 into a doublet with \(J\) = 8 Hz. As expected, irradiation at the olefinic region or at \(d\) 4.14 collapses the doublets at \(d\) 1.87 and \(d\) 1.19 into two singlets respectively.

That the A ring of surinamensin **4a** is 3,4,5-trioxygenated, was established on the basis of the known shielding effect observed on the methoxyl groups with an unsubstituted _ortho_ position, when d6C6H6 is used as solvent for recording the PMR spectrum [3], and by identification of 3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoic acid amongst the products of the KMnO4 (Me2CO) oxidation of surinamensis. Analysis of its MS confirmed the trimethoxybenzylic alcohol and isoeugenol moieties, on the basis of the ions at _m/e_ 195 and 164, respectively. Further support for the proposed structure of surinamensin **4a**, was obtained from the 13C NMR spectrum (cf. **5**) [4].

By phenol oxidation coupling of arylpropenoids, mixtures of _erythro_ and _three_-neolignans related to **4a** were previously obtained, and their configurations assigned by analysis of their PMR spectra [5]. Comparison of the \(d\) and \(J\) values of the methines at C-7 and C-8 (Table 1) with the reported values, indicated that **4a** corresponds to the _three_ series.

Indication of the constitution of the contaminant of surinamensin was obtained by oxidation of the mixture with DDQ [6]. Chromatographic analysis of the reaction mixture revealed two products which were isolated by PLC and submitted to MS analysis. One of these products (M+, _m/e_ 386) was shown to be the oxidation product **9a** of surinamensin, and the other one, (M+, _m/e_ 356) was identified as the oxidation product of violin (**4b**), by comparison with an authentic sample of **9b** prepared as shown below. A careful inspection of the MS of samples of surinamensin and its acetylderivative, showed also the presence of violin and its corresponding derivative.

A diastereoisomeric mixture of _erythro_- and _three_-surinamensin was prepared following the method described by Adler _et al._[7], by treatment of 3,4,5-trimethoxybenzaldehyde with ethylmagnesium bromide and the use of solid CO2 in H2O to decompose the magnesium complex, the substituted benzylic alcohol **6** was obtained. Oxidation of **6** with Jones reagent afforded the corresponding ketone **7**, which on bromination gave a mixture of bromoderivatives, including the bromoketone **8a**, isolated by PLC. The treatment of **8a** with the sodium salt of isoeugenol in DMF produced **9a**, purified by PLC. NaBH4 reduction of **9a** gave the diastereoisomeric mixture represented by **4a**, analyzed by PMR spectroscopy (Table 1). Again double irradiation experiments were used to confirm the assignments. Irradiation at \(d\) 1.2 simplified the C-8 methine signals and two doublets at \(d\) 4.18 and 4.36 with \(J\) = 8 and 3 Hz, corresponding to the _three_ and _erythro_ isomers respectively, could be easily observed.

The ketone **9b**, used for comparison with the DDQ oxidation product of violin (**4b**), was prepared by the method described above using the bromoketone **8b** and the sodium salt of isoeugenol.



## Page 3



## Experimental

### Extraction.

Plant material was collected at Aura Forest Reserve, Belem (Estado do Para,Brazil) and identified by Dr. Joao Mura Pires (Herbarium sample No. 126:206) EMBRAA, Departmento de Botanica, Ministefio de Agricultura, 66000, Belem, PA, Brazil. Dried powdered leaves (2.25 kg) of _Y. surinamensis_ were Soxhlet extracted with hexane for 72 hr, the extract evapd in vacuo afforded a green oily residue (145 g) which was suspended in MeOH-H2O (7:3) (500 mL), stirred at room temp. for 3 hr, filtered through a celle pad and successively extracted with hexane (3 x 300 ml) and Et2O (3 x 500 mL). The combined hexane extracts were evapd to dryness yielding a residue (65 g), which was dissolved in MeOH-H2O (5:1) stirred 2 hr and extracted with CHCl3, evapd of the CHCl3, retargets yielded a yellowish oilye residue (29 g). Part of the last residue was chromatographed on a Si gel column and eluted with hexane, C6H2, C6H2-EtOAc and EtOAc, yielding the following compounds in order of elution: galbcin, 2 (8.2 g), elemcnic, 1 (4.6 g), veraguensin, 3 (0.7 g) and surinamensis, 4a (0.5 g). The combined Et2O extracts were evapd to dryness yielding a yellowish oilye residue, which was chromatographed on a Si gel column and eluted with hexane, C6H6, C6H6-EtOAc and EtOAc, yielding the following compounds in order of elution: veraguensin, 3 (3.7 g) and surinamensis, 4a (8.2 g).

### Elcinic 1.

Viscous oil, PMR and MS data in agree with lit. [8].

### Gabacin 2.

Mp 114-118deg (from hexane-EtOAc), MS _m/e_ (rel. int.) 340 [M+] (45), PMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): d 1.05 (6H, \(J\) = 6 Hz, C-9 and C-9), 1.78 (2H, \(m\), C-8 and C-8), d 4.61 (2H, \(J\) = 9 Hz, C-7), 5.96 (4H, \(s\), 2 x ~-O--CH2--O--), d 6.82-6.93 (6H; m, aromatic products). Identical with an authentic sample (mmp and TLC).

### Surinamensis 4a.

Y.Apraquenn 3.

Mp 127-128deg (from Et2O), [a]0 +-40deg (CHCl3, \(c\) = 10), MS \(m\) (rel. int.) 372 [M+] (34). PMR (100 MHz, CDCl3, \(c\) = 30), C-9, 1.8 (1H, \(m\), C-8), 2.25 (1H, \(m\), C-8), 1.07 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 72, C-9), 1.8 (1H, \(m\), _C-8), 2.25 (1H, \(m\), _C-8), 3.84, 3.86, 3.88, 3.9 (4 < OCH3, \(d\), 4.4 (1H, _

## Page 4

_Acknowledgements--_We thank FAPESP, CNPq and FINEP, for financial support, Professor A. P. Seabra for the facilities given with the HPLC equipment, Professor K. S. Brown for helpful discussions and Professors C. Djerassi and E. Richtie for authentic samples of veraguensin and galbacin respectively.

## References

* [1] The biological testing was carried out by Dr. Jose Pellegrno at the Divisao de l'munologia e Biologia Parasitaria. Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.
* [2] The nomenclature used for the natural products is the one described by Gottlieb, O. R. (1978) _Fortschr. Chem. Org. Naturstoffe_ in press
* [3] Holloway, D. and Scheinmann, F. (1974) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 1233.
* [4] We are grateful to Dr. H. E. Gottlieb and Prof. E. Wenkert, for recording and analysis of this spectrum.
* [5] Sarkanen, K. V. and Wallis, A. F. A.(1973) _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin I_**1869**, and references cited therein.
* [6] Becker, H.-D. and Adler, E. (1961) _Acta Chem. Scand._**15**, 218.
* [7] Adler, E., Delin, S. and Miksche, G. (1966) _Acta Chem. Scand._**20**, 1035.
* [8] Gisbrecht, A. M., Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R. and da Rocha, A. I. (1974) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 2285.
* [9] Perry, W. C., Kalnins, M. V. and Deitcher, K. H. (1972) _J. Org. Chem._**37**, 4371.



