# 10.1023@A_1025694720727.pdf

## Page 1



# Electrophysiological Responses of Female and

MALE _Hypspiryla grandella_ (Zellera) TO _Swietenia macrophylla_ Essential OILS

MARISI G. SOARES, L LUCIANE G. BATISTA-PEREIRA, JOAO B. FERNANDES, ARLENE G. CORREA, M. FATIMA G. F. DA SILVA, PAULO C. VIEIRA, EDSON RODRIGUES FILHO, and ORLANDO S. OHASHI

# Abstract

The mabagony shoot borer, _Hypspiryla grandella_, is one of the most economically important Nectropical forest pest insects because it attacks valuable timber of the Meliaceae. Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, factors influencing attack by the shoot borer are not well known. Electronentemogram studies of borer antennae indicate that both female and male moths elicited significant antennal responses to essential oil of the terminal shoots, mature and senescent leaves, in three concentrations. - Himachalene, germacrene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils from _Swietenia macrophylla_. Germacene D- and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oil of _Cedrala odorata and Toonca cilata_. These findings suggest that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit on the leaves of these plants. The GC-EAD of essential oil from _S. macrophylla_ mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae led to the identification of -caryophyllene as the main constituent responsible for the antennae response.

## 1 Introduction

The mabagony shoot borer, _Hypspiryla grandella_, is one of the most economically important Nectropical forest pest insects because it attacks valuable timber of the Meliaceae. Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, factors influencing attack by the shoot borer are not well known. Electronentemogram studies of borer antennae indicate that both female and male moths elicited significant antennal responses to essential oil of the terminal shoots, mature and senescent leaves, in three concentrations. - Himachalene, germacrene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils from _Swietenia macrophylla_. Germacene D- and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oil of _Cedrala odorata and Toonca cilata_. These findings suggest that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit on the leaves of these plants. The GC-EAD of essential oil from _S. macrophylla_ mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae led to the identification of -caryophyllene as the main constituent responsible for the antennae response.

## 2 Introduction

The mabagony shoot borer, _Hypspiryla grandella_, is one of the most economically important Nectropical forest pest insects because it attacks valuable timber of the Meliaceae. Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, factors influencing attack by the shoot borer are not well known. Electronentemogram studies of borer antennae indicate that both female and male moths elicited significant antennal responses to essential oil of the terminal shoots, mature and senescent leaves, in three concentrations. - Himachalene, germacrene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils from _Swietenia macrophylla_. Germacene D- and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oil of _Cedrala odorata and Toonca cilata_. These findings suggest that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit on the leaves of these plants. The GC-EAD of essential oil from _S. macrophylla_ mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae led to the identification of -caryophyllene as the main constituent responsible for the antennae response.

## 3 Introduction

The mabagony shoot borer, _Hypspiryla grandella_, is one of the most economically important Nectropical forest pest insects because it attacks valuable timber of the Meliaceae. Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, factors influencing attack by the shoot borer are not well known. Electronentemogram studies of borer antennae indicate that both female and male moths elicited significant antennal responses to essential oil of the terminal shoots, mature and senescent leaves, in three concentrations. - Himachalene, germacrene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils from _Swietenia macrophylla_. Germacene D- and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oil of _Cedrala odorata and Toonca cilata_. These findings suggest that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit on the leaves of these plants. The GC-EAD of essential oil from _S. macrophylla_ mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae led to the identification of -caryophyllene as the main constituent responsible for the antennae response.

## 4 Introduction

The mabagony shoot borer, _Hypspiryla grandella_, is one of the most economically important Nectropical forest pest insects because it attacks valuable timber of the Melaceae. Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, factors influencing attack by the shoot borer are not well known. Electronentemogram studies of borer antennae indicate that both female and male moths elicited significant antennal responses to essential oil of the terminal shoots, mature and senescent leaves, in three concentrations. - Himachalene, germacrene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils from _Swietenia macrophylla_. Germacene D- and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oil of _Cedrala odorata and Toonca cilata_. These findings suggest that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit on the leaves of these plants. The GC-EAD of essential oil from _S. macrophylla_ mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae led to the identification of -caryophyllene as the main constituent responsible for the antennae response.

## 5 Conclusion

The mabagony shoot borer, _Hypspiryla grandella_, is one of the most economically important Nectropical forest pest insects because it attacks valuable timber of the Melaceae. Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, factors influencing attack by the shoot borer are not well known. Electronentemogram studies of borer antennae indicate that both female and male moths elicited significant antennal responses to essential oil of the terminal shoots, mature and senescent leaves, in three concentrations. - Himachalene, germacrene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils from _Swietenia macrophylla_. Germacene D- and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oil of _Cedrala odorata and Toonca cilata_. These findings suggest that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit on the leaves of these plants. The GC-EAD of essential oil from _S. macrophylla_ mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae led to the identification of -caryophyllene as the main constituent responsible for the antennae response.

## 6 Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the anonymous referee for useful comments and suggestions that improved the paper.

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]



## Page 2



## Introduction

Because it attacks plants of the Meliaceae family, the mahogany shoot borer, _Hypsipyla grandella_ (Zeller, 1848) (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae), is one of the most economically significant Neotropical forest pest insects (Schabel et al., 1999). It is a key pest of mahogany, _Swietenia macrophylla_ (Kim).

_S. macrophylla_ (Meliaceae) is well-known for its fast growth, adaptability, good shape, and high value, which are desirable properties in Latin America and Caribbean timbers (Grijpma and Ramalho, 1969). However, efforts to establish large-scale homogenous plantations of this native tree have almost invariably failed because of attack by mahogany shoot borer larvae. The damage consists of killing young terminal shoots, retarding growth, and the formation of numerous secondary shoots that develop into twisted and unprofitable trees.

Various strategies have been developed and considerable research efforts made to control this pest, but no practical method of control has been devised. Insecticidal trials have failed because of the effects of rainfall and the short period during which larvae are exposed prior to boring into shoots. In larval and pupal stages, the insects are protected in galleries inside the tree. Chemical treatment is still limited to forest nurseries. In plantations, only silvicultural measures have been employed (Grijpma, 1973; Whitmore, 1976; Newton et al., 1993; Speight, 1997).

Despite detailed information on the life cycle of _H. grandella_, the factors influencing attack by shoot borers are not well known. An understanding of these is essential if practical control methods are to be developed. The aim of the present work was to determine the selectivity and sensitivity of antennal receptors of both sexes of _H. grandella_ to volatile compounds identified from the essential oil of the terminal shoots, and mature and senescent leaves of the _S. macrophylla_. Comparative studies among these tree essential oils were made to determine similarities in olfactory receptors, using the electroantennogram (EAG) technique.

## Methods and Materials

_Essential Oil Extraction and Analysis_. Fresh terminal shoots and mature and senescent leaves of _S. macrophylla_ were collected in the town of Igarape-Agu, located 136 km from Belen in the state of Para, Brazil, at Eidai do Brasil Madeiras S.A.'s experimental forest station.

The fresh aerial parts of each tissue were steam-distilled for 4 hr, using a Clevenger apparatus. The essential oils were dried over anhydrous Na2SO4 and kept in a freezer. Analyses were carried out on a Shimadzu GC-17A gas chromatograph fitted with a fused silica DB-5 (30 m x 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 mm film thickness) capillary column, using helium as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.6 ml * min-1. The temperature was programmed initially at 60degC for 2 min and then increased

## Page 3

at a rate of 3degC \(\cdot\) min\({}^{-1}\) to 240degC. The injection was split and its temperature was 225degC, while the interface temperature was 250degC. The chromatograph was coupled to a Shimadzu QP5000 mass selective detector at 70 eV; EIMS. Identification of the components was made by determining their retention indices relative to those of a homologous series of _n_-alkanes (Dool and Kratz, 1963), by comparison with (a) coinjection with authentic samples, and (b) fragmentation patterns in mass spectra with those stored on the spectrometer database and reported in the literature (Adams, 1995).

_Insects._ Pupae of _H. grandella_ used in our experiments originated from the Faculdade de Ciencias Agrarias do Para's Laboratory of Entomology in Belem, PA, Brazil. The insects were reared in this laboratory on a diet of mahogany foliage. Pupae were established in the Federal University of Sao Carlos's Insect Bioassay Laboratory. They were sexed (Parra, 1986) and placed individually in to plastic vials (6 x 6 cm diameter) for emergence of adults. Male and female pupae were maintained in a growth chamber at 25 \(\pm\) 1degC, 60 \(\pm\) 5% RH and 12L:12D.

_Electroantenmograms._ Antennae of 1 to 2-day-old male and female moths were used for electroantennographic experiments (EAG) and electroantennographic detection (EAD).

Each antenna was excised (pulled out of the head) using forceps, and a few segments were cut off at the base and the tip (Bjostad, 1998). The antenna was then fixed between two stainless steel electrodes by pushing the base and tip into droplets of an electrically conductive gel (Spectra 360 electrode gel, Parker, Orange, NJ) applied onto the metal electrodes. The specimen with the antennal preparation was placed in such a way that the humidified air directed the compounds eluted from the gas chromatograph (GC) over the antenna. The antennal responses were amplified and recorded with a data acquisition controller and software EAG (Syntech).

EAGs experiments were performed to elucidate the selectivity of the antennal receptors of _H. grandella._ The EAG response was evaluated as follows. The compounds were released from Pasteur pipettes containing a piece of filter paper (about 0.8 cm\({}^{2}\)) impregnated with 5 1 of each freshly prepared solution of the test essential oil and passed over the antennae. In addition to the pipettes with the test preparations, one Pasteur pipette containing a filter paper impregnated with 5 1 of the hexane solvent was used as a control. The puff containing the test essential oil (from terminal shoots, mature, or senescent leaves of _S. macrophyll_) was delivered into a continuously humidified and purified air stream of 1.2 l \(\cdot\) min\({}^{-1}\) by purified air, passing for 0.3 sec through the impregnated filter paper in the pipettes. Control stimulation was made at the beginning and at the end of every series of experiments. The test essential oils were applied randomly at intervals of 30 sec. EAG amplitudes in response to the essential oils were expressed in relation to the responses to the control (hexane), because of the large differences in overall sensitivity between individual antennae, and to compensate the decline 

## Page 4

in antennal sensitivity during a measuring session. In this normalization procedure, responses to the control were defined as 100%. Values obtained between two references (controls) were corrected according to the values of the references by linear interpolation. The Syntech EAG software calculated the normalized values automatically. Essential oils were tested using 10 antennae each of female and male _H. grandella_. The mean normalized responses of the different compounds were analyzed by ANOVA and compared using the Tukey test (_P_ < 0.05).

_Coupled Gas Cromatography-Electroantnengraphic Detection (GC-EAD)_. The GC-EAD equipment was used to identify individual compounds in the oil that could elicit an electroneutnengraphic response. Five replicates were obtained for females, using essential oils from the terminal shoot. The GC-EAD instrument consisted of a Shimadzu 17-A chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector coupled to an electroantennography system (Syntech, Hilversum, The Netherlands) and a DB-5 column (30 m x 0.25 mm I.D., 0.25 mm film thickness, J and W Scientific), using a temperature program of 60degC/min, 3degC/min to 150degC/10 min, 1degC/min, and finally to 280degC held for 16 min. The column effluent (carrier gas hydrogen) was mixed with a nitrogen make-up gas flow (12 ml * min-1) before it was split to the flame ionization detector (FID) and to the heated transfer capillary leading to the antennal preparation. Compounds in the transfer capillary were eluted into a humidified and purified air stream (1.2 l * min-1), which led them directly to the antennal preparation. The same chromatographic conditions as above were used for the chromatographic separation. The FID was kept at 280degC, whereas the temperature of the transfer capillary was maintained at 290degC to prevent condensation.

## Results and Discussion

_Essential Oils._ The composition of the essential oils is given in Table 1. Component concentrations were calculated from GC peak areas and they were arranged in order of GC (DB-5) elution. Table 1 shows that the oils consisted largely of sesquiterpenes. Oils from the terminal shoots (212 mg, 0.053% w/w), mature leaves (193 mg, 0.048% w/w), and senescent (188 mg, 0.047%) leaves of _S. macrophylla_ contained 19, 16, and 13 components, respectively. Of these, 84% of the compounds in the terminal shoots were identified compared with identification of 63 and 69% of the components in the mature and senescent leaves, respectively.

The chemical composition of the volatile oils of terminal shoots, mature, and senescent leaves of _S. macrophylla_ were dissimilar (Table 1), except the main constituent and five other compounds. The major constituent in all samples (58.5-66.5%) was germacrene D, while all the oils contained -imachalene, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate, though in different proportions. The most similarity was found in the oils from mature and senescent leaves, both of which contained 10 similar compounds.



## Page 5

_Ecological Significance._ The essential oil of the terminal shoots and mature and senescent leaves, in the three concentrations, elicited a significant EAG response in both female and male moths (Figures 1 and 2). As expected, the responses of the different EAG preparations increased along with the concentration, although not all the differences between concentrations were significant.

Figure 3 compares the effect of the three essential oils, at 100 mg \(\cdot\) ml\({}^{-1}\), on females and males. Females tend to show greater depolarization of the antennae when exposed to the essential oils. Male antennae responded most strongly to the oil of mature leaves, whereas female antennae responded most noticeably to the shoot oil. The responses were different only for the essential oil of terminal shoots,



## Page 6

which elicited higher antennal response from females. However, since both sexes responded to all the essential oils and the difference in response between male and female antennae were slight, these results suggest that the oils are general attractants rather than specific oviposition or host plant selection attractants. Maia et al. (2000) observed that the high selectivity of _H. grandella_ female antenna to

Figure 1: Mean EAG in percentage elicited from _Hypsipyla grandella_ females with different concentrations of _S. macrophylla_ essential oil. Mean values marked with the same letter are not significantly different at _P_\(<\) 0.05 on the basis of the Tukey test. S = shoots, ML = mature leaves, and SL = senescent leaves.

Figure 2: Mean EAG in percentage elicited from _Hypsipyla grandella_ males with different concentrations of _S. macrophylla_ essential oil. Mean values marked with the same letter are not significantly different at _P_\(<\) 0.05 on the basis of the Tukey test. S = shoots, ML = mature leaves, and SL = senescent leaves.



## Page 7

the essential oils from the leaves of _Cedrela odorata_ and _Toona ciliata_ indicate its potential role as a chemical messenger for habitat location and oviposition.

For phytophagous insects, certain factors are important in host plant selection, such as color, shape, and odor. In some cases, specific odors facilitate the location and identification of suitable hosts. In the case of _H. grandella_, many authors have suggested that plant secondary compounds are largely responsible for this selection. Grijpma and Gara (1970) reported a direct relationship between the ratio of new leaves (shoots) and the number of attacks by _H. grandella_ in mahogany.

Sanchez et al. (1976) observed that, in Costa Rican trials, _S. macrophylla_ proved more susceptible to _H. grandella_ than _Cedrela odorata_. Differences in susceptibility to attack may reflect variations in the production of chemical attractants detected by ovipositing females, although differences in shoot growth and morphology may also be influential factors.

-Himachalene, germacene D, germacrene A, cadina-1,4-diene, hexadecanoic acid, and ethyl hexadecanoate appeared in all essential oils tested from _S. macrophylla_. Germacene-D and -himachalene were also present in the active essential oils of _C. odorata_ and _T. ciliata_. This observation suggests that these compounds play a role in attracting _H. grandella_ to oviposit in the leaves of these plants. However, numerous attempts to identify active constituents in leaf oils by coupled GC-EAD have failed, probably because the responses of female antennae to each eluted component were weak and below the limits of detection of the apparatus, or because stimulation requires a mixture of certain constituents. The GC-EAD (Figure 4) of the essential oil (0.1 mg \(\cdot\) ml\({}^{-1}\)) from _S. macrophylla_

Figure 3: Mean EAG in percentage elicited from _Hypnspyla grandella_ females and males at a concentration of 100 mg \(\cdot\) ml\({}^{-1}\) of _S. macrophylla_ essential oil. Within each sex, mean values marked with the same letter are not significantly different at _P_\(<\) 0.05, on the basis of the Tukey test. S = shoots, ML = mature leaves, and SL = senescent leaves.



## Page 8

mature leaves to female _H. grandella_ antennae suggests -caryophyllene (**1**, TR, 18.33 min and KI 1418) is the main constituent responsible for antennal response (scheme 1). This compound appears in lower concentrations in the terminal shoots than in mature leaves (Table 1); the same result was not observed in the GC-EAD of the essential oil from terminal shoots. Therefore, either the concentration of -caryophyllene is response-dependent or there are other important compounds for the insect's response to the oils.

Figure 4: GC-EAD of essential oil (0.1 mg \(\cdot\) ml\({}^{-1}\)) from _S. macrophyla_ mature leaves over _H. grandella_ female antennae.



## Page 9

The short lifetime of antennal preparations (30-60 min) pose practical problems; however, the EAG of essential oils before GC-EAD displayed a strong response. Field studies, optimized GC-EADs, and/or EAG experiments with pure compounds are required to clarify the role of volatile constituents in _H. grandella_ host selection and ovipositing behavior.

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq/RONEX), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP/PRONEX) for their financial support of this work.

## References

* Adams (1995)Adams, R. P. 1995. Identification of Essential Oil Components by Gas Chromatography Mass Spectroscopy. Allures Publishing, New York.
* Bostad (1998)Bostad, L. B. 1998. Electrophysiological methods, pp. 339-369, _in_ K. F. Haynes and J. G. Millar (eds.). Methods in Chemical Ecology: Chemical Methods, Vol. 1, Chapman and Hall, London.
* Dool (1963)Dool, H., Van Den and Kratz, P. D. 1963. A generalization of the retention index system including linear temperature programmed gas-liquid partition chromatography. _J. Chromatogr._ 11:463-471.
* Grijpma (1973)Gripma, P. 1973. Studies on the shootover _Hynsylaja grandella_ (Zeller) Lep. Pyralidae. Vol. II, IJCA. CATIE, Turrialba, Costa Rica. (Miscellaneous Publications No. 101).
* Grijpma and Gara (1970)Gripma, P. and Gara, R. I. 1970. Studies on the shootover _Hynsylaja grandella_ (Zeller). Host selection behaviour. _Turrialba_ 20:233-240.
* Grijpma and Ramalho (1969)Gripma, P. and Ramalho, R. 1969. _Tonna spp._, posibles alternativas para el problema del barrenador _Hynsylaja grandella_ des Milaceae en America Latina, _in_ P. Grijpma (ed.). Studies on the shootover _Hynsylaja grandella_ (Zeller) Lep. Pyralidae. _Turrialba_ 19:531-547.
* Mala et al. (2000)Mala, B. H. L. N., S., De Paula, J. R., Sant'Anta, J., Da Silva, M. F.,das G. F. Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Costa, M. D. S., Ohashi, O. S., and Silva, J. N. M. 2000. Essential Oils of _Toona_ and _Cedrela_ Species (Milaceae): Taxonomic and Ecological Implications. _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._ 11:629-639.
* Newton et al. (1993)Newton, A. C., Baker, P., Ramnarine, S., Mesen, J. F., and Leakey, R. R. B. 1993. The mahogany shoot bore: Prospects for control. _Forest Ecol. Manag._ 57:301-328.
* Parra (1986)Parra, J. R. P. 1986. Criacao de insets para estudos com pategones, pp. 348-373, _in_ S. B. Alves (ed.). Controle Microbiano de Insetos. Manole, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
* Sanchez et al. (1976)Sanchez, J. C., Holsten, E. H., and Whitmore, J. L. 1976. Compartination de 5 especies de Meliaceae en florenais Sur, Turrialba, 99-70-13, _in_ Whitmore, J. I. (ed.). Studies on the Shootover _Hynsylaja grandella_ (Zeller) Lep. Pyralidae. Vol. III, IJCA. CATIE, Turrialba, Costa Rica. (Miscellaneous Publications No. 101).
* Schabel et al. (1999)Schabel, H., Hile, L., Nair, K. S., and Varma, R. V. 1999. Economic entomology in tropical forest plantations: An update. _J. Trop. For. Sci._ 11:303-315.
* Speglatt (1997)Speglatt, M. R. 1997. Forest pests in the tropics: Current status and future threats, pp. 207-227, _in_ A. D. Watt, N. E. Stork, and M. D. Hunter (eds.). Forest and Insects. Chapman & Hall, London.
* Whitmore (1976)Whitmore, J. L. 1976. Studies on the Shootborer _Hynsylaja grandella_ (Zeller) Lep. Pyralidae. Vol. II, IJCA. CATIE, Turrialba, Costa Rica. (Miscellaneous Publications No. 101).
* Zeller (1848)Zeller, P. C. 1848. Exotiche Phyvelden. _Iss van Oken_ 41:857-890.



