# 10.1080@14786410412331271979.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

## Page 3



[

\(\dagger\)Instituto de Quimica - UNESP, Araraquara, C.P. 355, 14800-900

\(\ddagger\)Escola Paulista de Medicina - UNIFESP, C.P. 20204

\(\lx@sectionsign\)Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas - UNESP, Araraquara, C.P. 502, 14801-902

\(\lx@sectionsign\)Secao de Fisiologia e Bioquimica de Plantas - Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, C.P. 4005, 01061-970, Brazil

###### Abstract

An ethanolic extract from the stems of _Styracacemorum_ Pohl (Styracaceae), a plant traditionally used for gastrointestinal diseases, was fractionated and subjected to flash chromatography and afforded two benzofuran lignans, egonol and homoegonol, and one furofuran lignan, (\(\pm\))springarensol, which were identified by spectral data interpretation. Their cytotoxic activities against Hep-2 (larynx epidermoid carcinoma), HeLa (human cervix carcinoma) and C6 (rat glioma) cell lines were evaluated using the MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide) assay at several concentrations for 24 h. Activities could be observed for egonol against C6 (IC50 = 3.2 mg/mL) and Hep-2 (IC50 = 3.6 mg/mL) cell lines, and for homoegonol against C6 (IC50 = 4.9 mg/mL) and HeLa (IC50 = 5.3 mg/mL) cells.

Styracacene; Cytotoxic lignans; MTT assay]Cytotoxic lignans from the stems of

_Styrax camporum_ (Styracaceae)

HELDER L. TELES\(\dagger\), JEFFERSON P. HEMERLY\(\ddagger\), PATRICIA M. PAULETTI\(\dagger\), JOSE R.C. PANDOLFIS, ANGELA R. ARAUJO\(\dagger\), SANDRO R. VALENTINIS, M. CLAUDIA M. YOUNG\(\dagger\), VANDERLAN DA S. BOLZANI\(\dagger\) and DULCE H.S. SILVA\(\dagger\)*

## 1 Introduction

_Styrax camporum_ Pohl (Styracaceae), known in Brazil as "estoraque do campo" or "cuia de brejo", grows in the States of Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais and is popularly used in gastrointestinal diseases [1]. Its reported uses have led to a study of the composition and antiulcer activity of the crude extract of the bark and the trunk [2]. Previous phytochemical investigation of the bark of _S. camporum_ has resulted in the isolation of homoegonol, benzyl benzoate, benzyl salicylate, sitosterol, vanillin and esters of cinnamic and ferulic acids [3]. The present article deals with the isolation from stems of _S. camporum_, and the identification and cytotoxicity evaluation of two benzofuran lignans, egonol (**1**) and homoegonol (**2**), and one furofuran lignan, (\(\pm\))springaresinol (**3**),

## Page 4

originally isolated from _Styrax obassia_[4, 5] and _Forsythia intermedia_[6], respectively. Lignans are known to possess several biological activities [7-11], including antitumor, e.g., some podophyllotoxin derivatives, currently in clinical use, and cytotoxic, e.g., the benzofuran lignan licarin A which is active against KB cells. In order to evaluate the cytotoxicity of compounds **1-3** against C6, Hep-2 and HeLa human carcinoma cells, the MTT spectrophotometric assay was used.

## 2 Experimental

### Plant material

The stems of _S. camporum_ Pohl were collected in Campininha Farm, Mogi-Guacu, SP, Brazil, by M.C.M. Young in November 1995. A voucher specimen (Young 07 - SP) has been deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### General experimental procedures

Optical activities were measured on a Polamat A (Carl Zeiss) polarimeter. IR spectra were recorded on Perkin-Elmer 1710 spectrometer. 1H, 13C-NMR, DEPT and COSY spectra were recorded in CDCl3 or DMSO-D6 using TMS as internal standard on a Bruker AC 200 or Varian Unity 400 NMR instrument. Electrospray mass spectra were obtained at 70 eV on a VG Platform II and EIMS, on a VG 70 E-HF instrument. CC was performed over silica gel 60, 70-230 or 230-400 mesh or Sephadex LH-20 (Merck). TLC analysis was carried out on silica gel 60 F254 plates with detection provided by UV light (254 and 366 nm) and/or by spraying with 2% anisaldehyde-sulfuric acid reagent followed by heating.

### Extraction and isolation

The dried and powdered stems of _S. camporum_ (470.0 g) were extracted with a 2 : 1 v/v mixture of CH2Cl2/MeOH. The extract was evaporated under reduced pressure and the residue (57.2 g) was taken up in aqueous MeOH (MeOH-H2O 80 : 20; 200 mL) and subsequently extracted with hexane. Sufficient water was added to the aqueous methanol fraction to make it up to 60% aqueous MeOH, which was extracted with CHCl3 followed by EtOAc. The CHCl3 fraction (3.8 g) was loaded onto a column packed with silica gel 60 and eluted with hexane-EtOAc 1 : 1 v/v (A), CHCl3 (B), EtOAc (C), CHCl3-CH3OH 1 : 1 v/v (D), MeOH (E) and H2O (F) (300 mL each). After evaporation, fraction A (370 mg) was subjected to flash chromatography on silica gel eluted with CHCl3-MeOH (98 : 2) and 62 fractions (15 mL each) were collected. Combined fraction 6-15 afforded **1** (34.3 mg, CHCl3-MeOH 96 : 4, Rf 0.26) and the combined fraction 17-18 afforded **2** (11.7 mg, CHCl3-MeOH 96 : 4, Rf 0.50). Fraction C (630 mg) was subjected to column chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 eluted with MeOH and 19 fractions (10 mL each) were collected. Combined fractions 2-7 (363 mg) were rechromatographed on Sephadex LH-20 eluted with MeOH and 52 fractions (3 mL each) were collected. Purification of the combined fractions 31-41 (98 mg) by prep. TLC (eluent CHCl3-MeOH 92 : 8) yielded **3** (5.1 mg, CHCl3-MeOH

## Page 5

85 : 15, Rf 0.61). All known compounds were identified with the help of UV, IR, MS and NMR, including COSY, DEPT, HMQC and HMBC experiments.

### Cytotoxicity assay

Cellular viability in the presence and absence of test compounds was determined using the standard MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide; Sigma, Dorset, U.K.) microculture assay [12]. A mitochondrial dehydrogenase reduces MTT to a blue formazan product with an absorbance at 560 nm in DMSO. Cells harvested in the log phase of the growth were counted and seeded (5 x 104 cells/well in 1 mL) in 48-well microtiter plates. After 24 h of incubation at 37degC under 4.3% CO2 to allow cell attachment, cultures of the Hep-2 (larynx epidermoid carcinoma), HeLa (human cervix carcinoma) and C6 (rat glioma) cell lines were treated with several test compound concentrations. Three replicate wells were set up for each experimental condition. After another 24 h incubation period, MTT (100 mL of a 5 mg/mL solution) was added, the plate was incubated for 3 h and unreduced MTT was removed. Acid isopropanol (HCl 0.3%; 100 mL) was added to dissolve the blue formazan. The absorbance at 560 nm was read by using a Pharmacia LKB-Ultrospec III spectrophotometer. The IC50 value was defined as the concentration of test compound 

## Page 6

resulting in a 50% reduction of absorbance compared to untreated cells in the MTT assay. Absorbances taken from cells grown in the absence of drugs were taken as 100% cell survival (control). For each compound the percent viability was plotted against concentration and the IC50 (concentration required to reduce viability by 50%) values were calculated for the three cell lines. This experiment was also performed with a positive control anticancer agent: streptonigrin.

## 3 Results and discussion

The isolated lignans: egonol, homoegonol and (+-) syringaresinol were evaluated for their cytotoxicities by the MTT method in the three cell lines: Hep-2 (larynx epidermoid carcinoma), HeLa (human cervix carcinoma) and C6 (rat glioma). Each compound was tested at five different concentrations. The concentration-response curves thus generated were used to calculate the IC50 (table 1).

The cytotoxic activity was expressed in terms of relative absorbance of drug-treated cells, in comparison to control cells. The results show a dose-dependent cytotoxic effect relationship for all the lignans and all the cell lines evaluated. Significant activities (IC50 < 10 mg/mL) could be observed for egonol against C6 and Hep-2 cell lines and for homoegonol against C6 and HeLa cells, when compared to the positive control streptonigrin activity (table 1). The activity of egonol against HeLa cells, homoegonol against Hep-2 cells as well as the activity of syringaresinol, the only furofuran neolignan under investigation in this study towards the three cell lines were moderate. It is interesting to note the significant differences of activity related to the lignan structure.

## Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge FAPESP (Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo) and CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico - Brazil) for financial support of this work, and fellowships to H.L.T., J.P.H., P.M.P. and J.R.C.P.

## References

* Manual de identificacao e cultivo de plantas arboreas nativas do Brasil_, Vol. 1, p. 332, Instituto Plantarum de Estudos da Flora, Sao Paulo (1982).
* [2] E.M. Bacchi, J.A.A. Sertie, N. Villa, H. Katz, _Planta Med._, **61**, 204 (1995).



## Page 7

* [3] A.M. Giesbrecht, M.A.D. Alvarenga, J.J. Silva, S. Panizza, _Anais de Farmacia e Quimica_, **25**, 55 (1985).
* [4] M. Takanashi, Y. Takigawa, _Plytochemistry_, **27**, 1224 (1988).
* [5] H. Anil, _Plytochemistry_, **19**, 2784 (1980).
* [6] M.M.A. Rahman, P.M. Dewick, D.E. Jackson, J.A. Lucas, _Plytochemistry_, **29**, 1841 (1990).
* [7] W.D. MacRae, G.H.N. Towers, _Plytochemistry_, **23**, 1207 (1984).
* [8] N.G. Lewis, M.J. Kato, N.P. Lopes, L.B. Davin, Lignans: diversity, biosynthesis and function. In: _Chemistry of the Amazon_, P.R. Seidl, O.R. Gottlieb, M.A.C. Kaplan (Eds), Symposium Series Vol. 588, pp. 135-167, American Chemical Society Books, Washington, DC (1995).
* [9] C.F. Brewer, J.D. Loike, S.B. Horowitz, H. Sternlicht, W.J. Gensler, _J. Med. Chem._, **22**, 215 (1979).
* [10] J.D. Loike, C.F. Brewer, H. Sternlicht, W.J. Gensler, S.B. Horowitz, _Cancer Res._, **38**, 2688 (1978).
* [11] M. Yoshida, Biologically active neolignans from Amazonian trees. In _Chemistry of the Amazon_, P.R. Seidl, O.R. Gottlieb, M.A.C. Kaplan (Eds), Symposium Series Vol. 588, pp. 85-92, American Chemical Society Books, Washington, DC (1995).
* [12] M. Ferrari, M.C. Fornasiero, A.M. Isetta, _J. Immunol. Methods_, **131**, 165 (1990).



