# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2005.05.019.pdf

## Page 1



# Alkaloids from _Spathelia excelsa_: Their chemosystematic significance

M. da Paz Lima

Lisandra Vieira Rosas

M. Fatima das G.F. da Silva

A. Gilberto Ferreira

Joao B. Fernandes

Paulo C. Vieira

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil dmfs@power.ufscar.br

Received 18 January 2005; received in revised form 2 May 2005

###### Abstract

The methanol extract from the leaves of _Spathelia excelsa_ yielded six alkaloids: 2-(12-oxo-tridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone, 2-(10-hydroxy-10-methyldodecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone, 2-(11-hydroxy-11-methyldodecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone, 2-(12-hydroxytridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone, 7-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl)-4-quinolone and 6-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl)-4-quinolone, in addition to the known 3-O-b-d-glucopiranosylistosterol and (\(-\))-epicatechin. The 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones in _S. excelsa_ display strong similarities with those in Dictyolomatoideae, which contains several 2-alkyl-4-quinolones. The data reported herein thus provide firm support for placing Spatheliodeae close to or within the Dictyolomatoideae.

Rutaceae; _Spathelia excelsa_; 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones; Chemosystematic

## 1 Introduction

The placement of the genera _Spathelia_ L. and _Dictyoloma_ Juss. has been doubtful since they were first described in Linnaeus (1762) and in de Jussieu (1825), who assigned them to the Rutaceae. According to Bentham and Hooker (1862), _Spathelia_ and _Dictyoloma_ belong to the order Simaroubaceae. Engler (1874) initially included these genera in the Simaroubaceae, but later moved them to the Rutaceae, placing _Spathelia_ in the subfamily Spatheliodeae and _Dictyoloma_ in Dictyolomatoideae (von Engler, 1931).

In this paper, the isolation and identification of six 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones from the leaves of previously uninvestigated _Spathelia excelsa_ (K. Krause) Cowan and Brizicky (1960) (syn. _Sohnrevia_ K. Krause) are described. Their chemosystematic significance is discussed in order to clarify the relationships between _Spathelia_ and _Dictyoloma_.

## 2 Results and discussion

The methanol extract from _S. excelsa_ leaves yielded six new alkaloids **1-6**, as well as the known 3-_O-b-_glucopiranosylistosterol_ (Tandon et al., 1990) and (\(-\))-epicatechin (Agrawal, 1989).

Compound **1** showed UV absorption maxima at 242, 247, 324 and 335 nm, which is characteristic of a 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone (Tang et al., 1996). An elemental analysis and ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula C23H33NO3. The IR spectrum showed a weak a,b-unsaturated carbonyl band at 1632 cm-1, which can be explained by a partially enolized carbonyl group. In addition to signals typical of 4(1_H_)-quinolone with an unsubstituted A ring (four aromatic protons at \(\delta\) 8.40, _brd_, \(J=7.5\) Hz; 7.28, _brt_, \(J=7.5\) Hz; 7.54, _brt_, \(J=7.5\) Hz; 7.73, \(d\), \(J=7.5\) Hz), the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) revealed a singlet at \(\delta\) 11.12 for N-H, a singlet

## Page 2

at \(\delta\) 3.92 corresponding to one methoxyl group and a methyl singlet at \(\delta\) 2.14. The spectrum did not show the signal for the conjugated olefinic proton ca.\(\delta\) 6.22 (H-3), thus locating the methoxyl group at C-3. Based on the HMBC experiments (Table 2), the correlation observed between the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 8.40 and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 172.8, 131.1 (CH) and 138.6 led to their assignment as H-5, C-4, C-7 and C-8a, respectively.

The latter resonance was coupled to the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 7.28, which showed cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 125.8 and 117.9, thus allowing these signals to be assigned to H-6, C-4a and C-8. The \({}^{1}\)H signals for H-5 and H-6 at \(\delta\) 8.40 and 7.28 showed one bond correlations with the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 125.5 and 122.8, respectively. The H-7 signal was assigned to \(\delta\) 7.54 by correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C signal of C-8a (\(\delta\) 138.6). The remaining aromatic signal at \(\delta\) 7.73 was then attributed to H-8. This led to the formulation of **1** as a 3-methoxy-4(1_H_)-quinolone (C\({}_{10}\)H\({}_{8}\)NO\({}_{2}\)). The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 3) revealed resonances for an aliphatic chain of thirteen carbon atoms containing a carbonyl group (\(\delta\) 210.0). From the HMBC experiments (Table 2), the correlation found between the methyl proton at \(\delta\) 2.14 (\(\delta_{C}\) 30.0) and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 210.0 and 43.8 (CH2 by DEPT 135) led them to be assigned as H\({}_{3}\)-13, C-12 and C-11, respectively, indicating that the carbonyl must be vicinal to C-13. The signals for H\({}_{2}\)-11 and H\({}_{2}\)-10 were established as \(\delta\) 2.43 (\(t\), \(J=7.3\) Hz) and 1.54 \(m\), respectively, due to their correlation with the \({}^{13}\)C resonance for C-12 (\(\delta\) 210.0). Moreover, the correlation between the H\({}_{2}\)-11 signal and the \({}^{13}\)C resonance at \(\delta\) 23.7 showed that \(\delta\) 23.7 could be attributed to C-10 (\({}^{2}J\))

## Page 3

allowed C-10 to be assigned to \(\delta\) 23.7. Unambiguous \({}^{13}\)C NMR assignments were also made to C-1 to C-3 and C-9 to C-11 based on COSY and HSQC experiments. However, the signals at \(\delta\) 29.1-29.5 for five methylenes (C-4-C-8) were not unequivocal; hence, it is possible they may be reassigned. The mass spectrum showed a fragment at \(m/z\) 175 (100%) due to fission of the side-chain between C-2 and C-1, resulting in a stable odd-electron ion [C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{33}\)NO\({}_{3}\) + H \(-\) C\({}_{13}\)H\({}_{25}\)O\({}^{\dagger}\), 3-methyloxy-4(1_H_)-quinolone. The downfield signal at \(\delta\) 2.84 (\(t\), \(J\) = 7.6 Hz; \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 29.9) from the methylene H\({}_{2}\)-1 was consistent with it is allylic connected in the 4(1_H_)-quinolone system. The methoxyl proton at \(\delta\) 3.92 showed a cross-peak with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 140.2, and was therefore assigned to C-3. Moreover, a correlation between the methylene signal at \(\delta\) 2.84 assigned to H\({}_{2}\)-1 and the \({}^{13}\)C resonance at \(\delta\) 140.2 and 147.8 confirmed the presence of a methylene substituent at C-2, allowing for the assignment of the latter \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 147.8 to C-2. The new alkaloid was therefore identified as 2-(12-oxo-tridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**1**). The structural assignment was also supported by comparing the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum with that of 2-(12-hydroxy-12-methyltridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**7**), which was isolated for the first time from _Dictyoloma candellium_ (Sartor et al., 2003). HMBC experiments on **1** led to a minor correction previously made in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR assignments for **7**; in the latter, the \({}^{13}\)C signals of C-2 and C-3 had to be exchanged.

The remaining compounds **2**-**6** gave rise to UV and IR spectra, indicating the presence of a 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone nucleus. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra of **2**-**4** clearly indicated A and B rings similar to **1**. The HSQC and HMBC experiments on **2**-**4** permitted the assignment of all hydrogen and carbon atoms of the 3-methoxy-4(1_H_)-quinolone system (Tables 2 and 3). In compound **2**, elemental analysis indicated the molecular formula C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{35}\)NO\({}_{3}\), requiring the presence of an aliphatic chain of thirteen carbon atoms when compared with **1**. Hydroxyl, methyl and ethyl groups must be connected to the same carbon in the side-chain due to the observed signals for a hydroxytertiary carbon at \(\delta\) 73.1, a methyl singlet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 1.12, a methyl triplet at \(\delta\) 0.87 (\(J\) = 7.4 Hz) and a methylene quartet at \(\delta\) 1.45 (\(J\) = 7.4 Hz) in the \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 3). The methyl signal at \(\delta\) 0.87 showed cross-peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C resonances at \(\delta\) 73.1 and 34.3 (CH\({}_{2}\), DEPT). The methyl signal at \(\delta\) 1.12 showed a long-range correlation with two methylene resonances at \(\delta\) 34.3 and 41.1. These correlations indicated the presence of a structural unit, -CH\({}_{2}\)-C(CH\({}_{3}\))(OH)-CH\({}_{2}\)-CH\({}_{3}\), at the end of the side-chain. The signals at \(\delta\) 41.1 (\(\delta\) 1.37 \(m\), by HSQC), 73.1 and 34.3 (\(\delta\) 1.45 \(q\), by HSQC) were then assigned to C-9, C-10 and C-11, respectively. The correlation observed between the signals for H\({}_{2}\)-11 and H\({}_{2}\)-9 and the \({}^{13}\)C res

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} C & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & **5** & **6** & **7** \\
2 & 147.8 & 147.7 & 148.1 & 146.4 & 156.9 & 153.1 & 146.2A \\
3 & 140.2 & 140.3 & 140.2 & 140.2 & 105.1 & 105.7 & 138.4A \\
4 & 172.8 & 172.7 & 172.7 & 172.9 & 170.9 & 176.2 & 173.2 \\
4a & 125.8 & 125.8 & 125.8 & 125.8 & 122.8 & 125.9 & 125.9 \\
5 & 125.5 & 125.2 &

## Page 4

onances at \(d\) 8.3 and 26.4, respectively, led to their assignment to Me-12 and Me-13. The slightly negative \(g\) effect of the hydroxy group permitted the assignment of C-8 at \(d\) 23.6. The ESI-mass spectrum showed ions at _m/z_ 356 [C23H33N03 + H - H2O]+ and _m/z_ 342 [C23H35NO3 + H - OH - Me]+, confirming the presence of a 10-hydroxy-10-methyldodecanyl chain. Thus, the structure of the new alkaloid was characterized as 2-(10-hydroxy-10-methyldodecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**2**).

Compound **3** displayed a similar NMR spectrum to that of 2-(12-hydroxy-12-methyltridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**7**) (Sartor et al., 2003). The HSQC and HMBC experiments on **3** allowed for the assignment of all the hydrogen and carbon atoms. Elemental analysis and ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula C23H35NO3, confirming that **3** differed from **7** (C24H37NO3) only by removal of one CH2 group in the side-chain. Moreover, a correlation between the methylene signal at \(d\) 2.84 assigned to H2-1, and the 13C resonances at \(d\) 140.2 and 148.1 permitted the assignment of the latter 13C signal at \(d\) 148.1 to C-2. These correlations for a homolog skeleton (**3**) confirm that in **7** the 13C signals for C-2 and C-3 must be interchanged. The complete assignments of chemical shifts for all carbons are given in Table 3. Compounds **1**, **2**, and **7** were used as models. The structure of **3** was thus elucidated as 2-(11-hydroxy-11-methyldodecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone.

The 13C NMR spectrum of **4** (Table 3) revealed resonances for an aliphatic chain of thirteen carbon atoms containing a hydroxyl group (_d_C 68.3). Moreover, the 1H NMR spectrum showed an oxymethine proton at \(d\) 3.80 (_sext, J_ = 6.2 Hz), which was coupled to the methyl doublet at \(d\) 1.19 (_J_ = 6.2), indicating the hydroxyl group was located vicinal to C-13 and an unbranched side-chain. HMBC experiments showed correlations of the signal of H3-13 with the resonance of C-12 (_d_ 68.3) and the 13C signal at 39.3 (CH2 by DEPT), leading to its assignment to C-11. The oxymethine proton at \(d\) 3.80 showed cross peaks with the 13C signal at \(d\) 25.7 (CH2 by DEPT), which was then assigned to C-10. From ESI-MS the ion observed at _m/z_ 356 [C23H35NO3 + H - H2O]+ confirmed the hydroxyl group in the side-chain. These data were consistent with the structure of 2-(12-hydroxytridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**4**).

Compound **5**, C14H17NO3 (EA), exhibited signals typical of a 4-quinolone with a substituted A-ring. The 1H NMR spectrum revealed the presence of three aromatic protons (_d_H 7.90, \(d\), \(J\) = 9.0 Hz; 7.43, _dd_, \(J\) = 9.0 and 2.5 Hz; 7.47, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.5 Hz). From HMBC experiments, the correlation observed between the 1H signal at \(d\) 7.90 and the 13C resonance at \(d\) 170.9 (3_J_) led to their assignment as H-5 and C-4, respectively, indicating the hydroxyl group is located at C-7 and permitting the assignments of the signals at \(d\) 7.43 and 7.47 to H-6 and H-8, respectively. The HSQC experiments allowed for the assignments of all CH atoms of the 4(_1H_)-quinolone system (Table 3). Moreover, the correlation between the 1H signal at \(d\) 6.68 (_d_d_C 105.1 by HSQC), assigned to H-3, and the 13C resonances at \(d\) 28.9 (CH2 by DEPET) and 156.9 suggested a methylene substituent at C-2 and led to the assignment of the former 13C signal at \(d\) 28.9 to C-1 and the latter \(d\) 156.9 to C-2. The signals for C-4a and C-8a were established as \(d\) 122.8 and 133.8, respectively, due to correlations of the first 13C resonance \(d\) 122.8 and the 1H signals for H-5 and H-3 and the second \(d\) 133.8 with the 1H signal for H-5. The methylene signal at \(d\) 2.91 (_t_, \(J\) = 8.3; _d_C 28.9), assigned to H2-1, showed a long-range correlation with the 13C resonances at \(d\) 42.8 (CH2 by DEPET) and 68.9, which were attributed to C-2 and C-3, respectively, suggesting the presence of a hydroxyteriary carbon for C-3. Thus, hydroxyl and two methyl groups must be connected at C-3 due to the signals for two methyl singlets at _d_H 1.17 (_s_, 6H, d_C 29.5) in the 1H NMR spectrum. The ESI-mass spectrum showed ions at _m/z_ 230[C14H17NO3 + H - H2O]+ and _m/z_ 174 [C14H17NO3 - C4H9O]+, confirming the presence of an 3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl chain. The structure of the new alkaloid was therefore characterized as 7-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl)-4-quinolone (**5**).

Compound **6** exhibited a similar NMR spectrum to that of **5** (Tables 1 and 3). In addition to the signal described for the side-chain of **5**, the 1H NMR spectrum revealed the presence of three aromatic protons (_d_H 7.37, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.7 Hz; 7.12, _dd_, \(J\) = 8.8 and 2.7 Hz; 7.43, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.8 Hz). From HMBC experiments, the correlation observed between the 1H signal at \(d\) 7.37 and the 13C resonance at \(d\) 176.2 (3_J_) led to their assignment as H-5 and C-4, respectively, indicating that the hydroxyl group is located at C-6 and allowing for the signals at \(d\) 7.12 and 7.43 to be assigned to H-7 and H-8, respectively. The HSQC and HMBC experiments on **6** permitted the assignment of all the hydrogen and carbon atoms (Tables 1 and 3). The ESI-mass spectrum also showed ions at _m/z_ 230 [C14H17NO3 + H - H2O]+ and at _m/z_ 174 [C14H17NO3 - C4H9O]+, confirming that **6** differed from **5** only by the position of the hydroxyl group in the A ring. The structure of **6** was thus defined as 6-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl)-4-quinolone.

_Spathelia_ and _Dictyoloma_ are known to contain 2-quinolone alkaloids, prenylated chromones and limonoids (Burke et al., 1972; Mester, 1983; Gray, 1983; Diaz et al., 1983; Suwanborirux et al., 1987; Vieira et al., 1988, 1990; Campos et al., 1987; Sartor et al., 2003). However, prenylated chromones have only been reported from the genera _Spathelia, Dictyoloma_ and _Harrisonia_, as well as from the Cheoraceae, and Ptaerexolaceae (Gray, 1983). _Harrisonia_ is a member of the Simaroubaceae, although it differs from other genera 

## Page 5

by its lack of quasinoids. Its limonoid constituents suggest a strong affinity with rutaceous genera such as _Spathelia_ (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987). Chromones have not been found in other Simaroubaceae or Rutaceae. Thus, according to Waterman (1983), the co-occurrence of chromosomes in these taxa is phylogenetically significant by segregating them into a distinct group near the associated large family Rutaceae. Analysis of DNA sequence data from members of the Cheoraceae, Meliaceae, Ptaeroxylaceae, Rutaceae, and Simaroubaceae showed that the Rutaceae are paraphyletic, with _Spathelia_ and _Dictyoloma_ (Rutaceae), _Harrisonia_ (Simaroubaceae), _Cneorum_ (Cneoraceae), and _Ptaeroxylon_ (Ptaeroxylaceae) forming a clade sister to all other Rutaceae. Circumscription of Rutaceae to include all of these taxa was recommended (Chase et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2000). This analysis also indicated that the Simaroubaceae and Meliaceae are the outgroups closest to Rutaceae (Chase et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2000). The 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone alkaloids that have recently been isolated from _Dictyoloma randelliamm_ showed strong similarities to the Zanthoxyleae, which contain several 2-alkyl-4-quinolones. These data strongly supported Chase and Scott's taxonomic conclusions (1999, 2000) and permitted Sartor et al. (2003) to include Dictyolomatoideae in Waterman's phylogenetic diagram (1983) in a position between the proto-Rutaceae genera and the Spathelioideae, but close to the Zanthoxyleae (Sartor et al., 2003). These taxa, as separated small figures (an expression of the number of species in the taxon), occupy a position between the advanced Rutaceae and Simaroubaceae (Fig. 1). Now, the finding of 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones in _Spathelia excelsa_ shows strong similarities with Zanthoxyleae [_Platydesma_ and _Terradium_ (_T.__r__uticarpum_ = _Euodia rutaecarpa_)], Ruteae (_Haplophyllum_ and _Ruta_), Boroniae (_Boronia_), Cuspariae (_Raulinoa_), Toddalieae (_A__caronychia, Verpris_ and _Ptelea_) and Dictyolomatoideae (_Dictyoloma vandelliamm_), which contain several 2-alkyl-4-quinolones (Mester, 1983; Biavatti et al., 2002; Sartor et al., 2003). Thus, these data provide firm support for moving Spathelioidae close to or within the Dictyolomatoideae (Fig. 1).

## Experimental

### General

NMR: Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as internal standard; low resolution ESI-MSMS: Micromass Quattro LC instrument, equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source; IR: Bomen-Ft/IR; UV: Perkin-Elmer; Elemental analyses: on a EA 1108, CHNS-O (Fisons); [_a_]D: Perkin-Elmer 241 instrument.

### Plant material

_Spathelia excelsa_ was collected in the Forest Reserve Adolpho Ducke, Amazonas, Brazil, and identified by J.R. Pirani (Universidade de Sao Paulo). A voucher specimen (4227) is deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisa da Amazonia (INPA), Manaus, AM.

### Isolation of compounds

Ground leaves (2940 g) were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH. The concentrated MeOH extract was subjected to CC over silica gel. Elution with hexane, followed by a CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient, yielded 16 frs. Fr. 14 was applied to silica gel, CC eluted with a CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient to afford additional frs (Fr.14A-C). Fr. 14A was subjected to further Si gel CC eluted with gel, CH2Cl2, CH2Cl2-MeOH 1:1, MeOH, and then Si gel CC using CH2Cl2-EtOAc as eluent to give additional frs. Fr. 14A.5 was reapplied to silanized silica (EtOAc), yielding a new fr. containing **1**, with the latter purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, CH2Cl2-EtOAc, 6:4) to give **1** (10 mg). Fr. 14A.6 was subjected to flash chromatography on silica gel eluted with a CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient to afford **2** (14 mg), **3** (26 mg) and **4** (3 mg), respectively. Fr. 14B was applied to successive Si gel CC (eluant, CH2Cl2, CH2Cl2-MeOH 1:1, MeOH and then again on silica gel, CH2Cl2-EtOAc gradient) to give 3-O-b-p-glucopyranosylstoterol (8 mg). Fr. 14C was also subjected to successive Si gel CC (Florisil), eluted with a CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient, and then silica gel, using CH2Cl2-

Fig. 1: Waterman’s phylogenetic diagram of the Rutales, based on the distribution of secondary metabolites, is modified to remove the Spathelioideae subfamily, shifting it to close to the Dictyolomatoideae. A, Auranioideae; Ba, Balsamocritrinae; Bo, Boernoïae; Ci, Citrinae; Cl, Clausenine; Cn, Cheoraceae, Cu,Cusparaee; Di, Diosmeae; FI, Findersiideae; Ha, _Harrisonia_ (Simaroubaceae); Me, Meliaceae; Mi, Micromelinae; prR, proto-Rutaceae genera; Pt, Ptaeroxylaceae; Rt, Rutinae; Ru, Ruttoideae; Si, Simaroubaceae; Sp, Spathelioideae; To-1, (coumarin containing) Toddalioideae; To-2, (acridone containing) Toddalioideae; To-2, (acridone containing) Toddalioideae; Tr, Tribushaïase; Za, Zanthoxyleae (Waterman, 1983); Dy, Dictyolomatoideae (Sartor et al., 2003). (•) Distribution of chromosomes, (•) Distribution of 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones

## Page 6

EtOAc as a gradient to yield (\(-\))-epicatechin (7 mg), **5** (5 mg) and **6** (26 mg).

#### 3.3.1 2-(12-Oxo-ridecamyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (1)

White gum; UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (MeOH) nm (\(e\)): 242, 247, 324, 335; IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): 1705, a weak carbonyl band at 1632 cm\({}^{-1}\) can be explained by the carbonyl group being present in partially enolized form; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), see Table 3; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); HMBC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), see Table 2. EA: Found: C, 74.34; H, 8.92, N, 3.76. Calc. for C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{33}\)NO\({}_{3}\): C, 74.36; H, 8.95; N, 3.77; O, 12.92%; ESI-MSMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 372 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (70), 230 (50), 202 (30), 175 (100).

#### 3.3.2 2-(10-Hydroxy-10-methyldodecamyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (2)

Colorless oil; [\(\alpha\)]D + 5.4\({}^{0}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\); c 0.02); UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (MeOH) nm: 241, 248, 325, 334; IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3326, a weak carbonyl band at 1632 cm\({}^{-1}\) can be explained by the carbonyl group being present in partially enolized form; \({}^{1}\)H NMR 400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\), see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT 100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\), see Table 3; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); HMBC 400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\), see Table 2. EA: Found: C, 73.94; H, 9.45, N, 3.74. Calc. for C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{35}\)NO\({}_{3}\): C, 73.96; H, 9.44; N, 3.75; O, 12.85%; ESI-MSMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 356 [M + H - H\({}_{2}\)O]\({}^{+}\) (20), 342 [M + H - OH - Me]\({}^{+}\) (100), 175 (40).

#### 3.3.3 2-(11-Hydroxy-11-methyldodecamyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (3)

Colorless oil; UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (MeOH) nm: 241, 248, 326, 336; IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3347, a weak carbonyl band at 1660 cm\({}^{-1}\) can be explained by the carbonyl group being present in partially enolized form; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); see Table 3; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); see Table 2. EA: Found: C, 73.95; H, 9.45, N, 3.74. Calc. for C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{35}\)NO\({}_{3}\): C, 73.96; H, 9.44; N, 3.75; O, 12.85%; ESI-MSMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 374 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (90), 356 [M + H - H\({}_{2}\)O]\({}^{+}\) (

## Page 7

Zukerman-Schpector, J.,. Biological activity of quinoline alkaloids from _Raulinoa echinata_ and X-ray structure of flindersiamine. Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society 13, 66-70.
* Burke et al. (1972) Burke, B.A., Chan, W.R., Taylor, D.R., 1972. The structure and stereochemistry of spathelin, a new see-oring A tetramortriterpene from _Spathelin sorifolia_. Tetrahedron 28, 425-430.
* Campos et al. (1987) Campos, A.M., Doklache, D., Fetizon, M., 1987. Chromomes from _Dictyoloma incanescens_. Phytochemistry 26, 2819-2823.
* Chase et al. (1999) Chase, M.W., Morton, C.M., Kallunik, J.A., 1999. Phylogenetic relationships of Rutaceae: a cladistic analysis of the subfamilies using evidence from rbcL and atpB sequence variation. American Journal of Botany 86, 1191-1199.
* Cowan and Brizicky (1960) Cowan, R.S., Brizicky, G.K., 1960. Taxonomic relationships of Diomma Engler ex Harms. Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden 10 (2), 58-64.
* Diaz et al. (1983) Diaz, M., Preiss, A., Meyer, H., Ripperger, H., 1983. 5-Methoxy-2,2,8-trimethyl-10-8eneicyl-2H,6H-benzo(1,2-b5,4-b')dipropan-6-one from _Spathelin sorifolia_. Phytochemistry 22, 2090-2092.
* Engler (1874) Engler, A., 1874. In: Martius, C.F.P., Eichler, A.G. (Eds.), Flora Brasiliensis, vol. 2. R. Oldenbourg, Munich & Leipzig, pp. 76-194.
* von Engler (1931) von Engler, A., 1931, second ed.. In: von Engler, A., Prantl, K. (Eds.), Die Natarlichen Pflanzenfamilien, vol. 19a Engelmann, Leipzig, pp. 187-456.
* Gray (1983) Gray, A.I., 1983. Structural diversity and distribution of coumarins and chromones in the Rutales. In: Waterman, P.G., Grundon, M.F. (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales. Academic Press, London, pp. 97-146.
* de Jussieu (1825) de Jussieu, A.H.L., 1825. Memoire sur le groupe des Rutacees. Memoires du Musee National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
* Linnaeus (1762) Linnaeus, C., 1762. Species Plantum, vol. 1, second ed. Stokholm, Holmaie, Laurenti Saluvii, p. 386.
* Mester (1983) Mester, I., 1983. Structural diversity and distribution of alkaloids in the Rutales. In: Waterman, P.G., Grundon, M.F. (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales. Academic Press, London, pp. 31-96.
* Sartor et al. (2003) Sartor, C.F.P., Silva, M.F. das G.F. da, Fernandes, J.B., Vieira, P.C., Rodrigues Fo, E., Cortez, D.A.G., 2003. Alkaloids from _Dictyoloma vandellianum_: their chemosystematic significance. Phytochemistry 63, 185-192.
* Scott et al. (2000) Scott, K.D., McIntyre, C.L., Playford, J., 2000. Molecular analyses suggest a need for a significant rearrangement of Rutaceae subfamilies and a minor reassessment of species relationships within FINDersia. Plant Systematics and Evolution 223, 15-27.
* da Silva et al. (1984) da Silva, M.F. das G.F., Gottlieb, O.R., Dreyer, D.L., 1984. Evolution of limonoids in the Meliaceae. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 12, 299-310.
* da Silva et al. (1987) da Silva, M.F.dasG.F., Gottlieb, O.R., 1987. Evolution of quassinoids and limonoids in the Rutales. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 15, 85-103.
* Suwanborriux et al. (1987) Suwanborriux, K., Chang, C., Cassady, J.M., 1987. Novel chromosomes from _Spathelia sorifolia_. Journal of Natural Products 50, 102-107.
* Tandon et al. (1990) Tandon, M., Shukla, Y.N., Thakur, R.S., 1990. Steroid glycosides from _Asparagus adscendens_. Phytochemistry 29, 2957-2959.
* Tang et al. (1996) Tang, Y.-Q., Feng, X.-Z., Huang, L., 1996. Quinolone alkaloids from _Evoldia rutacearpa_. Phytochemistry 43, 719-722.
* Vieira et al. (1988) Vieira, P.C., Lazaro, A.R., Fernandes, J.B., Silva, M.F. das G.F. da, 1988. The chemosystematics of _Dictyoloma_. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 16, 541-544.
* Vieira et al. (1990) Vieira, P.C., Lazaro, A.R., Fernandes, J.B., Silva, M.F. das G.F. da, 1990. Limonoids, alkaloids and chromomes from _Dictyoloma vandellianum_, and their chemosystematic significance. Quimica Nova 13, 287-288.
* Waterman (1983) Waterman, P.G., 1983. Phylogenetic implications of the distribution of secondary metabolites within the Rutales. In: Waterman, P.G., Grundon, M.F. (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales. Academic Press, London, pp. 377-400.



