# 10.1016@0031-9422(74)80252-9.pdf

## Page 1



# Macrophyllin, a Neolignan from _Licaria Macrophyllats_

Nidia Cavalcanti Franca and Otto Richard Gottlieb

Laboratorno de Produtos Naturais da Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brasil Jose Guilherme Soares Maia

Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazona, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, Brasil

###### Abstract

The trunk wood of _Lacara macrophylla_ (A C Smith) Kosterm (Lauraceae) contains, in addition to stostored, terpene (borneol) and sesquiterpene (nerolold, elemol) alcohols, a novel neolignan, macrophyllin, for which the structure of 3-allyl-8-hydroxy-1,5-dimethoxy-7-methyl-4(or 2)-oxo-6-(3',4'-methylenedioxy-5'-methoxy-phenyl)-bicyclo [3,2,1] oct-2(or 4)-ene is proposed

_Licaria macrophylla_ (A. C. Smith) Kosterm. is a tree whch grows in the Amazon region. The trunk wood yielded borneol, nerolidol, elemol, stosterol and a new compound, C22H26O7, designated macrophylln. Functional analysis, warranting expansion of the formula to C18H14O.OH(OMe)3.O2CH2, suggested this to be a bis-C6.C3-derivative. One of the C6.C3-moieties must have structure **1**, since the MS indicates cleavage of the molecular ion into a fragment, _m/e_ 192 (80%), which, in analogy with the predominant fragment ions of related _bis_-C6.C3-compounds, such as guanilin (**2**),7 caullin-A (**3**)1 and canellin-C (**4**),1 must be represented by **5**. The PMR spectrum contains all the required proton signals and shows that the two aromatic protons are _meta_ related. It isogenetically improbable that they are situated at the alternative _meta_-positions, because this would require the C3-side chain to occupy the _para_-position to an unoxygenated carbon.

The structure of the additional C9-moiety can be deduced from the remaining PMR signals. These reveal the existence of the three C3-sequences represented in **6**. The secondary nature of the carbonl is documented by the large paramagnetic shift of the oxymethine PMR singlet at 5 80 which accompanies acetylation of macrophyllin (D135 ppm). In addition, this reaction produces virtually identical (D008 and 009 ppm) diamagnetic

## Page 2

shifts of the singlets at \(\tau\) 6:53 and 6 68 attributed to aliphatic methoxyls. These must thus occupy symmetrical positions with respect to the carbonol, and, no additional oxymethine signals being observable, not even in the spectrum of tetrahydromacrophylln. be placed on non-protonated sp3-carbons.

The a,b-unsaturated carbonyl, whose presence can be inferred through the IR spectrum (_n_max 1685 cm-1), has a single hydrogen, most probably at the b-carbon since the corresponding PMR singlet occurs at relatively low field (\(\tau\) 3 15) The _x_-carbon must be occupied by the allyl group The appearance of the CH2 doublet at relatively low field (\(\tau\) 6:94, \(J\) 7:0 Hz) can be rationalized only if the methylene group is flanked by an additional double bond Accordingly, there is only one way in which the C3-sequences of **6** can be joined. The carbonolic proton of the resulting unit 7 must lie over the rng. Saturation of the cyclic double bond (as in tetrahydroacrophylln), depriving it of anisotropic protection, results in a considerable paramagnetic shift (\(\Delta\) 0:20 ppm) of the corresponding singlet.

Macrophylln must thus be represented by one of the two formulae which can be constructed through linkage of **1** and **7** Although **8** is preferred on account of its slightly 

## Page 3

greater structural resemblance to guianin (**2**), and the canellins A (**3**) and C (**4**), biogetically both **8** and **9** are equally probable (Scheme) and no argument is presently available by which **9** can be excluded. This is due to the fact that the aryl group occupies the _endo_-face of the molecule and thus, in contradistinction to the aryl group of the canellins (**3**, **4**), does not help in the discrimination of the methoxyls through differential shielding. Evidence for the _endo_-arrangement was seen in the fact that the hydroxyl at C-8 of macrophyllin is as completely acetylated at room temp. as that of guianin (**2**), while under identical conditions only monoacetates are formed from the canellins A (**3**) and C (**4**).1 In these cases, esterification of the hydroxyl at C-8 is incomplete, even at 60deg, due, conceivably, to the steric hindrance exerted by the _exo_-aryl group. The _trans_-relationship of the aryl-methyl substituents, as shown in the relative spacial representations of macrophyllin (**8** and **9**), is based on the large coupling constant which characterizes \(J_{\text{H} - 6,\text{H} - 7}\) (8.7 Hz) and the normal chemical shift of the C-Me protons (_t_ 9:08). A smaller coupling and a chemical shift above \(t\) 9:3 would be expected for the _cis_-arrangement.1

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Lacara macrophylla Collection Site_  Duke Forest Reserve, Manaus, Amazonas  Tree 15 m high. Herbarium sample INPA, Manaus, no 15536 _Solvent extraction_  Dry, powdered trunk wood (6 kg) was extracted successively with C6H6 and with EtOH The C6H6-soln deposited, after cone under vacuum 2 crops of macrophyllin (3 2 g) which was separated by filtration  Part (22 g) of the residual C6H6 extract (195 g) was chromatographed on silica. C6H6 eluted stosterol and C6H6-CHCl3, 1 1 eluted an additional quantity of macrophyllin (800 mg). Chromatography on silica of the EtOH extract (330 g) also yielded macrophyllin (2 5 g) _Vapour entrapment_  Essential oils were obtained from bark (veld 0 45deg, m267 14975) and wood (veld 0 50%, m267 15055) composition of wood oil determined by GLC borneol 3%, netolol 5%, chemol 25%, sesquiterpene alcohols 40%, the constituents were dentified, after isolation by preparative GLC, through direct comparison with authentic samples

## Page 4



