# 10.1016@j.bse.2005.10.012.pdf

## Page 1

Dammarane triterpenes from _Cabralea canjerana_ (Vell.) Mart. (Meliaceae): Their chemosystematic significance

Patricia A. de Campos Braga

Marcio Santos Soares

M. Fatima das G.F. da Silva

Paulo C. Vieira

Joao B. Fernandes

Antonio L. Pinheiro

dmfs@power.ufscar.br Departmento de Compaica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil Departamento de Engenharia Flowesta, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, 36570-000, Vicosa, MG, Brazil

Received 11 May 2005; accepted 17 October 2005

###### Abstract

The stem of _Cabralea canjerana_ (Vell.) Mart. yielded three new dammarane triterpenes 205,245-epoxy-7b,25-dihydroxy-3,4-secondamar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid, 20S,245-epoxy-7b,15a,25-trihydroxy-3,4-secondamar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid and 20S,246-epoxy-7b,225,25-trihydroxy-3,4-secondamar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid, which were identified on the basis of spectroscopic methods. The known dammarane triterpenes occuillone, eichlerianic acid, shoreic acid and the sterols sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, sitostenone and stigmast-5-en-3-one were also isolated and identified. The branches yielded the above three known dammaranes and eichlerialactone. The dammaranes in \(C\). _canjerana_ display strong similarities with Trichiliae tribe, which contains several dammaranes. The data reported herein thus provide firm support for placing _Cabralea_ within the subfamily Melioideae, Trichiliae tribe.

(c) 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Meliaceae; _Cabralea canjerana_; Dammarane triterpenes; Chemosystematics

## 1 Introduction

The Meliaceae is a medium-sized family of woody plants of the tropics and subtropics of both hemispheres, comprising 51 genera and probably no more than 550 species. Harms (1940) divided the Meliaceae into three subfamilies in the following way: Cedreloideae (two tribes: Cedreleae and Ptaeroxyleae), Swietenioideae and Melioideae (five tribes: Carapeae, Turraceae, Vavaeeae, Meliae and Trichiliaee). Pennington and Styles (1975) excluded Ptaeroxyleae from the family, included Harms' tribes Cedreleae and Carapeae into the subfamily Swietenioideae and divided Harms' tribe Trichiliieae into four tribes, Trichiliieae, Aglaieae, Guareeae and Sandoriceae.

Chemically, the family Meliaceae is distinguished by the frequent occurrence of limonoids, whose precursor degrades to four major routes, oxidative opening of ring D to give the D-seco limonoids, of ring B and D to give the mexicanolide types, of ring B and A to give the A,B-seco limonoids and of ring C to give the C-seco limonoids or 

## Page 2

Nimbin group (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987). The mexicanolide group occurs widely in the genera of the Swietenioideae. The Melioideae appears to be the most prolific in production of A,B-seco limonoids but relatively poor in mexicanolide types. The C-seco limonoids have so far been recorded in four genera of the Melioideae (_Turrea_, _Trichilia_, _Melia_, and _Azadiracha_). Chemically, the Swietenioideae and Melioideae are clearly distinguished. The difference in composition of the limonoids in Harms' tribe Trichilieae is not pronounced enough to corroborate Pennington and Styles' separation of the genera into four tribes (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987). Thus, expansion of knowledge on Trichilieae, Aglaieae, Guareeae and Sandoricceae is necessary, particularly to support Pennington and Styles' suggestion. As part of a continuing study of the chemistry of the Meliaceae we have examined branches and stem of previously uninvestigated _Cabralea canjerana_ (Vell.) Mart. in order to obtain phytochemical evidence permitting a better understanding of its chemotaxonomic position in the Harms' tribe Trichilieae or Guareeae.

## Materials and methods

### General

NMR: on a Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as internal standard; HRMS were obtained on a Fisons VG Autospec; IR: Bomen-Fu/IR; [a]D: Perkin Elmer 241 instrument.

### Plant material

_C. canjerana_ was collected in Federal University of Vicosa, MG, Brazil, and identified by T. D. Pennington, from the Royal Botanic Garden, Kew-UK. A voucher (1842; 1983) is deposited in the Herbarium of Departamento de Engenharia Flowesta, Dendrologia, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, MG, Brazil.

### Isolation of compounds

Ground branches (228 g) and stem (1.5 kg) from _C. canjerana_ were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH at room temperature for three times. The concentrated hexane extract from branches was subjected to CC over silica gel (230\(-\)400 mesh). Elution from hexane to EtOAc yielded cocoillone (16.6 mg) and a mixture of **4** and **5** (35.8 mg). The concentrated CH2Cl2 extract from branches was subjected to CC over silica gel (230\(-\)400 mesh). Elution with hexane\(-\)EtOAc gradient yielded 11 frs. Fr.4 was rechromatographed as above, eluting with hexane\(-\)Me2CO to afford a mixture of **4** and **5** (15.3 mg). Fr. 8 was twice rechromatographed over silica gel (230\(-\)400 mesh, hexane\(-\)Me2CO 20\(\cdot\)7; hexane\(-\)Me2CO 20\(\cdot\)5) yielding eichlerialactone (3.0 mg). The concentrated MeOH extract from branches was purified by repeated column chromatography as above to give cocotillone (41.0 mg) and a mixture of **4** and **5** (10.3 mg).

The concentrated CH2Cl2 extract from the stem was subjected to CC over silica gel (230\(-\)400 mesh). Elution with hexane\(-\)CH2Cl2\(-\)Me2CO gradient yielded cocotillone (40.0 mg), a mixture of **4** and **5** (12.3 mg) and an amorphous solid characterized by GC\(-\)MS and \({}^{13}\)C NMR as a mixture (313 mg) of sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, sitostenone and stigmast-5-en-3-one. The concentrated MeOH extract from the stem was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel (70\(-\)230 mesh) using a hexane\(-\)CH2Cl2\(-\)EtOAc\(-\)MeOH gradient giving four frs, fr-hexane, fr-CH2Cl2, fr-EtOAc and fr- MeOH. Fr-EtOAc was subjected to CC over silica gel (230\(-\)400 mesh). Elution with hexane\(-\)CH2Cl2\(-\)Me2CO gradient yielded 14 frs. Fr-EtOAc-3 was rechromatographed as above to afford **1** (15.1 mg). Fr-EtOAc-5 was rechromatographed as above to afford occotillone (25.6 mg) and additional frs. Fr-EtOAc-5-3 was twice rechromatographed as above yielding, after final purification by lobar column (MERCK, hexane\(-\)CH2Cl2\(-\)Me2CO gradient), compound **3** (7.0 mg). Fr-EtOAc-5-6 was rechromatographed as above, eluting with hexane\(-\)Me2CO to afford cocotillone (160 mg), a mixture of **4** and **5** (43 mg) and a fr. containing **2**. The last fr. was then rechromatographed as above yielding, after final purification by lobar column (MERCK, hexane\(-\)CH2Cl2\(-\)Me2CO gradient), compound **2** (3.0 mg).

#### 2.3.1 20S,24S-epoxy-7b,25-dihydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (1)

Amorphous solid: [a]D\({}_{2}^{23}\) -16.1deg (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.0048); IR (liq. film) _ν_max/cm\({}^{-1}\): 3448, 2969, 2872, 1711, 1457, 1054; 1H NMR (400 MHz, C5D5N): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, C5D5N): see Table 2; HMBC, NOESY, NOEDIF

## Page 3

(400/100 MHz, C\({}_{5}\)D\({}_{5}\)N): see Table 3. COSY, TOCSY, HSQC (400/100 MHz, C\({}_{5}\)D\({}_{5}\)N). HREI-MS 490.3658, 143.1064 (100) (caled for C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{5}\), 490.3658, for C\({}_{8}\)H\({}_{15}\)O\({}_{2}\), 143.1072).

#### 2.3.2 20S,24S-epoxy-78,15\(\alpha\),25-trihydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (2)

Amorphous solid: [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}^{23}+216\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\); \(c\) 0.0040); IR (liq. film) \(r_{\rm max}\)/cm\({}^{-1}\): 3353, 2966, 2878, 1713, 1456, 1059; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 2; HMBC, NOEDIF (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 3. COSY, HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)). HREI-MS 506.3607, 143.1077 (100) (caled for C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{6}\), 506.3607, for C\({}_{8}\)H\({}_{15}\)O\({}_{2}\), 143.1072).

#### 2.3.3 20S,24R-epoxy-78,225,25-trihydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (3)

Amorphous solid: [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}^{23}+29.7\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\); \(c\) 0.0040); IR (liq. film) \(r_{\rm max}\)/cm\({}^{-1}\): 3448, 2969, 2872, 1711, 1457, 1054; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 2; HMBC, NOEDIF (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 3. COSY, HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)). HREI-MS 506.3607, 159.1001 (100) (caled for C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{6}\), 506.3607, for C\({}_{8}\)H\({}_{15}\)O\({}_{3}\), 159.1021).

## 3 Results and discussion

A methanol extract of the stem of _C. canjerana_ afforded three new dammarane triterpenes **1\(-\)3**, in addition to the known 20S,24R-epoxy-25-hydroxydammar-3-one (occotillone) (Rao et al., 1975a), 20S,24R-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (**4**, shoreic acid) and 20S,24S-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (**5**, eichlerianic acid) (Roux et al., 1998).



## Page 4

Compound **1** showed the spectral characteristics of a 20,24-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (as **5**, eichlerianic acid) (Tanaka and Yahara, 1978; Lavie et al., 1984; Roux et al., 1998; Qiu et al., 2001). The HREI-mass spectrum indicated the molecular formula as C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{5}\) (_m_/_z_ 490.3658) showing that **1** differed from **5** (C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{4}\)) only by an additional oxygen. The IR spectrum showed the presence of hydroxyl (3448 cm\({}^{-1}\))

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c} C & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & **5** \\
1 & 35.4 & 34.1 & 34.0 & 34.0 & 34.1 \\
2 & 29.2 & 2

## Page 5

and carboxyl (1711 cm\({}^{-1}\)) groups. In addition to signals typical of a 20,24-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secondammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (\(\delta\) 4.95, brs, H-28a; 4.99, brs, H-28b; six tertiary methyl groups, \(\delta\) 0.95, s, 3H, 1.15, s, 3H, 1.26, s, 3H, 1.33, s, 3H, 1.39, s, 3H, 1.46, s, 3H; a vinylic methyl \(\delta\) 1.83, s, 3H; an oxymethine \(\delta\) 3.96, dd, \(J=10.3\) and 5.0 Hz, H-24), the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1) revealed an oxymethine at \(\delta\) 4.05, dd, \(J=11.2\) and 4.2 Hz. The HSQC and HMBBC experiments on **1**, permitted the assignments of all hydrogen and carbon atoms of the 20,24-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secondammar-4(28)-en-3-oic system (Table 2) in close agreement with those for **5**. From HMBC experiments (Table 3), the correlation observed between the \({}^{1}\)H signals for H-28a (\(\delta\) 4.95) and H-28b (\(\delta\) 4.99) and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 48.6 and 23.5 (CH and CH\({}_{3}\), respectively, by DEPT 135) led to their assignments as C-5 and C-29, respectively. The methyl proton at \(\delta\) 0.95 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 20.7 by HSQC) showed long-range correlations with the C-5 signal and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 35.4 (CH\({}_{2}\)), 41.6 (CH) and 39.3 (quaternary), leading to their assignments as H\({}_{3}\)-19, C-1, C-9 and C-10, respectively. The C-1 signal (\(\delta\) 35.4) showed one-bond correlation with the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 2.00 m (2H) and was coupled to the \({}^{1}\)H signals at \(\delta\) 2.71 (ddd, \(J=15.0\), 11.5, 4.0 Hz) and 2.52 (ddd, \(J=15.0\), 12.0, 6.0 Hz), and both of which also showed cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 29.2. These signals were then assigned to 2H-1, H-2a, H-2b and C-2, respectively. Moreover, the C-5 signal (\(\delta\) 48.6) showed one-bond correlation with the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 2.40 (dd, \(J=13.1\), 2.8 Hz), which was coupled to the \({}^{1}\)H signals at \(\delta\) 2.26 (td, \(J=13.1\), 11.2 Hz) and 1.86 m, and both of which were also coupled to the oxymethine signal at \(\delta\) 4.05 (dd, \(J=11.2\) and 4.2 Hz), thus indicating a hydroxyl group at C-7 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 72.9 by HSQC) and permitting the assignment of the above signals to H-5, H-6ax, H-6eq and H-7, respectively. These assignments were supported by TOCSY experiments. Orientation of the hydroxyl followed from the large coupling constant between H-7 and H-6ax at \(\delta\) 2.26 (td, \(J=13.1\), 11.2 Hz) which requires H-7 to be in an axial conformation (\(\alpha\)). The methyl proton at \(\delta\) 1.33 showed long-range correlations with the C-7 (\(\delta\) 72.9), C-9 (\(\delta\) 41.6) signals and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 46.1 and 50.3 (quaternaries), leading to their assignments as H\({}_{3}\)-18, C-8 and C-14 (or C-14 and C-8), and confirming a hydroxyl group at C-7. A comparison of \({}^{13}\)C chemical shifts of dammaranes indicated that C-14 (ca \(\delta\) 50) resonates at a lower field than C-8 (ca \(\delta\) 46). The signals at \(\delta\) 46.1 and 50.3 were then assigned to C-8 and C-14, respectively. A second methyl proton at \(\delta\) 1.15 showed also long-range correlations with the C-8 and C-14 signals and the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 35.6 (CH\({}_{2}\)), which were assigned to H\({}_{3}\)-30 and C-15, respectively. The HR-mass spectrum gave a significant fragment at \(m\)/\(z\) 143.1064 (C\({}_{8}\)H\({}_{15}\)O\({}_{2}\)) confirming the presence of a side chain of the same type as that of eichlerianic acid (**5**). In the NOEDIFF experiments (Table 3) irradiation of the H-24 signal did not influence Me-21, showing NOEs only to Me-27 (or Me-26). These observations suggested the H-24 to be _anti_ (\(\alpha\)) to Me-21 (\(\beta\)). Moreover, compound **1** was characterized as 20S,24S-epoxy-7b,25-dihydroxy-3,4-secondammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid from the chemical shift of C-24 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 87.4; \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.96, dd, \(J=10.3\) and 5.0 Hz) and its comparison with those of 20S,24S-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secondammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (**5**, eichlerianic acid, \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 86.2; \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.62, dd, \(J=10.0\) and 5.5 Hz), and 20S,24_R_-epoxy-25-hydroxy-3,4-secondammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (**4**, shoreic acid, \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 83.1; \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.71, t, \(J=7.7\) Hz) (Hisham et al., 1996; Roux et al., 1998). The assignment of the relative configuration of C-7 received further support between NOE of the H-7 and H\({}_{3}\)-30, supporting that hydroxyl group is thus in an equatorial configuration (\(\beta\)) (Table 3).

The HR-mass spectra of **2** and **3** indicated the molecular formula as C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{6}\) (\(m\)/\(z\) 506.3607), showing that both differed from **1** (C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{50}\)O\({}_{5}\)) only by an extra oxygen. The HSQC and HMBC experiments on **2** and **3** permitted the assignments of all hydrogen and carbon atoms (Table 2) in close agreement with those for **1**. In addition to signals typical of **1**, the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **2** (Table 1) revealed an oxymethine at \(\delta\) 4.06, t, \(J=8.8\) Hz. From HMBC experiments (Table 3), the observed correlation between the signal at \(\delta\) 0.98, assigned to H\({}_{3}\)-30 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 9.4), and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 72.2 determined the position of a hydroxyl group at C-15. The C-15 signal (\(\delta\) 72.2) showed one-bond correlation with the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 4.06, which was attributed to H-15. The stereochemistry suggested for **2** was based on the biosynthesis of dammarane (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987), moreover, these were supported by the NOESY and NOESY experiments (Table 3). The NOEs of the H-15 at \(\delta\) 4.06, coming from H\({}_{3}\)-18, showed that the hydroxyl group at C-15 is thus in the \(\alpha\)-face of the molecule. Thus, the structure of the new dammarane was characterized as 20S,24S-epoxy-7b,15\(\alpha\),25-trihydroxy-3,4-secondammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (**2**).

In compound **3**, the HR-mass spectrum showed a significant fragment ion at \(m\)/\(z\) 159.1001, C\({}_{8}\)H\({}_{15}\)O\({}_{3}\), assuming hydroxyl group to be located in the side chain. In addition to signals typical of **1**, the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **3** (Table 1) revealed an oxymethine at \(\delta\) 4.07, t, \(J=5.8\) Hz. From HMBC experiments (Table 3), the correlations observed between the signals at \(\delta\) 3.65, assigned to H-24 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 81.7), \(\delta\) 1.16, assigned to H-21 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 19.2), and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 75.6 determined the position of a hydroxyl group at C-22. Furthermore, the shielded resonance observed for C-24 in compound **3** (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 81.7; \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.65, t, \(J=7.3\) Hz) is not typical of **1** and **5**, but of **4** (**4**, shoreic acid, \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 83.1;

## Page 6

\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.71, t, \(J=7.7\) Hz) (Hisham et al., 1996; Roux et al., 1998). The slightly negative \(\gamma\) effect of the hydroxy group at C-22 caused an upfield shift for C-24 in **3**, when compared with **4**. The NOESY and NOEDIFF experiments (Table 3) did not facilitate elucidation of the relative configuration of C-22 and C-24. However, the data were consistent with the structure of 20S,24\(R\)-epoxy-7b,225,25-trihydroxy-3,4-secodammar-4(28)-en-3-oic acid (**3**).

The dichloromethane extract of the stem yielded cocoillone (Rao et al., 1975a), a mixture of **4** and **5** and a mixture of sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, sitostenone and stigmast-5-en-3-one. The hexane and methanol extracts of the branches afforded cocoillone and a mixture of **4** and **5**. The dichloromethane extract of the branches also afforded a mixture of **4** and **5** and eichlerialactone (Rao et al., 1975b).

## 4 Conclusion

_Cabralea_ is known to contain D-seco limonoids (seeds: gedunain, 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin, 7-deacetoxy-7-hydroxygedunin, 7-deacetoxy-7-hydroxyphotogedunin; Rao et al., 1975b), B,D-seco limonoids (seeds: methyl angolensate; Rao et al., 1975b), mexicanolides (seeds: fissinolide, 3-deacetyl fissinolide, cabralin and isocabralin; Zelnik, 1971; Rao et al., 1975b; wood: fissinolide; Rao et al., 1975a) and dammarane triterpenes (seeds: cabraleone and cabraleadiol; Rao et al., 1975b; fruits: cabraleone, cabraleadiol, cabralealactone and cabraleahydroxylactone; Cascon and Brown, 1972; wood: cabraleone, cocoillone, cabraleadiol, cabralealactone and cabraleahydroxylactone, eichlerianic acid, shoreic acid, dammarenolic acid and eichlerialactone; Rao et al., 1975a). _Cabralea_ appears to produce limonoid types from the common precursor along only one pathway to mexicanolides (limonoids with intact carbon skeleton \(\rightarrow\) D-seco \(\rightarrow\) B,D-seco limonoids \(\rightarrow\) mexicanolides). Thus, the known limonoids from _Cabralea_ are typical of the Swietenioidease subfamily (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987). On the other hand, the dammarane triterpenes do not 

## Page 7



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c} Compound & C=C & OH & C=O & OAc & Source \\ \hline AglaioI & 20 & 3θ & & 24,25 & _Aglaia odorata_ (Nanonggai-Suwanrath \\  & & & & epoxide & and Warnhoff, 1965) \\ Aglaiondiol & 20 & 3θ, 25 & 24 & _Aglaia odorata_ (Shiengthong et al., 1974) \\ Aglaitriol & 20 & 3θ, 24\(R\), 25 & & _Aglaia odorata_ (Shiengthong et al., 1974) \\ Aglaitriol & 20 & 3θ, 24\(S\), 25 & & _Aglaia odorata_ (Shiengthong et al., 1974) \\
5a-Dammar-20-ene-3θ,24,25-triol & 20 & 3θ, 24\(R\), 25 & & _Aglaia odorata_ (Boar and Damps, 1977) \\
24,25-Dihydroxy-dammar-20-en-3-one & 20 & 24\(R\), 25 & 3 & _Aglaia odorata_ (Boar and Damps, 1977) \\
24,525-Epoxy-5α-dammar-20-en-3-one & 20 & 3θ, 25 & _Aglaia odorata_ (Boar and Damps, 1977) \\ Cabraleadiol & 3α, 25 & & 20\(S\),24\(R\) oxide & _Cabralea politricha_ (Cascon and Brown, 1972) \\  & & & _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\  & & & _Aglaia tomentosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Aglaia foveolata_ (Roux et al., 1998) \\  & & & _Amaoro vannanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Hisham et al., 1996) \\  & & & _Cabralea politricha_ (Cascon and Brown, 1972) \\  & & & _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richi_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum muellerii_ (Mulholland and Naidoso, 2000) \\  & & & _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Aglata eleaengoidea_ (Fuzzati et al., 1996) \\  & & & _Amaoro cucullata_ (Haque et al., 1995) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Hisham et al., 1996) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richi_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\  & & & _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Cascon and Brown, 1972) \\  & & & _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum caulififorma_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richii_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum caulififorma_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richii_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Govindachari et al., 1994) \\  & & & _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum caulififorma_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum caulififorma_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richii_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum muellerii_ (Mulholland and Naidoso, 2000) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richi_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\  & & & _Dysoxylum richi_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Aglata eleaengoidea_ (Fuzzati et al., 1996) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mulholland et al., 1994) \\  & & & _Astrotichiliaasterotricha_ (Mulholland et al., 1994) \\  & & & _Aglata tometosa_ (Mulholland et al., 1994) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\  & & & & _Amaoro yunnanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Occurrence of dammaranes with an intact carbon skeleton (6) in species of Maliaceae

## Page 8

seem to be common in the genera of Swietenioideae, but have been found frequently in those of Melioideae, being restricted to the Harms' tribe Trichilieae (Tables 4 and 5). As already mentioned, the difference in composition of the limonoids in Harms' tribe Trichilieae is not pronounced enough to corroborate Pennington and Styles' separation of the genera into four tribes. This interpretation receives additional support from dammarane triterpenes (Tables 4 and 5), if indeed the data of five genera justify any comment. As a result of this study _Cabralea_ has been shown to be prolific in production of dammaranes but relatively poor in limonoids, reinforcing its position in the subfamily Melioideae, Harms' tribe Trichilieae.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c} \hline Compound & C=C & OH & C=O & OAc & Source \\ \hline
20S,23\(R\),24S-23-chloro-20,24-epoxy-dammarane-3a,24,25-triol 3-acetate & & 24\(\beta\), 25 & & 3\(\alpha\) & 23\(\beta\)-chloro, 20S,24\(R\) oxide \\
20R-23(24 → 25)_ahoe-20,24-dihydrodammaran-3-one & & 20\(R\), 24 & 3 & & _Dysoxylum caulifiform_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\ Dammara-20,24-dien-3-one & & & & & _Amaora cucullata_ (Haque et al., 1995) \\
20(S)-hydroxydammar-24-en-3-one & & 24 & 20\(S\) & 3 & & _Amaora cucullata_ (Haque et al., 1995) \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: (_continued_)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c} \hline Compound & C=C & OH & CO\({}_{2}\)R & Source \\ \hline Shoreic acid & 4(28) & 25 & R = H & 20S,24\(R\) oxide & _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ & (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ & (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia foveolata_ (Roux et al., 1998) \\ _Amaora yannanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\ _Dysoxylum caulifiform_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ & (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\ _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Hisham et al., 1996) \\ _Aglaia elliptica_ (Cui et al., 1997) \\ _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Govindachari et al., 1994) \\ _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia foveolata_ (Roux et al., 1998) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\ _Aglaia eichleriana_ (Cui et al., 1997) \\ _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\ _Cabralea eichleriana_ (Rao et al., 1975a) \\ _Amaora yannanensis_ (Luo et al., 2000) \\ _Dysoxylum caulifiform_ (Huang et al., 1999) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Singh and Aalbersberg, 1992) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia foveolata_ (Roux et al., 1998) \\ _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Govindachari et al., 1994) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_ (Aalbersberg and Singh, 1991) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia lawii_ (Mohamad et al., 1999) \\ _Aglaia foveolata_ (Roux et al., 1998) \\ _Dysoxylum malabaricum_ (Govindachari et al., 1994) \\ _Dysoxylum richii_

## Page 9



## Acknowledgements

The authors thank the Brazilian agencies Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES), Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for their financial support.

## References

* [1]
* [2]Aalbersberg, W., Singh, Y., 1991. Dammarane triterpenoids from _Dysoxylum richii_. Phytochemistry 30, 921\(-\)926.
* [3]Boar, R.B., Damps, K., 1977. Triterpenoids of _Agliaa odorata_. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. I, 510\(-\)512.
* [4]Cason, S.C., Brown Jr., K.S., 1972. Biogenetically significant triterpenes in a species of Meliaceae: _Cabralea oplitricha_ A. Juss. Tetrahedron 28, 315\(-\)323.
* [5]Cui, B., Chai, H., Santisuk, T., Reutrakul, V., Farnswoeth, N.R., Cordell, G.A., Pezzuto, J.M., Kinghorn, A.D., 1997. Novel cytotoxic 1\(H\)-cyclopenta[\(b\)]benzofuran lignans from _Agliaa elliptica_. Tetrahedron 53, 17625\(-\)17632.
* [6]Fuzzati, N., Dyatmiko, W., Rahman, A., Achmad, F., Hostettmann, K., 1996. Triterpenoids, lignans and a benzofuran derivative from the bark of _Agliaa eleaga niedoide_. Phytochemistry 42, 1395\(-\)1398.
* [7]Govindachari, T.R., Suresh, G., Kumari, G.N.K., 1994. Triterpenoids from _Dysoxylum malabarcium_. Phytochemistry 37, 1127\(-\)1129.
* [8]Haque, M.E., Uddin, M.N., Jalal, M.S., 1995. Dammarane triterpenoids from the stem bark of _Amoora cucullata_ (Meliaceae). Bangladesh J. Bot. 24, 165\(-\)171.
* [9]Haque, M.E., Uddin, M.N., Jalal, M.S., 1996. Cabralealactone and isofouquierone from the stem bark of _Amoora cucullata_ L. (Meliaceae). Bangladesh J. Bot. 25, 177\(-\)181.
* [10]Harms, H., 1940. In: Engler, A., Prantl, K. (Eds.), Die Naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien, second ed., pp. 1\(-\)172, 19, bl.
* [11]Hisham, A., Bai, M.D.A., Fujimoto, Y., Hara, N., Shimada, H., 1996. Complete H-1 and C-13 NMR spectral assignment of cabraleadiol, a dammarane triterpene from _Dysoxylum malabarcium_ Bedd. Magn. Reson. Chem. 34, 146\(-\)150.
* [12]Huang, R., Harrison, L.J., Sim, K., 1999. A triterpenoid with a novel abeo-dammarane skeleton from _Dysoxylum caulifornum_. Tetrahedron Lett. 40, 1607\(-\)1610.
* [13]Lavie, D., Frolow, F., Meshulam, H., 1984. The X-ray structure of methyl shoreate and the stereochemistry of eichlerianic acid, aabraleone and cocollitone. Tetrahedron 40, 419\(-\)420.
* [14]Luo, X., Wu, S., Ma, Y., Wu, D., 2000. Dammarane triterpenoids from _Amoora yunnanensis_. Heterocycles 53, 2795\(-\)2802.
* [15]Mohamad, K., Sevenet, T., Dumontet, V., Pais, M., Tri, V.M., Hadi, H., Awang, K., Martin, M., 1999. Dammarane triterpenes and pregnane steroids from _Agliaa lawii_ and _Agliaa tomentosa_. Phytochemistry 51, 1031\(-\)1037.
* [16]Mulholland, A.D., Nair, J.J., Taylor, D.A., 1994. Dammaranes from _Astrotrichilia asterotricha_. Phytochemistry 35, 542\(-\)544.
* [17]Mulholland, A.D., Naidoo, N., 2000. Dammarane triterpenoids from _Dysoxylum muellerii_. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 28, 295\(-\)297.
* [18]Nanonggai-Suwanrath, P., Warnhoff, E.W., 1965. Triterpenoids of _Agliaa odorata_. configuration of trisubstituted epoxides. Tetrahedron 21, 917\(-\)924.
* [19]Pennington, T.D., Styles, B.T., 1975. A generic monograph of the Meliaceae. Blumea 22, 419\(-\)540.
* [20]Qiu, S., Hung, N., Xuan, L., Gu, J., Lobkovsky, E., Khanh, T., Soejarto, D., Clardy, J., Pezzuto, J., Dong, Y., Tri, M.V., Huong, L.M., Fong, H.H.S., 2001. A pregnane steroid from _Agliaa lawii_ and structure confirmation of cabraleadiol monoacetate by X-ray crystallography. Phytochemistry 56, 775\(-\)780.
* [21]Rao, M.M., Meshulam, H., Zelnik, R., Lavie, D., 1975a. _Cabralea eichleriana_ DC. (Meliaceae) \(-\) I. Structure and stereochemistry of wood extractives. Tetrahedron 31, 333\(-\)339.
* [22]Rao, M.M., Meshulam, H., Zelnik, R., Lavie, D., 1975b. Structure and stereochemistry of limonoids of _Cabralea eichleriana_. Phytochemistry 14, 1071\(-\)1075.
* [23]Roux, D., Martin, M.T., Adeline, M.T., Sevenet, T., Hadi, H., Pais, M., 1998. Foveolins A and B, dammaranes triterpenes from _Agliaa foveolata_. Phytochemistry 49, 1745\(-\)1748.
* [24]Shiengthog, D., Kobpol, V., Kurnating, P., Massey-Westropp, R.O., 1974. Triterpenoid constituents of the medicinal plants \(-\) II \(-\) isomeric agliai-triols and gajanoidol. Tetrahedron 30, 2211\(-\)2215.
* [25]da Silva, M.F. da G.F., Gottlieb, O.R., Dreyer, D.L., 1984. Evolution of limonoids in the Meliaceae. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 12, 299\(-\)310.
* [26]da Silva, M.F. da G.F., Gottlieb, O.R., 1987. Evolution of quassinoids and limonoids in the Rutales. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 15, 85\(-\)103.
* [27]Singh, Y., Aalbersberg, W., 1992. Dammarane triterpenoids from _Dysoxylum richii_. Phytochemistry 31, 4033\(-\)4035.
* [28]Tanaka, O., Yahara, S., 1978. Dammarane saponins of leaves of _Panax pseudo-ginseng_ subsp. _Himalacius_. Phytochemistry 17, 1353\(-\)1358.
* [29]Zelnik, R., 1971. Tetranorterpenoids from _Cabralea eichleriana_. Phytochemistry 11, 1886.



