# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)94260-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Oxoaporphine Alkaloids from _Duguettia Eximia_+
Footnote †: Part 3 in the series ‘The Chemistry of Brazilian Annonaceae’. For Part 2 see ref. [1].

Otto R. Gottlieb,, Aderbal F. Magalhaes,, Eva G. Magalhaes,, Jose G. S. Maia,, Anita J. Marsaioli

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, e.g. 20780, Sao Paulo, SP; Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP,, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, Manns, AM, Brasil

###### Abstract

_Duquettia eximia_: Anonaceae; alkaloids; 2,4,5-trimethoxystyrene; oxoaporphines.

_Duquettia eximia_: Diels (Annonaceae) was collected near Manaus, AM, and identified by Dr. W. A. Rodrigues. Voucher INPA, Manaus, 42236. There is no previous work recorded for this species although two aporphines and a (6_aS_, _TS_)-7-hydroxyaporphine (duguetti) were isolated from an unclassified Brazilian _Duqueta_ sp. [2].

In the present work the C6H6 extract (6 g. 0.15%) of a trunk wood sample was separated by Si gel column and TLC into the following compounds, listed in order of increasing polarity : 2,4,5-trimethoxystyrene (11 mg), situosterol (40 mg), 0-methylmoschatoline (35 mg) (1a), 11-methoxy-1,2-methylenedioxyoxoaporphine (110 mg) (1b) and 11-hydroxy-1,2-methylenedioxyoxoaporphine (10 mg) (1e).

The styrene, previously isolated from _Pachypodanthium stauditin_ Eng. et Diels (Annonaceae) [3] and **1a**, previously isolated from _Triclisa patas_ Oliv. [4]_. _T. gillett_ Oliv. [5] (Menispermeaceae) and _Guateria subsellis_ (Annonaceae) [6], were identifed by comparison of mp, UV, IR, PMR and MS with reported data. The new compounds **1b** and **1c** were also characterized as oxoaporphines by their colour and bathochromic UV shifts in acid solution, as well as by their carbonyl absorptions at 1660 cm-1 [7]. The molecular formulae C18H11O4N (**1b**) and C17H9O4N (**1c**), determined by elementary analyses and MS, could be expanded, respectively, to C18H6N.COO2CH2-OMe and C18H6N. COO2CH2-OH after inspection of the PMR spectra. Indeed, as was consequently expected, methylation of **1c** gave an O-methyl derivative which proved to be identical, in all respects, with natural **1b**. The 6 undefined hydrogens in these compounds cause 3 groups of PMR bands (i) two doublets (\(J=5\) Hz) at low field, typical of H-5 and H-4 of the isoquinoline system [7], (ii) a singlet and (iii) two double doublets (\(J=8.5\), 2 Hz) and one triplet (\(J=8.5\) Hz). Double irradiation experiments, performed on the O-methyl derivative, confirmed the vicinality of two and three protons, indicated respectively by signal groups (i) and (ii). Among the structural alternatives consistent with the coupling constants, **1b** seemed most consistent with the chemical shift data. Indeed, **1d** represents oxostepahanine [ex. _Stephania japonica_ Miers (Menispermeaceae)], which has a considerably higher mp (270-272deg), and had its proposed structure supported by reduction and N-methylation to (+)-stephanine (**2a**). Analogously, successive Mel-methylation and Clemmensen reduction of **1b** gave (+)-_O-methylpukatene_ (**2b**) identified by direct comparison (IR and PMR) with an authentic sample, and was thus designated oxo-O-methylpukatene.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Oxo-O-methylpukatene_ (1 b). Yellow crystals, mp 241-242deg (CHC)3,[a]235 +- 0deg (_c_ 1, CHCl3) [Found : C. 71.02; H. 3.65; N. 4.49; C.8H11O4N requires: C. 0.782; H. 3.63; N. 4.59; Y. 2.05(Hin) (mm); 276, 290 s, 312 (0log \(e\) 4.64, 4.21, 4.00, 3.60); \(\frac{2}{2}\frac{\text{C}_{18}^{\text{C}}\text{H}_{1}\text{N}\text{C}_{0}\text{0}



## Page 2

H-9, H-10), 7.67 (d, \(J\) = 5 Hz. H-4), 8.23 (_dd, J_ = 8 and 2 Hz, H-8), 8.9 (_d, J_ = 5 Hz. H-5). MS (_m_/_e_): 291 (39 % ) M. 275 (50), 247 (13), 246 (10), 177 (9), 85 (45), 83 (70), 78 (100). Methylation with CH2N2 m Et2O gave oxo-O-methylpukatine (1b).

## References

* [1] Braz Fo., R. Gabriel, S. J. Gomes, C. M. R. Gottlieb, O. R. Bichara, M. das G. A. Maia, J. G. S. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1187.
* [2] Casagrande, C. and Ferrari, G. (1970) _Farmaco (Pavia) Ed. Sci._**25**, 442.
* [3]_Psytochemistry_, 1978, Vol 17, pp 838-839 Pergamon Press Printed in England
* [4]_Fagara mayu_(Bert.ex Hook.etArn.) Engler(= _Zanthoxylum mayu_ Bert.) is the most abundant tree in the rain forest of Robinson Crusoe Island (Juan Fernandez Group) [1]. Morphologically, this species seems to be somewhat removed from the rest of its genus, and Engler created the monotypic section _Maya_ to differentiate it from the large sections _Macqueria_ and _Blackburnia_[2].
* [5] An earlier publication showed that the trunk bark contains the tetrahydrobenzylisoquinoline-derived caterphydrine and magnofloring, the anthranilic acid-derived canthin-6-one and the furanoquinolines skimmainine, dictamnine and g-fagarine, and an unidentified slightly liavorotatory alkaloid melting at 139-140\({}^{\circ}\), apparent MW 273 (MS) [3]. The presence of furanoquinolines, which are lacking in all American species of the _Zanthoxylum/Fagara_ complex studied so far with the exception of _F. coco_[4], _Z. belizense_[5] and _Z. americanum_[6], indicates a relatively advanced position in the phylogeny of this group [7]. The isolation of the furanocoumarins posoralcn, begargten, xanthotoxin and isopimpinellin from the leaves [8], on the other hand, is not considered significant for the sake of comparison with South American _Fagara_ species, as several of these which have been shown to contain alkaloids have not been examined for neutral components [9].

The leaves of _Fagara mayu_ also contain a small amount of alkaloids (0.1 %). This paper reports the separation and identification of these compounds as skimmainine, (-)-edulinine (**1**), and ribalinine (**2**). As mentioned above, skimminaine has been found in the bark [3], where it is accompanied by another two common furanquinolines which are not present in the leaves. The unidentified bark alkaloid is probably (-)-edulinine, whose MS taken in the usual way shows an extremely faint molecular ion peak and a weak signal at _m_/_e_ 273; the discrepancies in the mp of this compound are probably due to polymorphism.

It seems unlikely, given the weakly basic conditions under which the alkaloids were extracted, that (-)-edulinine is an artefact. The possibility cannot be ruled out, however, that this substance is formed by the attack of OH\({}^{-}\) on _N_-methylplatydesminium and/or the hypothetical _N_-methylribalininium cation, neither of which has yet been found in this plant. The apparent lack of optical activity of ribalinine at the sodium d line [10], should not be taken as an indication that this substance is a racemic mixture.

To the best of our knowledge, no other member of the _Zanthoxylum/Fagara_ complex has been shown to contain edulinine or ribalinine (or its quarternary precursors. if it should be proved to be an artefact), and the accumulation of these uncommon offshoots of the main biogenetic route to furanoquinoline alkaloids may be of some taxonomic significance. In this connection, it should be pointed out that the African species _Fagara chalybea_[11] and the Puerto Rican _Zanthoxylum monophyllum_[12] contain angular pyranoquinolones, while _F. mayu_ is the only member of this group which is known to synthesize a linear pyranoquinoline.

## EXPERIMENTAL

All mps are uncorr. UV, IR and PMR (60 MHz, TMS as int. stand.) spectra were determined in EtOH, KBr and CDCl3, respectively. MS were recorded using electron impact ionization at 70 eV and 200deg. TLC was carried out on Si gel HF254 using CHCl3-MeOH (9:1).



