# 10.1016@0031-9422(80)87033-6.pdf

## Page 1



# Neoligans from a _Nectandra_ Species*

Raimundo Braz Filho, Roberto Figliuolo and Otto R. Gottlieb

# Abstract

The trunk wood of an Amazonian _Nectandra_ (Lauraceae) species contains one bicyclo[3.2.1]octanoid and four hydropbenzofuranoid neoligans. The latter comprise representatives of the mirandin, the rearranged burchellin and the burchellin types. The former was characterized as (1S, 4R, 5S, 6R, 7R)-3-allyl-4-hydroxy-1-methoxy-(3', 4', 5'-trimethoxyphenyl)-7-methyl-8-oxobicyclo[3.2.1]oct-2-ene (macrophyllin-B), a new representative of the seemingly rare macrophyllin type.

## INTRODUCTION

Trunk wood for the present study was collected from a lauraceous tree at Rosa de Maio, a locality on the Manaus-Itacoatiara highway (km 8), Amazonas, by Dionisio Coelho. According to Dr. Klaus Kubitzki, Hamburg, the specimen, voucher Herbarium INPA, Manaus, No. 46.534 (20 February 1974), belongs to an unclassified _Nectandra_ species. Indeed mirandin-A (**1a**), which proved to be its major neoligan, is known to occur additionally in _Nectandra miranda_[2]. For reasons stated in a previous paper of this series [3], nomenclature and numbering of this and other neoligans follow the rules which were outlined in a recent review [4].

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fractionation of the C6H6 extract gave crystalline mirandin-A (**1a**), besides minor quantities of burchellin-type [4, 5] (**2**, **3a**, **3b**) and macrophyllin-type [4, 6] (**4a**) neoligans. While **1a, 2** and **3a** had been isolated previously from _Nectandra miranda Sandw._[2]; _from N. miranda_[2] and _Aniba simulans_ Allen [7]; and from A. affinis_[8] and _A. bucchellii_ Kosterm. [9], respectively, and were thus identifiable by direct comparison with known compounds, **3b** and **4a** were novel neoligans.

Compounds **3a** and **3b** were isolated as a mixture whose separation was not achieved by Si gel chromatography. The IR and UV characteristics of this product and pure **3a**[8] were closely comparable. The MS, however, showed, besides peaks at _m/e_ 356 (M+), 315 [(M-allyl)+] and 178 [(MeO)2C6H3CH = C1Me+], diagnostic of **3a**, corresponding pcaks at _m/e_ 386, 345 and 208 of comparable heights. Since all other neoligans of the species under scrutiny sustain a tri-O-methylpyrogallyl substituent, it was immediatidy suspected that this may be the case also for **3b**, and account for the observed MS peaks. Indeed, the 60 MHz 1H NMR contained, besides the broad singlet at 8 6.85 typical of the C-2, C-5 and C-6 protons of a veratyl group, a fine singlet at 8 6.55, compatible with the C-2 and C-6 protons of a pyrogallyl group. With the exception of the typical 3H-9 and 2H-7' signals, which appeared at slightly different frequencies, all other peaks for **3a** and **3b** in the spectrum of the mixture were coincident. A conclusive carbon-count for both compounds was given by a proton-decoupled 13C NMR spectrum. Significant differences of signal frequencies were noted solely for the carbons of the aromatic rings. All assignments

## Page 2

were checked by single frequency off-resonance decoupling which led to the expected band multiplicities.

The relative configuration of **3a** was established by consideration of chemical shifts for atoms at positions 7, 9 and 7' [10]. As the analogous values for **3b** are substantially identical, both compounds must possess identical relative configurations and conformations. Since, furthermore, the ORD curves of the mixture and of pure **3a**[8, 11] were closely comparable, the absolute configuration shown in **3b** represents the novel neolignan.

Determination of the MW by MS, allied to hydrogen, carbon and methoxyl counts by NMR, revealed the formula C18H16O2 (OMe)2 for compound **4a** suggesting another bis-arylpropanol compound. Indeed, as in analogous cases [4], a prominent MS fragment ion at _m/e_ 208 (45%) and the symmetry of the aryl substitution indicated by NMR data revealed the constitution of one of the C8C3-moieties (**5**).

The additional C4C3-group had an allyl on a trisubstituted double bond (2H-7', d 3.00, \(d\), \(J\) = 7 Hz). The fact that the only vinylic proton (H-6', d 5.62) was represented by a singlet with only allylic broadening indicated vicinality of this methine to a tetrasubstituted carbon. This double bond was part of a secondary allyl alcohol since oxidation of the compound with MnO2 led to an a,b-unsaturated ketone (**4b**, _m_max 1680 cm-1), a transformation which produced a 1.13 ppm paramagnetic shift of the olefinic b (H-6') proton. The secondary nature of the alcohol was confirmed by acetylation. The doublet (d 4.72, \(J\) = 5 Hz) due to the carbonic proton (H-2') suffered a 1.08 ppm paramagnetic shift. The multiplicity of this signal indicated the vicinity of a further methine. Since the signal of the corresponding proton appeared at d 2.60, the yet unassigned methoxyl (d 3.54) could only be situated at the previously mentioned tetrasubstituted carbon. The carbonyl (_m_max, 1750 cm-1), which must link these trisubstituted and tetrasubstituted carbons in order to complete the C8-unit **6**, was also part of the pentacycle formed by joining **5** and **6**. Of the two ways this can be done, **4a** alone must represent the correct alternative. Indeed, there was a slight coupling (_J_H274,4 - 0.8 Hz) between the bridgehead and the benzylic protons. The interpretations of this, as well as all other proton couplings, were confirmed by a complete series of decoupling experiments at 270 MHz.

The relative configurations of the substituents of the bicyclo[3.2.1]oct-2-ene skeleton of **4a** were deduced from the 3H-9 proton signal at relatively low field (d 1.05) indicative of the Me/Ar _trans_-relationship, and the coupling constant between H-2', H-3' (5 Hz) which was, according to the Karplus equation, compatible only with the _endo_-configuration for the hydroxyl at C-2'.

The absolute configurational details indicated in **4** were determined by comparison with the bicyclo[3.2.1]oct-2-ene (**7**). This compound was obtained by acid-catalysed rearrangement of mirandin-A (**1a**) of known stereochemistry [2,11]. The reaction proceeds by way of an intermediate benzylic ion **8**

\(\bullet

## Page 3

elucidation of the neolignan **4a**, required reflux in MeOH. **A** previous hydrobenzofuranoid-bicyclo[3.2.1]octanoid rearrangement [12] was performed at room temperature [13]. Under the milder conditions, however, **1a** isomerized to **1b**[2] (32%), and added the elements of water and methanol leading to the products **9a** (18%) and **9b** (31%). Relevant features of the \({}^{1}\)H NMR data of **9a** and **9b** were comparable with those for piperone (**9c**), an anti-feeding neolignan of _Piper futokadzura_ for which only a constitutional formula is available [14]. All three derivatives should thus possess the same relative stereochemistry. This is defined by experimental evidence for C-6, C-7, and C-5', while construction of a model reveals the _trans_-ring juncture to be highly strained.

Alternative cyclization modes of benzylic ions such as **10**, whose preferred direction seems to be governed mainly by stereochemical factors [12], rationalizes the co-occurrence of 8.1'-linked neoligans of the bur-chellin (**3**) and guianin (**11**) type in extracts of

**Lauraceae** species (cf. [9, 11, 13]). Now that the co-occurrence of mirandin (**1**) and macrophyllin (**4**) types has been established, the relationship of the 8.5'-linked neoligans can be assumed to be mediated by intermediates such as **8**.

## Experimental

_Isolation of the constituents._ Trunk wood reduced to saw dust (4.5 kg) was percolated with C6H6 at room temp. A powder mixture of extract (100 g) and Si gel (200 g) was washed successively with petrol, C6H6 and CHCl3 and MeOH giving respectively fractions A1, A2 and A3. A1 (18 g) was separated by filtration into crystalline **1a** (9 g) and oily aliphatic material. A3 (4 g) in EtOH deposited a solid which, after separation by centrifugation and washing with EtOH, gave a colourless powder of aliphatic esters (350 mg). A2 (35 mg) was in part (15 g) chromatographed on Si gel (200 g), elution with C6H6-Me2CO of indicated proportions giving fractions B1 (1:0), B2 (9:5:0.5), B3 (9:1), B4 (8:1.5), B5 (8:2). B1, (2.2 g) and B2 (2.7 g) were composed respectively of **1a**, **4a** and **2a**, which were separated by repeated TLC (Si gel, CHCl3): **1a** (750 mg, _R_f 0.80), **2** (810 mg, _Rf_0 0.71), **4a** (160 mg, _Rf_0 0.76). B3 (1.4 g), B4 (1.9 g) and B3 (2.2 g) were respectively **2**, and mixtures of **2**, **3a**, **3b** and **3a**, **3b**. The latter mixture could not be resolved by TLC on Si gel. (75,8S,1R-)A*-3,4,5'-_Trimethoxys_-(_and_ 3,4,5'-_tetramethyl_-)-1',4'-_dihydro_-4'-oxo_-6.0,2'.7'.1-_neolignan_ (**3a**+**3b**). Viscous oil, IR _r_min** cm-1': 1658. UV \({}^{2}_{2}\)CO3 nm (log _e_): 234, (4.68), 277 (5.49), 305 (3.98). If H NMR **3d** (60 GHz, HCl3): 6 8.65/5.6 (0.78 g), SH-2,5,6/2H-2,6,5, 5.38 (d, \(z\) = 9 Hz, H-7), 2.4-2.55 (_m_, H-8), 1.19/1.17 (_d_, \(J\) = 7 Hz, 3 H-9), 5.82 (s, H-3'), 5.50 (s, H-6), 2.4-

## Page 4

and extraction with CHCl3. The extract, filtered through Si gel (C6H6), gave **7** (yield 76%). In the second case work-up involved neutralization with NaHCO3 and evapn. The residue was separated by TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc, 8:2) into **1b** (yield 32%) and a mixture. This was fractionated by repeated TLC into **9a** (yield 18%) and **9b** (yield 31%).

_Compound_**7.** Crystals, mp 141-143deg (C6H6-hexane), C23H2O6, by NMR C and H counts and MS. IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{FLOW}}\) cm-1: 1757, 1667, 1H NMR (270 MHz, CDCl3): 6 6.70 (s, 2H-2,6), 2.46-2.48 (_m_, 2H-7,8), 1.09 (_d_, \(J\) = 7 Hz, 3H-9), 3.54 (s, H-3), 7.05 (_br_ s, H-6), 3.12 (_dt_, \(J\) = 5.1 Hz, 2H-7'), 5.8-5.9 (_m_, H-8'), 5.15-5.21 (_m_, 2H-9'), 3.84 (s, 2 OMe-3,5), 3.82 (s, OMe-4), 3.65 (s, OMe-5). 13C NMR (20 MHz, CDCl3): 6 137.2 (s, 2C-1,4), 10.46 (_d_, 2C-2,6), 153.8 (s, 2C-3,5), 45.4 (_a_, 49.5, 2G, 2C-7,8), 13.9 (_a_, 59.0, 140.6 (s, C-1'), 202.2 (s, C-2'), 69.9 (_d_, 5-3'), 194.3 (s, C-4'), 89.4 (s, C-5'), 147.3 (_d_, C-6'), 32.8 (_t_, C-7'), 134.1 (_d_, C-8'), 118.0 (_t_, C-9'), 56.3 (_s_, 2 OMe-3,5), 60.8 (s, OMe-4), 54.0 (_s_, OMe-5'), ORD (1.2 mg/25 ml MeOH): \(\left\{ \phi \right\}_{\text{AHO}}\) - \(400\), \(\left\{ \phi \right\}_{\text{2592}}^{\text{H}}\) - \(1400\), \(\left\{ \phi \right\}_{\text{355}}^{\text{25}}\) 0, \(\left\{ \phi \right\}_{\text{303}}^{\text{H}}\) + \(3800\), \(\left\{ \phi \right\}_{\text{203}}^{\text{25}}\) 0.

_Compound_**1b**. This is compound **7e** in ref. [2].

_Compound_**9a**. Crystals, mp 173-175deg (C6H6-hexane). IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{FLOW}}\) cm-1: 1665. UV \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{FLOW}}\) nm (log _e_): 230 (4.02), 282 (3.54), 302 (3.76). MS _m_/_e_ (rel, int.): 404 M+ (52), 317 (20), 276 (8), 208 (100), 139 (34), 181 (8), 151 (19), _Compound_**9b**. Crystals, mp 98-100deg (C6H6-hexane). IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{FLOW}}\) cm-1: 1675. UV \(\nu_{\max}^{\text{FLOW}}\) nm (log _e_): 235 (4.02), 284 (3.84), 295 (3.78). MS _m_/_e_ (rel, int.): 418 M+ (22), 317 (42), 276 (12), 208 (100), 193 (42), 181 (7), 179 (5), 151 (51), 1H NMR **9a**/**100 MHz, CDCl3): 86.62/6.54 (_s_, 2H-2,6), 4.12/4.10 (_d_, \(J\) = 11 Hz, H-7), 2.5-2.9 (_m_, H-8), 1.06/1.02 (_d_, \(J\) = 7 Hz, 3H-9), 2.7/5/2.64 (_d_, \(J\) = 16 Hz, H-3'ax), 3.22/3.28 (_d_, \(J\) = 16 Hz, H-3' eq), 6.50/6.44 (_br_ s, H-6'), 3.17 (_d_, \(J\) = 7 Hz, 2H-7'), 5.7-6.1 (_m_, H-8'), 5.1-5.3 (_m_, 2H-9'), 3.82 (s, 2 OMe-3,5), 3.85/3.86 (s, OMe-4), -/3.56 (s, OMe-4'), 3.44/3.42 (s, OMe-5').

_Acknowledgments--_This work was supported by a fellowship to R.B.F. from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico. The authors are indebted to Dr. Paul M. Baker, NPPN, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, for the 100 MHz 1H NMR, the 13C NMR and the MS, and to Dr. Hugo E. Gottlieb, Department of Organic Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, for the 270 MHz 1H NMR spectra and their interpretation.

## References

* [1] Martinez, V., J. C., Maia, J. G. S., Yoshida, M. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1980) _Phytochemistry_**19,** 474.
* [2] Aiba, C. J., Gottlieb, O. R., Pagliosa, F. M., Yoshida, M. and Magalhaes, M. T. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 745.
* [3] Diaz, D. P. P., Yoshida, M. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1980) _Phytochemistry_**19,** 285.
* [4] Gottlieb, O. R. (1978) _Prog. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod._**35**, 1.
* [5] Aiba, C. J., Fernandes, J. B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1975) _Phytochemistry_**14**, 1597.
* [6] Franca, N. C., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1974) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 2839.
* [7] Aiba, C. J., de Alvarenga, M. A., Castro C., O., Giesbrecht, A. M., Gottlieb, O. R. and Pagliosa, F. M. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 741.
* [8] Fernandes, J. B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Maia, J. G. S. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1033.
* [9] de Alvarenga, M. A., Brocksom, U., Castro C., O., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes, M. T. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 1797.
* [10] Wenkert, E., Gottlieb, H. E., Gottlieb, O. R., Pereira, M. O. da S. and Formiga, M. D. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1547.
* [11] Gottlieb, O. R., Mourao, J. C., Yoshida, M., Mascarenhas, Y. P., Rodrigues, M., Rosenstein, R. D. and Tomita, K. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 1003.
* [12] de Alvarenga, M. A., Brocksom, U., Gottlieb, O. R., Yoshida, M., Braz Filho, R. and Figliuolo, R. (1978) _J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm._**831.
* [13] de Alvarenga, M. A., Castro C., O., Giesbrecht, A. M. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 1801.
* [14] Matsui, K. and Munakata, K. (1975) _Tetrahedron Letters_**1905.



