# 10.3390@molecules15129205.pdf

## Page 1

Molecules 2010, 15, 9205-9213; doi:10.3390/molecules15129205

Alkaloids from Stems of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ Engl. (Rutaceae) as Potential Treatment for Alzheimer Disease

Elaine Monteiro Cardoso-Lopes 1, James Andreas Maier 1, Marcelo Rogerio da Silva 1, Luis Octavio Regasini 2, Simone Yasue Simote 2, Norberto Peporine Lopes 3, Jose Rubens Pirani 4, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani 2 and Maria Claudia Marx Young 1,*

## References

* _Section of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, Institute of Botany, Box 3005, 01061-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil_
* _Institute of Chemistry, Sao Paulo State University, Box 355, 14801-970, Araraquara, SP, Brazil_
* _Department of Chemistry and Physics, Sao Paulo University, 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil_
* _Department of Botany, Biosciences Institute, Sao Paulo University, Box 11.461, 05422-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil_
* _Author to whom corresponding should be addressed; E-Mail: mcmyoung@yahoo.com.br; Tel.: +55-11-5073-6300; Fax: +55-11-5073-6300._

_Received: 15 November 2010; in revised form: 2 December 2010 / Accepted: 6 December 2010 / Published: 13 December 2010_

_Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ Engl. (Rutaceae), popularly known as _guaranta, goiabeira_, is a native tree from Brazil. Bioactivity-guided fractionation of the ethanol stems extract afforded the isolation of six alkaloids: leiokinine A, leptomerine, kokusaginine, skimmianine, maculine and flindersiamine. All isolated compounds were tested for acetyl cholinesterase inhibition, _in vitro_ and displayed anticholinesterasic activity. The alkaloid leptomerine showed the highest activity (IC\({}_{50}\) = 2.5 mM), similar to that of the reference compound galanthamine (IC\({}_{50}\) = 1.7 mM). The results showed for the first time the presence of alkaloids leptomerine and skimmianine in _E. leiocarpa_ (Engl.) with potent anticholinesterasic activity.

_Keywords:Esenbeckia leiocarpa_; Rutaceae; alkaloids; acetylcholinesterase inhibitors

## Page 2



## 1 Introduction

The genus _Esenbeckia_ comprises 30 species distributed in Tropical America [1]. Chemical studies of _Esenbeckia_ spp. showed that they synthesize a variety of secondary metabolites, particularly quinolinic, quinolonic and indolic alkaloids and furocoumarins, and these compounds were considered chemical markers of this genus [2-4].

_Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ Engl. (Rutaceae), native from Brazil, is an ornamental tree widely distributed in Brazilian Dense Ombrophilis Atlantic Forest from South of Bahia to Sao Paulo states and is commonly known as _guaranta_ (SP), _goioheira_ (BA), _anta-forte_ and _guarataia_ (ES) [5].

Previous studies on _E. leiocarpa_ have been reported in the literature, and various compounds have been isolated from it, such as the alkaloids kokusaginine, flindersiamine, maculine, dictamnine, 4-methoxy-2-(3'-pentyl)quinoline, 1,4-dihydro-1-methyl-2-(3'-pentyl)quinolin-4-one, leiokinine A and leiokinine B, twelve indole derivatives, three lignans, one coumarin, two amides and the methyl 4-isoprenyloxy-_trans_-cinnamate [3,6,7].

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of progressive cognitive dysfunction that results from a deficiency in cholinergic activity in brain [8]. Several plant-derived drugs (rivastigmine and galanthamine) that inhibit acetylcholinesterase (AChE) can be used to treat early stages of AD, since these compounds increase the endogenous levels of acetylcholine to boost cholinergic neurotransmission. In a recent review, 260 chemically defined natural molecules were evaluated for acetylcholinesterase inhibition. The compounds tested were classified in alkaloids (139), monoterpenes (27), coumarins (18), triterpenes (17), flavonoids (14), benzenoids (13), diterpenes (8), oxygen heterocycles (5), sesquiterpenes (5), stilbenes (3), lignans (2), sulfur compounds (2), proteids (2), polycyclic (1), quinoid (1), benzoxazinone (1), carotenoid (1) and alycyclic (1) [9-11].

Strong efforts to discover new acetylcholinesterase inhibitors from a vast number of plant species were realized in our laboratory. In a screening of 58 extracts from native Brazilian plants, the ethanolic crude extract of the stems of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ showed a strong acetylcholinesterase inhibition and was chosen for bioassay-guided fractionation in order to isolate the biologically active compounds and evaluate the acetylcholinesterase inhibition of these compounds.

## 2 Results and Discussion

### Effect of crude extract and hexane and alkaloid fractions on acetylcholinesterase inhibition

The crude ethanol extract of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ stems inhibited 91.1 +- 0.2% of acetylcholinesterase activity when tested at 200 mg/mL. Acid-base partition was used to separate the crude extract (35.8 g) of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ into two fractions, hexane and chloroform (Alkaloid) and the yield of each fraction was 0.64% and 3.30%, respectively. The ethanol extract, hexane and alkaloid fractions of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ inhibited acetylcholinesterase activity with an IC50 50.7 mg/mL, 6.0 mg/mL and 1.6 mg/mL, respectively (Figure 1). The chloroform fraction, with positive result for alkaloids (Dragendorff's and iodoplatinate reagents), exhibited highest level of AChE inhibition and was selected for further purification.



## Page 3



### Chromatographic profile of alkaloid fraction

The analytical chromatographic (HPLC) analyses of alkaloid fraction (105.0 mg) from _E. leiocarpa_ afforded 14 fractions from which six major compounds were identified. They were fractionated by chromatographic procedure and the anticholinesterase activity of each fraction was tested by TLC bioassay as described by Marston _et al_. [12]. The fractions 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 presented strong anticholinesterase activity on TLC bioassay (results not showed) and retention times (_t_R) of 9.12 min, 11.69 min, 14.26 min, 15.60 min and 20.73 min, respectively (Figure 2).

Figure 1: Acetylcholinesterase inhibition by ethanol extract, alkaloid and hexane fractions (0.2 to 100.0 μg/mL).

Figure 2: Analytical chromatographic profile of alkaloid fraction from _E. leiocarpa_ by HPLC and their respectives molecular ion peaks [M+H]+ data in the ESI-MS.



## Page 4



### Isolation and identification of alkaloids from stems of E. leiocarpa

The alkaloid fraction of _E. leiocarpa_ (m = 105.0 mg) was dissolved into MeOH (10 mg/mL) and submitted to RP-HPLC using acetonitrile-water-methanol (10:45:45) as mobile phase, with UV detection at 242 nm and flow rate of 8 mL/min, affording 14 fractions (Fractions 1-14). From preparative HPLC, fractions Fr. 7 (_t_R = 15.4 min) and Fr. 9 (_t_R = 19.3 min) were identified as two 4-quinolinone alkaloids, leiokine A (**1**, 5.8 mg) [3] and leptomerine (**2**, 16.0 mg) [13], respectively. Fractions Fr. 10 (_t_R = 24.5 min) and Fr. 11 (_t_R = 26.2 min) yielded two fluoroquinoline alkaloids, kokusaginine (**3**, 5.7 mg) [14] and skimmianine (**4**, 12.3 mg) [15], respectively. In addition, fraction Fr. 12 (_t_R = 34.3 min) afforded a mixture of two others fluoroquinoline alkaloids (3.2 mg), maculine (**5**) [16] and flindersiamine (**6**) [6] (Figure 3). Their identification was based on analysis of 1D and 2D NMR experiments, as well as by comparison with literature data, 13C-NMR data of compounds **1**, **2**, **3** and **4** and 1H-NMR data of compounds **5** and **6** (see Experimental section).

### Anticholinesterase activity of alkaloids

The alkaloids maculine, flindersiamine, kokusaginine, leptomerine, leiokine A and skimmianine identified in this work were previously isolated from other _Esenbeckia_ species [1,17-19]. The alkaloids leptomerine and skimmianine have already been isolated from _Haplophyllum heptomerum_ (Rutaceae) in 1986 [13]. However, this is the first occurrence of leptomerine and skimmianine in _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ (Engl.).

To date, no study on evaluation of acetylcholinesterase activity was performed with species of the genus _Esenbeckia_. In the present paper, the alkaloids isolated from stems of _E. leiocarpa_, leiokine A and skimmianine presented acetylcholinesterase inhibition with IC50 values of 0.21 mM and 1.4 mM, respectively. While leptomerine and kokusaginine showed IC50 values of 2.5 mM and 46 mM, respectively (Figure 4). The alkaloids leptomerine and kokusaginine had a potent effect

Figure 3: Chemical structures of alkaloids with anticholinesterase activities, ALK 1 to 6. The alkaloids isolated are: **1** – leiokine A, **2** – leptomerine, **3** – kokusaginine, **4** – skimmianine, **5** – maculine, **6** – flindersiamine.



## Page 5

anticholinesterase similar to reference compounds galanthamine and physostigmine that have 1.7 mM and 0.4 mM values of IC50, respectively.

Previous biological studies with chloroform extract from leaves of _E. leiocarpa_ demonstrated weak antifeedant activity against the pink bollworm, _Pectinophora gossypiella,_ this activity was attributed to alkaloids leiokinine A and leiokinine B [3]. On the other hand, the alkaloids isolated from leaves of _E. belizencis_ Lundell were tested in the brine shrimp toxicity assay and revealed that kokusaginine have mildly toxicity (LC50 = 367 ppm) and findersiamine did not showed toxicity (LC50 > 1,000 ppm) [20]. The alkaloids maculine, kokusaginine, skimmianine and findersiamine demonstrated weak mutagenic activity [21,22]. In another species of Rutaceae, _Raulinoa echinata_ Cowan, these same alkaloids showed antifungal activity against _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_, a symbiotic fungus of leaf-cutting ants [23].

## Experimental

### Plant material

The stems of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ Engl. were collected in January 2007 from a specimen cultivated at the "Cidade Universitaria - Armando Salles de Oliveira- CUASO", USP, Sao Paulo State, Brazil, and identified by Dr. Jose Rubens Pirani. A voucher specimen (SPF 1169) was deposited at the Herbarium of the Departamento de Botanica, Instituto de Biociencias, USP, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation

The dry stems of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_ (1000 g) were powdered and extracted with ethanol (5 x 1.5 L) using a maceration method. The ethanol extract (35.8 g) was re-dissolved in aqueous solution (HCl 0.1 M, 2 x 120 mL) and the insoluble portion was filtered off. The acid solution was partitioned with hexane (7 x 60 mL) yielding a hexane fraction (0.230 g). The acid aqueous fraction was basified with NH4OH (pH 10) and partitioned with CHCl3 (7 x 60 mL) yielding an active alkaloid

Figure 4: Acetylcholinesterase inhibition of physostigmine, galanthamine, leptomerine, kokusaginine, leiokinine A and skimmianine (10−10 to 10−3 M).



## Page 6

fraction (1.182 g). All the fractions were tested in biological test for acetylcholinesterase inhibitor activity.

### General methods for compounds identification

The alkaloid fraction was analyzed in HPLC Varian Pro Star 310 system equipped with a 20 mL injection loop. The column used was a Phenomenex C-18 (250 x 4.6 mm) maintained at 20 degC. Twenty mL of the sample (1 mg/mL) was injected, the mobile phase (1 mL/min) was ACN: MeOH: H2O (10:45:45). Preparative HPLC was carried out using Varian Prep-Star 400 system using a Phenomenex C-18 (250 mm x 20.0 mm) preparative column. HPLC analysis of alkaloid fraction afforded 14 fractions. Fractions 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 were identified by NMR analyses. The 1D - (1H, 13C and DEPT) and 2D (1H-1H gCOSY, _g_HMQC and _g_HMBC) NMR experiments were recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer (11.7 T) at 500 MHz (1H) and 125 MHz (13C), using the CDCl3 as an internal standard.

_Leioknine 4_ (**1**). 1H-NMR [CDC13, d (ppm), \(J\) (Hz)]: d 2.97 (H-C1'), 1.68 (H-C2'), 1.10 (H-C3'), 8.53 (dd, \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.5 Hz, H-C5), 7.36 (tl, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-C6), 7.52 (dl, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-C7), 7.65 (dt, \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.5 Hz, H-C8), 3.82 (s, H-N-CH3), 3.94 (s, H-C3-OCH3) [3]. 13C-NMR [CDC13]: d 29.48 (C-1'), 22.23 (C-2'), 14.15 (C-3'), 148.45 (C-2), 140.01 (C-3), 172.01 (C-4), 141.07 (C-5), 126.52 (C-6), 123.11 (C-7), 131.70 (C-8), 115.29 (C-9), 126.77 (C-10), 34.93 (N-CH3), 60.22 (3-OCH3) [3].

_Leptomerine_ (**2**). 1H-NMR [CDC13, d (ppm), \(J\) (Hz)]: d 1.60 (m, H-C1'), 1.60 (m, H-C2'), 0.85 (t, H-C3'), 6.36 (s, H-C3), 8.41 (dd, H-C5), 7.34 (t, H-C6), 7.52 (d, H-C7), 7.63 (d, H-C8), 3.77 (s, H-N-CH3). 13C-NMR [CDC13]: d 27.6 (C-1'), 27.6 (C-2'), 11.6 (C-3'), 109.0 (C-3), 177.23 (C-4), 142.14 (C-5), 126.57 (C-6), 123.70 (C-7), 132.18 (C-8), 115.9 (C-9), 126.7 (C-10), 34.4 (N-CH3) [13].

_Kokusaginine_ (**3**). 1H-NMR [CDC13, d (ppm), \(J\) (Hz)]: d 7.53 (d, \(J\) = 2.5 Hz, H-C2'), 7.02 (d, \(J\) = 2.5 Hz, H-C3'), 7.47 (s, H-C5), 7.40 (s, H-C8), 4.41 (s, H-C4-OCH3), 4.03 (s, H-C6-OCH3), 4.02 (s, H-C7-OCH3) [21]. 13C-NMR [CDC13]: d 142.7 (C-2'), 104.8 (C-3'), 112.9 (C-3), 102.4 (C-4a), 100.2 (C-5), 105.8 (C-8), 142.7 (C-8a), 59.1 (4-OCH3), 56.2 (6-OCH3), 56.0 (7-OCH3) [21].

_Skimmianine_ (**4**). 1H-NMR [CDC13, d (ppm), \(J\) (Hz)]: d 7.54 (d, \(J\) = 2.5 Hz, H-C2'), 7.00 (d, \(J\) = 2.5 Hz, H-C3'), 7.95 (d, \(J\) = 9.5 Hz, H-C5), 7.17 (d, \(J\) = 9.5 Hz, H-C6), 4.39 (s, H-C4-OCH3), 4.06 (s, H-C7-OCH3), 3.97 (s, H-C8-OCH3) [14, 21]. 13C-NMR [CDC13]: d 143.2 (C-2'), 104.7 (C-3'), 118.2 (C-5), 112.4 (C-6), 59.8 (4-OCH3), 56.8 (7-OCH3), 61.7 (8-OCH3) [15, 21].

_Maculine_ (**5**). 1H-NMR [CDC13, d (ppm), \(J\) (Hz)]: d 7.56 (d, \(J\) = 2.4 Hz, H-C2'), 7.03 (d, \(J\) = 2.4 Hz, H-C3'), 7.46 (s, H-C5), 7.21 (s, H-C8), 6.07 (s, H-C2"), 4.41 (s, H-C4-OCH3) [16, 21].

_Flindersiamine_ (**6**). 1H-NMR [CDC13, d (ppm), \(J\) (Hz)]: d 7.52 (d, \(J\) = 2.4 Hz, H-C2'), 6.99 (d, \(J\) = 2.4 Hz, H-C3'), 7.19 (s, H-C5), 6.00 (s, H-C2"), 4.39 (s, H-C4-OCH3), 4.19 (s, H-C8-OCH3) [21].



## Page 7



### Anticholinesterasic assay

Acetylcholinesterase activity was measured using a 96-well microplate reader [24] based on Ellman's method [25]. In the 96-well plates, 25 mL of 15 mM acetylcholinesterase iodide (ATCI) in water, 125 mL of 3 mM DTNB in buffer C, 50 mL of buffer B, 25 mL of plant extract, alkaloid or hexane fractions (0.2 to 100.0 mg mL-1) were added and the absorbance was measured at 405 nm every 30 s for three times. Then 25 mL of 0.22 U/mL of the enzyme were added and the absorbance was again read every 10 min for two times. The percentage of inhibition was calculated by comparison with the rates for the sample to a blank (10% MeOH in Buffer A). The following buffers were used. Buffer A: 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8; buffer B: 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin V fraction (BSA); buffer C: 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, containing 0.1 M NaCl and 0.02 M MgCl2*6H2O.

### Statistical analysis of data

Data were presented as means +- SEM of experiments realized at least in triplicate. The IC50 values were calculated by means of regression analysis.

## 4 Conclusions

The alkaloids kokusaginine, findersiamine, maculine and leiokinine A were previously isolated from _E. leiocarpa_. On the other hand, this is the first occurrence of leptomerine and skimmianine in _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_. There are many compounds identified from higher plants with acetylcholinesterase inhibition activity as huperzine A, galanthamine isolated from _Huperzia serrata_ (Thunb.) Trev. [26] and _Galanthus nivalis_ Lumikello, respectively, and used for dementia treatment.

Some biological activities have been reported for the alkaloids isolated in this work, but none have been found to be related to acetylcholinesterase inhibition. This work demonstrated that these alkaloids presented potent anticholinesterasic activity and must be tested in pharmacological models _in vivo_ to determine if they have activity on memory of mice and pre clinical studies before human application.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants of Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) within the BIOTA/FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br); grant no. 03/02176-7). M. C. M. Young and V. S. Bolzani are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships. Elaine Monteiro Cardoso-Lopes thanks PRODOC/CAPES for providing a post-doctoral fellowship through the postgraduate programme on "Biodiversidade Vegetal e Meio Ambiente" of Instituto de Botanica of Sao Paulo, Brazil.

## References

* (1) Barros-Filho, B.A.; Nunes, F.M.; Oliveira, M.C.F.; Andrade-Neto, M.; Mattos, M.C.; Barbosa, F.G.; Mafezoli, J.; Pirani, J.R. Secondary Metabolites of _Esenbeckia almavillia_ Kaastra (Rutaceae). _Quim. Nova_**2007**, _30_, 1589-1591.



## Page 8

* [2] Guilhon, G.M.S.P.; Baetas, A.C.S.; Maia, J.G.S.; Conserva, L.M. 2-alkyl-4-quinolone alkaloids and cinnamic acid derivatives from _Esenbeckia almawillia_. _Phytochemistry_**1994**, _37_, 1193.
* [3] Nakatsu, T.; Johns, T.; Kubo, I.; Sakai, M., Chatani, K.; Saito, K., Tamagiwa, Y.; Kamikawa, T. Isolation, structure, and synthesis of novel 4-quinolinone alkaloids from _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_. _J. Nat. Prod._**1990**, _53_, 1508-1513.
* [4] Johnstone, R.A.W.; Rose, M.E. A rapid, simple and mild procedure for alkylation of phenols, alcohols, amides and acids. _Tetrahedron_**1979**, _35_, 2169-2173.
* [5] Lorenzi, H. _Brazilian Trees: A Guide to the Identification and Cultivation of Brazilian Native Trees_; Plantarum: Nova Odessa, SP, Brazil, 1992; p. 307.
* [6] Monache, F.D.; Monache, G.D.; Souza, M.A.M.; Cavalcanti, M.S., Chiappeta, A. Isopentenylindole derivatives and other components of _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_. _Gazz. Chim. Ital._**1989**, _119_, 435-439.
* [7] Monache, F.D.; Di Benedetto, R.; Souza, M.A.M.; Sandor, P. _Esenbeckia leiocarpa_: II\({}^{\text{a}}\). Further Componentes. _Gazz. Chim. Ital._**1990**, _120_, 387-389.
* [8] Katzman, R.; Jackson, E. Alzheimer disease: basic and clinical advances. _J. Amer. Geriat. Soc._**1991**, _39_, 516-525.
* [9] Howes, M.-J.R.; Perry, N.S.L.; Houghton, P.J. Plants with traditional uses and activities, relevant to the management of Alzheimer's disease and other cognitive disorders. _Phytother. Res._**2003**, _17_, 1.
* [10] Barbosa-Filho, J.M.; Medeiros, K.C.P.; Diniz, M.F.; Batista, L.M.; Athayde-Filho, P.F.; Silva, M.S.; Cunha, E.V.L.; Almeida, J.R.G.S.; Quintans-Junior, L.J. Natural products inhibitors of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. _Braz. J. Pharmacogn._**2006**, _16_, 258-285.
* [11] Houghton, P.J.; Ren, Y.; Howes, M.-J. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors from plants and fungi. _Nat. Prod. Rep._**2006**, _23_, 181-199.
* [12] Marston, A.; Kissling, J.; Hostettmann, K. A rapid TLC bioautographic method for the detection of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors in plants. _Phytochem. Anal._**2002**, _13_, 51-54.
* [13] Akhmedzhanova, V.I.; Bessonova, I.A.; Yunusov, S.Y. Alkaloids of _Haplophyllum leptomerum_. I. Structure of leptomerine. _Chem. Nat. Compd._**1986**, _22_, 78-79.
* [14] Wu, T.-S.; Shi, L.-S.; Wang, J.-J.; Iou, S.-C.; Chang, H.-C.; Chen Y.-P.; Kuo, Y.-H.; Chang, Y.-L.; Teng, C.-M. Cytotoxic and antiplatelet aggregation principles of _Ruta graveolens. J. Chin. Chem. Soc._**2003**, _50_, 171-178.
* [15] Cortez, L.E.R.; Cortez, D.A.G.; Ferreira, A.G.; Vieira, P.C.; Fernandes da Silva, M.F.G.; Fernandes, J.B. Chemical constituents of _Almeidea coerulea_ (Nees and Mart.) A. St.-Hill (Rutaceae). _Braz. J. Pharmacogn._**2006**, _16_, 164-169.
* [16] Nunes, F.M.; Barros-Filho, B.A.; Oliveira, M.C.F.; Andrade-Neto, M.; Mattos, M.C.; Mafezoli, J.; Pirani, J.R. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra of 3,8-dimethoxyfuro[3,2-g]coumarin and maculine from _Esenbeckia grandiflora_ Martius (Rutaceae). _Magn. Reson. Chem._**2005**, _43_, 864-866.
* [17] Trani, M.; Carbonetti, A.; Monache, G.D.; Monache, F.D. Dihydrochacones and coumarins of _Esenbeckia grandiflora_ subsp. _brevipetiolata_. _Fitoterapia_**2004**, _75_, 99-102.
* [18] Simpson, S.D.; Jacobs, H. Alkaloids and coumarins from _Esenbeckia pentaphylla_ (Rutaceae). _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2005**, _33_, 841-844.



## Page 9

* [19] Oliveira, F.M.; Sant'ana, A.E.G.; Conserva, L.M.; Maia, J.G.S.; Guilhon, G.M.P. Alkaloids and coumarins from _Esenbeckia_ species. _Phytochemistry_**1996**, _41_, 647-649.
* [20] Rios, M.Y.; Delgado, G. Terpenoids and alkaloids from _Esenbeckia belizencis_. spontaneous oxidation of fluoroquinoline alkaloids. _J. Nat. Prod._**1992**, _55_, 1307-1309.
* [21] Paulini, H.; Waibel, R.; Schimmer, O. Mutagenicity and structure-mutagenicity relationships of fluoroquinolines, naturally occurring alkaloids of the Rutaceae. _Mutat. Res. Lett._**1989**, _227_, 179-186.
* [22] Schimmer, O.; Kuhne, I. Furoquinoline alkaloids as photosensitizers in _Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Mutat. Res.-Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mut._**1991**, _249_, 105-110.
* [23] Biavatti, M.W.; Vieira, P.C.; Da Silva, M.F.G.F.; Fernandes, J.B.; Victor, S.R.; Pagnocca, F.C.; Albuquerque, S.; Caracelli, I.; Zukerman-Schpector, J. Biological activity of quinoline alkaloids from _Raulina echinata_ and X-ray structure of flindersiamine. _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2002**, _13_, 66-70.
* [24] Rhee, I.K.; Meent, M.; Ingkaninan, K.; Verpoorte, R. Screening for acetylcholinesterase inhibitors from Amaryllidaceae using silica gel thin-layer chromatography in combination with bioactivity staining. _J. Chromatogr. A_**2001**, _915_, 217-223.
* [25] Ellman, G.L.; Courtney, K.D.; Andres, V., Jr.; Featherstone, R.M. A new and rapid colorimetric determination of acetylcholinesterase activity. _Biochem. Pharmacol._**1961**, \(7\), 88-95.
* [26] Liu, J.S.; Zhu, Y.L.; Yu, C.M.; Zhou, Y.Z.; Han, Y.Y.; Wu, F.W.; Qi, B.F.; The structures of huperzine A and B two new alkaloids exhibiting marked anticholinesterase activity. _Can. J. Chem._**1986**, _64_, 837-839.
* [27]_Sample Availability:_ Samples of the compounds 1, 2, 3 and 4 are available from the authors.
* [28](c) 2010 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license ([http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/)).



