# 10.5935@0103-5053.19930018.pdf

## Page 1



**Further Pyrano Flavones From _Neoraputia alba_**

**Alberto C. Arruda, Paulo C. Vieira\({}^{\bullet}\), Joao B. Fernandes**

**and M. Fatima das G.F. da Silva.**

_Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brasil._

Received : april 22, 1993; July 23, 1993

###### Abstract

De _Neoraputia alba_ (Rutaceae) foram isoladas oito flavonas, alem de uma flavancona. Tres das flavonas estao sendo descritas pela primeira vez: 3',4'-metilendodioxi-6,5-(2",2"-dimetilipirano)-7-metoxiflavona (**1**); 3',4'-s-trimetoxi-5-hidroxi-6,7-(2",2"-dimetil-pirano)-flavona (**2**) e 3',4'-metilendodioxi-5,7,8-trimetoxiflavona (**3**). Cinco substancias conhecidas (**4**-**8**) foram tambem isoladas: 3',4'-metilendodioxi-5, 5',6,7-tetrametoxiflavona; 3',4',5,5',7-pen-tametoxiflavona; 4',5',7,8-tetrametoxiflavona; 3',4',5',7,8-bematecoiflavona. A unica flavancona, 3',4',5,5',7-pentametoxiflavancona (**9**), e conhecida como produto de derivataza, sendo esta a primeira vez que e isolada de plantas.

_Neoraputia alba_ (Rutaceae) yielded eight flavones, besides one flavanone. Among the flavones, three were identified as the new compounds, 3',4'-methylenedioxy-6,5-(2",2"-dimethylpyran)-7-methoxyflavone (**1**); 3',4',8-trimethody-5-hydroxy-6,7-(2",2"-dimethylpyran)-flavone (**2**), 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5,7,8-trimethodyflavone (**3**). Five known compounds (**4**-**8**) 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5, 5',6,7-tetramethyl-flavone; 3',4',5,5',7-pentametohxyflavone; 4',5,5',7,8-tetramethyl-flavone; 3',4',5,7,8-pentametohxyflavone; 3',4',5,5',7,8-bematechoxyl flavone were also isolated. The only flavancone (**9**), 3',4',5,5',7-pentametohxyflavone, is known as product of derivatization, however this is its first isolation from plants.

**Key words -** Neoraputia alba; _Rutaceae, flavones._

## Introduction

The genus _Raputia_ was first described by Aublet in 1775, with the species _R. aromatica_. However, recently, Emmerich1 has renamed it as _Neoraputia_.

In a previous paper2 we described the isolation of two pyrano flavones of _Neoraputia alba_. Now, we report the isolation and identification of eight flavones and one flavanone from the same plant.

## Experimental

_Extraction and isolation of the constituents_ - Leaves (1.041 kg) of _N. alba_ (a voucher is deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias-USP-Sao Paulo) collected in Espirito Santo, Brazil, were ground and extracted with petrol, CH2Cl2 and MeOH respectively. Solvent evaporation yielded the corresponding extracts. The petrol extract (2.082 g) afforded two flavonoids reported in a different paper2. The methylene chloride extract (14.527 g) was chromatographed on dry column (eluent CH2Cl2:EtOAc 9:1). The column was cut and the silica extracted with MeOH yielding 8 new fractions. Fraction 4 chromatographed over silicagel column yielded (**3**) (116 mg). Fractions 6,7 and 8 after recrystallization afforded (**3**) (86 mg), (4) (231 mg) and (**8**) (54 mg) respectively.

The methanol extract (18.470 g) was partitioned in MeOH/HfO2/hexane. The methanolic fraction partitioned with EtOAc/HfO/Hf+. The acidic solution was neutralized with NH4OH and extracted again with EtOAc. The resulting EtOAc extract after column chromatography yielded (**3**) (37 mg), (**4**) (118 mg) and (**5**) (121 mg).

From a second collect the dichloromethane extract of leaves (20.417 g) after a similar treatment as described above, yielded (**1**) (320 mg), (**2**) (13 mg), (**6**) (410 mg) and (**7**) (36 mg). Other extracts from stems of the same plant were also fractionated yielding the same compounds described above.

_3',4'-Methylenedioxy-6,5-(2",2"-dimethylpyran)-7-methyloxyflavone_ (**1**). Colorless crystals from MeOH, m.p. (156-

## Page 2

158) ^C. UV _l_max nm: 308 (log e 3.95), 330 (log e 4.02). IR _v_max cm-1: 1645, 1515, 1473.

1H NMR: table 1. ^1C NMR: Table 3. MS _m_/z (rel. int. %): 378(16), 363(100), 217(83), 146(16), 145(14).

3', ',4',8'-_Trinemo_-3'-_hydroxy_-6'-(2', 2'-_dimethylpyran) -_flavone_ (2). Yellow crystals from MeOH, m.p. (182-184)^C. UV _l_max nm: 294 (log e 4.14), 350 (log e 4.01). IR _v_max cm-1: 3435, 1656, 1620, 1575. 1H NMR: table 1. ^1C NMR: Table 3. MS _m_/z (rel. int. %): 410(76), 395(100), 165(34). Compound (2) was acetylated with acetic anhydride and pyridine yielding (2a).

1H NMR: Table 1. _Conversion of_ (2) _in_ (2b). A mixture containing 1.4 mg of NaH, 10 mg of (2) and 1ml of CH3I dissolved in mineral oil and DMF was stirred under N2 for 40 min. Workup of the reaction yielded (2b) (7 mg). ^1H NMR: Table 1.

5,7,8-_Trinemo_-3',4'-_methylenedioxyflavone_ (3). Colorless crystals from MeOH, m.p. (241-243)^C. UV \(l\) max nm: 260 (log e 4.13), 332 (log e 4.14). IR _v_max cm-1: 1649, 1598, 1504, 1379. 1H NMR: Table 1. ^1C NMR: Table 3. MS _m_/z (rel. int. %): 356(35), 341(39), 146(61), 195(23), 167(100).

## Results and discussion

The stems and leaves of _N. alba_ yielded nine flavonoids, eight of them flavones and one flavanone.

Compounds **1** and **2** have very similar structures. The ^1H NMR for compound **1** (Table 1) showed features of a dimethylehromene ring (8 5.56 and 6.58 vinylic protons), a singlet for a pair of magnetically equivalent methyl groups (d = 1.51). Other signals referring to an ABX coupling system for three protons in the ring **B** (d 87.40\(d\), 7.27\(d\) and 6.87_d_), a methoxyl (d 3.89) and methylenedioxy (d 6.02) were all well-defined in the ^1H NMR. From MS, the fragments _m_/_z 149 and 146 indicated that the methylenedioxy is fused to the ring **B**, as well as the one _m_/_z 217 requires the chromene fused to **A**. The comparison of these data to those reported for two other flavones isolated from the same plant2, suggests that (**1**) contains one proton in the ring **A**, and a methylenedioxy in **B**. The relative positioning of the chromene ring came from experiments of lanthanide reagent3 (Table 2), which suggested the same arrangement as obtained for the two previously reported flavones2. However, two possible isomers can be drawn for (**1**), which can either have a proton at C-7 and a methyl at C-8 or vice-versa. The decision for the compound containing 7-OMe and H-8 came from both bi-synthetic arguments, where an oxygen atom is required in C-7 rather than C-8, and the chemical shift observed for C-8 (d 91.4) in the ^1C NMR, that would be a very high field for C-7. The structure proposed is also in agreement with the ^1C NMR (Table 3).

Compound **2** showed to be very closely related to (**1**). The ^1H NMR for this compound also showed features of a chromene ring, vinylic and methyl protons (Table 1). Again from ^1H NMR it was possible to assign a disubstituted **B** ring exhibiting a characteristic ABX coupling system. The presence of a chelated hydroxyl (d 12.75) requires a hydroxyl group attached to C-5, as well as the chemical shift observed for C-4 (d 182.3)4. Acetylation of (2) yielded the corresponding monoacetate (2a) (d 2.42). The acetate (2a) also showed a disenlielding for the signal of H-4' ( d 0.21) displaying a linear arrangement for the chromene ring in this molecule. Compound (2) was also methylated yielding (2b), which showed to be an isomer of (10), a flavone described before2, indicating **a** different attachment of the chromene unit to the **A**. Moreover, the addition of lanthanide shift reagent to (2a) in the ^1H NMR showed a large shift for the signals of H-3, H-4' and H-3'' confirming that (2b) is an isomer of (10) (Table 3). Therefore a linear arrangement for the chromene ring was proposed for (2).

Compound (3) showed ^1H NMR signals referring to a methylenedioxy group (d 6.04), three methoxyls (d 3.99, 3.96 and 3.94). Further analysis from the ^1H NMR indicated the disubstituted pattern of the ring **B**, and the presence of one 

## Page 3

proton in the ring **A** (SS 6.43) as well. The suggestion that the methylenedioxy should be attached to the ring **B**, appeared from the mass spectrum \(m/\!z\) 146. One further problem was the location of the third methoxyl group in the ring **A**. This was decided on the basis of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR which showed only one signal for the methoxyl carbons (8 61.58) requiring an _ortho_-disubstituted carbon\({}^{3}\). This result conducted to the structure counting 8-OMe, instead of a 6-OMe.

Flavones **4-8** were identified through comparison of their spectral data with the ones described in the literature\({}^{6-8}\).

The use of C6D6 was necessary to decide among some possible isomers, especially for those compounds having three methoxyls in the ring **A**. It has been shown that C6D6 induces a shielding in methoxyl signals, in the \({}^{1}\)HNMR, when this group has an _ortho_ hydrogen\({}^{9,10}\). Using this experiment together with the chemical shifts observed for the methoxyl carbons in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR, it was possible to distinguish among the isomers for compounds **4**, **6**, **7** and **8**. For example, when the \({}^{1}\)H NMR was run for compound **8** in CDCl3 and subsequently in C6D6, a shielding was observed in the signals for four methoxyls. This means that only two methoxyls have no proton in _ortho_ positions. This result led unequivocally to the structure **8** for this flavone. A similar approach was used for the other compounds.

The only flavanone isolated from this plant was identified on the basis of its spectral data and comparison with those reported in the literature for the same compound\({}^{11}\).

\({}^{13}\)C NMR data for flavones 1, 2 and 3 (CDCl3 50.32 MHz, 8 scale).

\({}^{13}\)C NMR data for flavones 1, 2 and 3 (CDCl3 50.32 MHz,

## Page 4

The occurrence of polymethoxylated flavones is important for the chemosystematics of _Neoraputia_. This is the second time that this type of compounds has been isolated from this genus. Polymethoxylated flavones have also been found in _Citrus_ species [12, 13]

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors thank FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES for financial support. A.C.A. acknowledges CAPES-PICD for the award of a scholarship.

## References

* [1] M. Emmerich, _Rodriguesia_**45**, 223, (1987).
* [2] A.C. Arruda, P.C. Vieira, J.B. Fernandes, M.F. das G.F. da Silva, R.H.P. Francisco, A.M.G.D. Rodrigues, J.R. Lechat, _Photochemistry_**30**, 3157 (1991).
* [3] A.F. Cockerill, G.L.O. Davies, R.C. Harden, D.M. Rackham, _Chemical Reviews_**73**, 553 (1973).
* [4] K.R. Markhan, V.M. Chari, in _The Flavonoids, Advances in Research_ (J.B. Harborne and T.J. Mabry, T.J. eds.)(Chapman and Hall, London, 1982) p.19.
* [5] P. K. Agrawal, R. P. Rastogi, _Heterocycles_**16**, 2181 (1981).
* [6] C. C. Chen, Y. P. Chen, H. Y. Hsu, Y. L. Chen, _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**32**, 166 (1984).
* [7] S.H. Cavalcante, A.I. da Rocha, M. Yoshida, O.R. Gottlieb, _Acta.Amazonica_**12**, 377 (1982).
* [8] J.H. Tatum, R.E. Berry, _Hydrochenistry_**11**, 2283 (1972).
* [9] A.V. Vyas, N.B. Mulchandani, _Magm. Res. Chem._**24**, 421 (1986).
* [10] R.G. Wilson, J.H. Bowie, D.H. Williams, _Tetrahedron_**24**, 1407 (1968).
* [11] V.B. Khare, A.B. Kulkarni, _Indian J. Chem._**12**, 1134 (1974).
* [12] G. Schneider, G. Unkinch, P. Pfaender,_Arch. Pharm._**301**, 785 (1968).
* [13] J.H. Tatum, C.J. Hearn, R.E. Berry, _Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci._**103**, 492 (1978).



