# 10.1021@np9004079.pdf

## Page 1



# Cytotoxic Clerodane Diterpenoids from _Caseraria obliqua_

Gerardo Magela Vieira Junior, Tiago de Oliveira Goncalves, Luis O. Regasini, Paulo M. Pinheiro Ferreira, Claudia do O Pessoa, Leticia V. Costa Lotto, Roseli Buzanelli Torres, Nivaldo Boralle, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Alberto Jose Cavalheiro

# Abstract

A crude bioactive EtOH extract of the twigs of _Caseraria obliqua_ afforded two new clerodane diterpenes, caseobliquins A (**1**) and B (**2**). Additionally, bioactivity-directed fractionation on a bioactive hexane extract of the leaves from this species led to the isolation of the known clerodane diterpenes _rel_-_6_b_-hydroxyzuelanin_-_2_b_-benzoate and _rel_-_2a_-hydroxyzuelanin_-_6_b_-benzoate (**3** and **4**) as a mixture and _2_b_-hydroxyzuelanin_-_6_b_-cinnamate (**5**). The structures of the new clerodanes **1** and **2** were established on the basis of their 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopic data, and the new compound **1** and the known substance **5** had their absolute configurations determined by circular dichroism spectroscopy. The cytotoxicity of several of the compounds isolated was evaluated against a small panel of human tumor cell lines.

## Introduction

Clerodane diterpenes (Dimeroids) were first introduced by the _Caseraria obliqua_ (Caseraria _obliqua_), which was first introduced by the _Caseraria obliqua_ (Caseraria _obliqua_). The _Caseraria obliqua_ was first introduced by the _Caseraria obliqua_ (Caseraria _obliqua_), which was first introduced by the _Caseraria obliqua_ (Caseraria _obliqua_).



## Page 2

4.93 (d, \(J\) = 11.0 Hz, H-15), which were coupled to a methine proton signal at \(\delta\) 6.43 (dd, \(J\) = 11.0, 17.5 Hz, H-14). The other methine proton signal was observed as a multiplet at \(\delta\) 5.54 (H-12). This side chain was also confirmed by BCOSY correlations of H-11 to H-12 and H-14 to H-15. The gHMBC spectrum exhibited correlations of H-11 to C-9, C-10, C-12, and C-13; H-14 to C-12 and C-16; and H-15 to C-13, revealing that this side chain is located at the C-9 position. The configuration of the C-12,13 double bond was found to be \(E\) on the basis of the NOESY correlations between H-12 and H-14 (Figure 1). The \(p\)-hydroxybenzoate group was deduced from the resonances at \(\delta\) 6.83 (2H, d, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz, H-3' and H-7') and 7.97 (2H, d, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz, H-4' and H-6'). The gHMBC spectrum showed correlation of the oxymethine proton, H-6, to the carbonyl carbon (\(\delta\) 167.1, C-1') of the \(p\)-hydroxybenzoate group, which indicated that the \(p\)-hydroxybenzoate is located at C-6 (\(\delta\) 76.5). The H-18 (\(\delta\) 6.39) and H-19 (\(\delta\) 6.67) protons were correlated to carbonyl groups (\(\delta\) 171.8 and 171.1), respectively, establishing these as sites of acetylation. By elimination, the third acetate group (\(\delta\) 172.5 and 21.0) could be located at C-2.

On comparing compound **1** with other clerodane di terpenoids, this compound showed differences in the configurations of the carbons C-5, C-6, C-8, C-9, C-10, and C-18, as indicated by chemical shift data for compound **1** in relation to literature values.[15] The relative configuration of all eight chiral centers was assigned on the basis of their coupling constants and by NOESY correlations (Table 1 and Figure 2). A 1,3-diaxial NOESY correlation was observed for H-6 and H-8, which indicated that the C-8 methyl group (C-17) is in an equatorial orientation. The _trans_ configuration between the C-17 and C-20 methyl groups was proposed because of the chemical shift at \(\delta\) 25.3 for C-20, which also supported a

Figure 1: Selected NOE enhancements observed for **1**.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline position & **1\({}^{a}\)** & **1\({}^{b}\)** & **2\({}^{b}\)** & **3\({}^{a}\)** & **4\({}^{a}\)** \\ \hline
1 & 29.6 & 272, CH\({}_{2}\) & 30.2 & 37.4, CH\({}



## Page 3

_cis_-**A**/B ring junction.[10, 15, 17] The \(J\) values of 3.0 and 14.0 Hz for the coupling of H-10 to H-1 protons revealed that H-10 is in an axial position, while the NOESY correlations between H-2/H\({}_{2}\)-10 showed that H-2 is \(\beta\)-oriented. The chemical shift at \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 70.5 in CDCl3 for the C-2 oxymethine carbon was consistent with the C-2 substituents having an \(\alpha\)-orientation, as reported for related compounds.[1, 18] The acetal proton, H-19, was also assigned with a \(\beta\)-orientation on the basis of the NOESY correlation of H-19 to H-10, and to the other acetal proton, H-18, an \(\alpha\)-orientation was assigned because of the NOE enhancement observed for H-18 with the protons H-4'/H-6' from the \(p\)-hydroxybenzoate moiety (0 7.97). This could occur only if H-18 is on the opposite face of the diacetal furan ring in relation to H-19 (Figure 1).[16]

X-ray crystallographic data were used earlier to assign the absolute configuration for a series of clerodane diterpenes similar to **1**.[15] The absolute stereochemistry of **1** was determined by circular dichroism spectroscopy, in which a positive Cotton effect was exhibited at 241 nm. The C-9 carbon of the clerodane diterpenes occurs with a \(R\) orientation when a negative Cotton curve is evident,[12] so **1** was assigned with an \(S\) orientation at C-9. Following this argument, it was possible to determine the complete absolute configuration of compound **1**, as follows: _2R_, _5R_, _6R_, _8S_, 9S, 10\(R\), 18S, 19_S. This new compound, named caseboliquin A, is a diastereoisomer of caseabroin E.[15]

Caseobiliquin B (**2**) was isolated as a yellow amorphous solid, with a molecular formula of C3H4O3 as determined by HRTOFES-TMS (observed _m/z_ 629.2747 [M + Na]+). The complete \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data for **2** are shown in Tables 1 and 2. The entire data set was similar to that for **1** except for the modification from the substituent at C-6, with that in **1** a \(p\)-hydroxybenzoate moiety and that for **2** a cinnamoly moiety.

gCOSY, gHMQC, and gHMBC NMR experiments performed supported the same connectivities for **2** as in **1**. The cinnamoly group was deduced from the resonances at \(\delta\) 6.48 (1H, d, \(J\) = 16.0 Hz, H-2', 7.80 (1H, d, \(J\) = 16.0 Hz, H-3'), 7.40 (3H, m, H-6', H-7' and H-8'), and 7.63 (2H, m, H-5' and H-9'). The gHMBC spectrum showed a correlation of the oxymethine proton, H-19 (\(\delta\) 6.67), linked to the acetate carbonyl at \(\delta\) 171.1. The ester groups were located by comparison with appropriate values reported in the literature,[16] the cinnamoly was placed at C-6 (0 75.5), and the acetate groups were placed at carbons C-2 (\(\delta\) 64.4) and C-18 (\(\delta\) 94.0). These assignments were corroborated by NOE enhancements between H-12 and the methyl group (\(\delta\) 1.90) of the acetate moiety at position 2 and between H-15 and the methyl group (\(\delta\) 2.05) of the acetate moiety at position 18 (Figure 2).

Khan et al.[16] used NOESY data to assign the relative configuration for a series of clerodane diterpenoids that have a two-dimensional structure identical to that of **2**, differing only in the stereochemistry of C-2. The chemical shift at \(\delta\) 64.4 for the C-2 oxymethine carbon was consistent with the C-2 substituent having a \(\beta\)-orientation, as reported for related compounds,[17]\({}^{a,}\)[17] whereas from the literature this value is \(\delta\) 70.2 (\(\alpha\)-orientation,[16] On the basis of the evidence above, compound **2** could be determined to have the relative configuration 2\(S\), _5R_, _6R_, _8S_, 9S, 10\(R\), 18S, 19S. This is a diastereoisomer of _rel_-2\(\alpha\)-acetoxyzuelanin-6\(\beta\)-cinnamate[16] and has been named caseboliquin B.

The three known clerodane diterpenes (**3**-**5**) were identified on the basis of their spectroscopy data (UV, IR, and NMR) and comparison with appropriate values reported in the literature. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR data of compounds **3** and **4** and the absolute configuration of **5** are included in this paper, in order to complement the lack of this information in previous reports of these compounds,[16, 19]

Four compounds were evaluated for their cytotoxic activity, using the MTT assay, corroborating the well-established cytotoxicity of this compound class. The cytotoxic activities of compound **1**, a mixture **3** and **4**, and **5** were evaluated in vitro against HL-60 (human myeloblastic leukemia), HCT-8 (human colon carcinoma), MDA/MB-435 (human melanoma), and SF-295 (human glioblastoma) cells. Inhibitory concentration (IC50) values were determined, and the results are shown in Table 3. The mixture of compounds **3** and **4** showed significant cytotoxicity against four cancer cell lines (HL-60, HCT-8, MDA/MB-435, and SF-295), with IC50 values ranging from 0.13 to 1.0 \(\mu\)M, close to data obtained for the positive control, doxorubicin (Table 3).



## Page 4

CH3OH as internal standard. Positive-ion HRMS were recorded on a UltrOTOFq (Bruker Daltonics) ESI-qTOF mass spectrometer using an internal standard. Analytical HPLC was performed on a Varian Pro Star 230 with a UV-vis detector (model 330) using a Phenomenex Cs column (250 mm x 4.6 mm, 5 _m_m), in order to develop the reversed-phase conditions, which were scaled up for preparative work. Preparative HPLC was performed on a Varian Prep-Star 400 system using a Phenomenex Cs (250 mm x 21.2 mm, 10 _m_m) preparative column. Column chromatography was performed over silica gel 230\(-\)400 mesh (Merck) or on Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia Biotech). TLC was performed using Merck silica gel 60 (>230 mesh) and precoated silica gel 60 PFS24 plates. Spots on TLC plates were visualized under UV light and by spraying with anisaldehyde-H3SO4 reagent followed by heating at 120 degC.

**Plant Material.**_Cascuring obliqua_ leaves and twigs were collected in May 2007 at Campinas municipality, Sao Paulo, Brazil. The plant material was identified by one of the authors (R.B.T.). A voucher specimen (IAC46529) has been deposited in the herbarium of the Instituto Agromocino de Campinas (Sao Paulo State, Brazil). Recent studies on the phylogeny of the Flacoutiaceae, based on plastid rhcl DNA sequences, have shown that the family is polyphyplicite and recognized by two major clades, one with coffee affinities to the Salicaceae and the other with the Achiaraiaceae. Among those genera of Flacoutiaceae now assigned to Salicaceae _sensu tato_ is the genus _Cascaria_.20

**Extraction and Isolation.** The twigs (534.0 g) of C. _obliqua_ were extracted exhaustively by maccarian with hexane, ethanol, and water (3.0 L x 3), successively, at room temperature. The ethanol extract was concentrated under reduced pressure (<=40 degC) to yield 9.3 g of a crude extract. This ethanol extract was then diluted with MeOH-H2O (3:1) and partitioned successively with hexane (1.0 L x 3), E12O (1.0 L x 3), and E10OAc (1.0 L x 3). After removal of the solvent, each extract yielded 2.9, 1.0, 1.1, and 4.0 g of residue, respectively. Part of the cytotoxic E12O fraction (1.0 g) was subjected to gel permeation chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 (708 \(\times\) 3.0 cm), eluted with methanol, to afford 95 fractions, which were combined on the basis of TLC visualized with anisaldehyde-H3SO4. Cytotoxic fraction 50 (54.0 mg) was submitted to preparative RP-HPLC on a C18 column (Phenomenex Luna 250 mm x 21.2 mm, 10 _m_m), eluted with MeOH-H2O-AcOH (85:15:0.01) at a flow rate of 15 mL/min and UV detection at 254 nm, affording the cierodane dieterpenes **1** (6.0 mg) and **2** (1.3 mg).

The leaves (94.7 g) of C. _obliqua_ were extracted exhaustively by maceration successively with hexane, ethanol, and water (3.0 L x 3) at room temperature. The hexane extract was concentrated under reduced pressure (<=40 degC) to yield 1.5 g of a crude extract. This extract exhibited cytotoxicity against four human cancer cell lines and was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (15.0 x 4.5 cm), eluted in a gradient step mode from hexane to E10OAc, yielding 15 fractions. Cytotoxic fraction 8 (114.0 mg) was subjected to preparative RP-HPLC on a C18 column, eluted with MeOH-H2O (78:22) at a flow rate 14 mL/min and UV detection at 254 nm, affording the cierodane dieterpenes **5** (6.2 mg) and a mixture of **3** and (1.7:10; 10.0 mg).

**Casobibilium A (1):** yellow, amorphous solid; [a]3P +52 (_c_ 1.0, MeOH); UV (CHCl3)2max (0g _g_) 241 (348), 280 (3.50 mm); (DC \(o\)0, MeOH) (_a_ =145 (241)), +24 (280); IR (KBr) _r_max 436, 2950, 1735, 1250 cm-1; H and [13C NMR data, see Tables 2 and 2; HRTOFSIM _m_/_z_ 619.2513 [M + Na]+ (caled for C3P3H2O30Na, 619.2513).

**Caseobilium B (2):** yellow, amorphous solid; [a]3P +51 (_c_ 0.5, CHCl3)2max (0g _g_) 243 (4.58) nm; (HT) and [1C NMR data, see Tables 1 and 2; HRTOFSIM _m_/_z_ 629.2747 [M + Na]+ (caled for C3H2O30Na, 629.2721).

**_rel-6B-Hydroxyzuelan-2b-benzoate and rel-2o-Hydroxyzuelan-in-6b-benzoate (3 + 4, 1:71 mixture);_ yellow, amorphous solid; [a]3P +70 (_c_ 1.0, CHCl3); UV (CHCl3)2max (0g _e_) 243 (4.12) nm; IR (KBr) _r_max 3448, 2925, 1756, 1714, 1272, 715 cm-1; 13C NMR data, see Table 2; HRTOFSIM _m_/_z_ 577.2199 [M + K]+ (caled for C3H2O30Na, 577.2198 [M + K]+ (caled for C3H2O30Na, 577.2198 [M + K]+ (caled for C3H2O30Na, 57.



