# 10.1515@znb-2005-0321.pdf

## Page 1



# Limonoids from _Cipadessa fruticosa_

Ana C. Leite, Joao B. Fernandes, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, and Paulo C. Vieira

Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Sao Carlos, Sao Paulo, Brazil, CP 676

Reprint requests to Prof. Dr. Joao Batista Fernandes. Fax : +55-16-3351-8350.

E-mail: djbf@power.ufscar.br

Z. Naturforsch. 60b, 351 - 355 (2005); received July 16, 2004

###### Abstract

The fruits of _Cipadessa fruticosa_ BI. afforded two new limonoids: methyl 8\(a\),30_a_-epoxide-3_b_-(2'-methylbutyryloxy)-1-oxomeliacate (cipadesin A) and methyl 21,23-dihydro-23-hydroxy-21-oxo-3_b_-tioglyoxyl-1-oxomeliac-8(30)-enate (febrifugin A), along with the known limonoids cpadesin, khayasin T, febrifugin, ruageanin A and mexicanolide. Their structures were elucidated on the basis of spectroscopic methods.

Cipadessa fruticosa, Meliaceae, Limonoid, Cipadesin A, Febrifugin A 0932-0776 / 05/ 0300-0351 $ 06.00 (c) 2005 Verlag der Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung, Tubingen. [http://maturforsch.com](http://maturforsch.com)

## Introduction

_Cipadessa fruticosa_ BI. (Meliaceae) is widely cultivated in the southwest of China. This plant has been reported to contain _ent_-ciredoandes and labdanes diterpenoids [1, 2], limonoids, sterols, sesquiterpenoids, henecisocene derivatives and one coumarin [3, 4]. Flavonoid glycosides [5, 6] were isolated from _C. cinerascens_ and _C. boivinina_ yielded sterols [7].

Limonoids are mainly found in plants belonging to the Meliaceae family. They have attracted considerable interest because of their biological properties and variety of structures [8]. In this paper, we report the isolation of two new limonoids **1** and **2**, along with five known limonoids: cipadesin (**3**) [3, 9], khayasin T (**4**) [10, 3], febrifugin (**5**) [3, 9, 11, 12], raugeanin A (**6**) [13] and mexicanolide (**7**) [14].

## Results and Discussion

The ethyl acetate-soluble fraction of the dichloromethane extract of the fruits of _C. fruticosa_ was purified by repeated column chromatography on silica gel and preparative HPLC to give the limonoids **1** - 7.

Compound **1** had a molecular formula of C32H42O9 as determined from the pseudo-molecular ion peak at _m/z_ 593 [M + Na]+ in the positive ESI mass spectrum and elemental analysis. The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data (Table 1 and 2) of **1** are similar to that cipadesin (**3**), a mexicanolide-type limonoid previously isolated from this plant [3]. They differed only with respect to an epoxide ring between C-8 and C-30 in **1** and the olefinic bond, in the same position, in **3**. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **1** indicated the presence of four tertiary methyl groups (\(\delta_{\text{H}}=0.80\), \(0.82\), \(1.01\) and \(1.07\)), one methoxy singlet (\(\delta_{\text{H}}=3.72\)), three downfield shifted signal attributed to a \(\beta\)-substituted furan ring (\(\delta_{\text{H}}=7.48\), \(7.43\) and \(6.46\)), two signals characteristic of proton attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (\(\delta_{\text{H}}=5.17\), \(s\), H-17 and \(\delta_{\text{H}}=5.10\), \(d\), \(J=9.4\) Hz, H-3) and the proton on the epoxide ring (\(\delta_{\text{H}}=3.32\), \(d\), \(J=2.4\) Hz, H-30). The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum showed the presence of a ketone at \(\delta_{\text{c}}=214.3\) (C-1) and three ester carbonyls at \(\delta_{\text{c}}=172.1\) (C-16), \(174.2\) (C-7) and \(175.9\) (C-1'). In the \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H COSY experiment the signal of H-30 showed cross peaks with the methine proton at \(\delta_{\text{H}}=3.56\) (\(dd\), \(J=9.4\), \(2.4\) Hz, H-2), which correlated with the signal of H-30. This signal showed HSQC correlation with the signal at \(\delta_{\text{c}}=63.5\) attributed to C-30.

In the HMBC spectrum, the signal at \(\delta_{\text{c}}=214.3\) (C-1) showed correlations with the signals at \(\delta_{\text{H}}=1.07\) (\(s\), H-19, 3H), \(3.32\) (\(d\), \(J=2.4\) Hz, H-30) and \(3.56\) (\(dd\), \(9.4\), \(2.4\) Hz, H-2). It was observed long-range correlations of \(\delta_{\text{H}}=5.17\) (\(s\), H-17) with the signals at \(\delta_{\text{c}}=172.1\) (C-16), \(120.1\) (C-20) and \(26.7\) (C-18), suggesting the presence of a \(\delta\)-lactone as D-ring. The \(\alpha\)-configuration of epoxide ring at C8/C30 was determined by the small coupling constant of H-30 (\(J=2.4\) Hz). The data above confirmed that limonoid **1** had a mexicanolide skeleton.

The 2-methylbutyryloxyl ester moiety at C-3 was characterized by the signals at \(\delta_{\text{H}}=2.58\) (_sextet_, \(J=6.8\) Hz, H-2'); \(1.55\) and \(1.79\) (_m_, H-3'); \(0.97\) (\(t\), \(J=7.4\) Hz, H-4') and \(1.25\) (\(d\), \(J=7.0\), H-5')

## Page 2

and which showed correlations in the HSQC spectrum with \(\delta_{\rm c}=41.5\) (C-2'), 26.5 (C-3'), 12.0 (C-4') and 17.4 (C-5'), respectively. The presence of this group in **1** was confirmed by comparison of its spectral data with those published for swietenn E, isolated from _Swietenia mahogoni_[10]. Its \(\beta\)-orientation was defined by the large coupling constant of H-3 (\(J=9.4\) Hz) [15]. Compound **1** was elucidated to be methyl 8\(a\),30_a_-epoxide-3_b_-(2'-methylbutyryloxy)-1-oxomeliacate, named cpidessa A.

Compound **2** showed the pseudo molecular ion peak at _m_/2 607 [M + Na]+, in the positive ESI mass spectrum, according to the molecular formula C3H4H40O10, which was confirmed by elemental analysis. Their 1H and 13C NMR spectral data (Table 1 and 2) indicated that it was also a mexicanolide-type limonoid. This compound is similar to febfirigin (**5**), previously isolated from _Soyonida febfirigin_[11] and _C. fruitocas_[3], except for the group attached at C-17. The signals at \(\delta_{\rm H}=5.30\) (_brd_, \(J=6.9\) Hz, H-30) in the 1H NMR spectrum and the 13C NMR signals at \(\delta_{\rm C}=137.9\) (C-8) and 123.4 (C-30) are characteristics of the olefinic linkage between C-8 and C-30 for limonoids with mexicanolide skeleton [16]. These attributions were confirmed by the correlation of H-30 with the signal at \(\delta_{\rm C}=123.4\) (C-30) in the HSQC experiment. The tigloyl moiety at C-3 was defined by the signals at \(\delta_{\rm H}=6.92\) (_m_, H-3'), which showed HSQC correlation with \(\delta_{\rm C}=139.3\) (C-3'), and two signals of methyl group at \(\delta_{\rm H}=1.82\) (_dd_, 6.9, 1.2 Hz) and 1.84 (_t_, 1.2 Hz) attributed to H-4' and H-5', respectively.

The characteristic signals for a furan ring at C-17, typical for limonoids of Meliaceae, were not observed in the 1H and 13C NMR spectral data of **2**. However, it showed two broad one-proton singlets at \(\delta_{\rm H}=6.21\) (H-23) and 7.34 (H-22), which showed cross peaks in the 1H-1H COSY spectrum. These 1H NMR signals showed further couplings to a broad singlet at \(\delta_{\rm H}=5.57\), attributed to H-17. The 13C NMR data indicated the presence of a hemicetal carbon at \(\delta_{\rm C}=97.0\) (C-23), a,\(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated \(\gamma\)-lactone carbonyl at \(\delta_{\rm C}=168.4\) (C-21) and two signals at \(\delta_{\rm C}=135.4\) and 149.4, relating to the olefinic bond at C-20/C-22. The HSQC experiment established the correlation of the signal at \(\delta_{\rm H}=6.21\) (_brs_, H-23) with \(\delta_{\rm C}=97.0\) (C-23) and \(\delta_{\rm H}=7.34\) (H-22) with the olefinic carbon at \(\delta_{\rm C}=149.4\) (C-22). The data above indicated the presence of a \(\gamma\)-hydroxybutenolide function in **2**, which was confirmed by the comparison with the limonoid 7-deoxy-7\(\alpha\)-acetoxykihadanin B, previously 

## Page 3

isolated from _Trichilia elegans_[17]. The equilibrium between two epimeric forms at C-23 of this group accounts for the broadness of the \({}^{13}\)C signal of C-23, C-22 and with a lesser intensity at C-20. The occurrence of limonoids with \(\gamma\)-hydroxybutenolide at C-17 has already been reported in several members of the Meliaceae [17, 18, 19, 20]. Compound **2** was characterized as methyl 21,23-dihydro-23-hydroxy-21-oxo-3\(\beta\)-tioglyoxy-1-oxomediac-8(30)- enate, named febrifugin A.

Compound **3** showed spectral data identical to those published for cipadesin (**3**) [3]. However, the signal earlier reported to C-12/C-15 were inverted. These \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals were reassigned as shown in Table 2. The data reported to febrifugin (**5**) [11, 12] also presented mistaken. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals previously attributed to C-2, C-5, C-9, C-12, C-14, C-15, C-21 and C-23 were inconsistent with those observed to compound **5** (Table 2). These corrections were based on the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR, \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H COSY, HSQC and HMBC experiments of compounds **3** and **5** and confirmed by described data for structurally related compounds [10, 16].

The mexicanolide-type limonoids **4**, **6** and **7** were elucidated to be khayasin T [10], ruageanin A [13] and mexicanolide [14], respectively. It was possible through the comparison of their one and two-dimensional NMR spectral data with those previously reported to them.

Harms [21] classified the meliaecous genera into three subfamilies Cedreloideae, Switenoiideae and Melioidaee (tribes Carapeae, Meliaee, Turraceae, Vavaeae and Trichiliaee), Penington and Styles [22], in their more recent monograph, included Harms' subfamily Cedreloideae, tribe Carapeae into the Switenoideae and removed genus _Cipadessa_ from Turraceae classifying it in Trichiliae. Chemically, the family Meliaceae is distinguished by the frequent oc

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline
**C** & **1** & **2** & **3** & **5** \\ \hline
1 & 214.3 & 217.3 & 217.1 & 217.2 \\
2 & 48.8 & 49.1 & 48.9 & 49.1 \\
3 & 77.4 & 77.1 & 76.9 & 76.6 \\
4 & 39.4 & 38.8 & 38.7 & 38.6 \\
5 & 42.6 & 40.4 & 41.5 & 41.3 \\
6 & 33.5

## Page 4

currency of limonoids. The mexicanolide group occurs widely in the genera of the Switenioideae. The Melioideae appears to be the most prolific in production of A,B-_seco_ limonoids but relatively poor in mexicanolide types [23, 24]. The latter group of compounds has been recorded in genera of the Harms' tribe Trichilieae. Thus, the present results obtained from _Cipadessa fruitcosa_ and those from literature [3], provide firm support for including _Cipadessa_ in the Trichilieae.

## Experimental Section

### General

NMR: on a Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as internal standard; ESIMS: low resolution on a triple quadrupole Micromas Quattro LC instrument; IR: KBr, BOMEM, Hartmann & Braun/MB Series); UV: HP 8452A, diode array spectrophotometer; Preparative HPLC: on a Shimadzu LC-8A; the column used was Shim-pack Prep-Sil (H), 250 mm x 20 mm, 5\(m\) particle size, 100 A pore diameter; detection on Shimadzu SPD-6AV; Elemental analysis: on a EA1108, CHNSO (Fisons).

### Plant material

The fruits of _Cipadessa fruitcosa_ Bl. were collected in Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil, and a voucher specimen (110.664) was deposited in the SPF Herbarium of Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas-USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of compounds

The powdered air-dried fruits (990 g) of _C. fruitcosa_ were subsequently extracted with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH. The conc. CH2Cl2 extract (10.9 g) was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient. The ethyl acetate-soluble fraction (2.3 g), rich in limonoids, was chromatographed on silica gel, eluting with a hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone gradient to give 8 fractions (A-H). Fraction C was fractionated as above, using hexane-EtOAc gradient, affording 11 fractions. Fraction C-6 was twice chromatographed on silica gel, eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (6:3:1) to give compounds **1** (8.5 mg) and **3** (19.4 mg). Fraction D was chromatographed as above, using hexane-EtOAc gradient, to afford 4 fractions. Fraction D-3 was twice chromatographed with a hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone gradient yielding a fraction containing compounds **6** and **7**, which was purified by HPLC (detection UV \(\lambda\) 220 nm), using hexane-_iso_-ProH (85:15) with a flow rate of 1.5 ml min-1 to yield **6** (9.3 mg) and **7** (12.4 mg). Fraction E was twice subjected to column chromatography over silica gel, eluting with a hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone gradient affording 4 fractions. Fraction E-3 was purified by HPLC (detection UV \(\lambda\) 240 nm), using hexane-_iso_-ProH (8:2) at 2.0 ml min-1 to give **2** (4.7 mg) and **5** (40.3 mg).

### Cipadesi _A (1)_

Amorphous solid, C2H2O9, [_a_2]7 -103deg (CHCl3; c 0.9649); IR (KBr) \(\text{V}_{\text{max}}^{\text{CH}_{\text{c}}\text{Cl}_{1}}\) cm -1.3430, 1730, 1459, 1385, 1266, 1184, 1145, 1026, 897, 738; UV \(\text{X}_{\text{max}}^{\text{CH}_{\text{c}}\text{Cl}_{1}}\) nm (log _e_): 234 (5.1); ESIMS, _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 593 [M + Na]+ (100): calcd. C 67.36, H 7.37; found C 67.40, H 7.30. 1H NMR (CDCl3): Table 1; 13C NMR (CDCl3): Table 2.

### Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support.

## References

* [1] S. R. Rojatkar, B. A. Nagasampagi, Phytochemistry **37**, 505 (1994).
* [2] S. R. Rojatkar, Y. G. Chiplunkar, B. A. Nagasampagi, Phytochemistry **37**, 1213 (1994).
* [3] X. D. Luo, S. H. Wu, Y. B. Ma, D. G. Wu, Phytochemistry **55**, 867 (2000).
* [4] X. D. Luo, S. H. Wu, Y. B. Ma, D. G. Wu, Zhongcaoyao **32**, 778 (2001).
* [5] L. Liang, C. C. Zhong, Z. Y. Xiao, Zhongcaoyao **22**, 6 (1991).
* [6] L. Liang, C. C. Zhong, Z. Y. Xiao, Zhongcaoyao **25**, 236 (1994).
* [7] D. A. Mulholland, S. L. Schwikkard, M. Randrianariv-elogia, Phytochemistry **52**, 705 (1999).
* [8] D. E. Champagne, O. Koul, M. B. Isman, G. G. E. Scudder, G. H. N. Towers, Phytochemistry **31**, 377 (1992).
* [9] M. Lamek, N. Nakamura, H. Kakuda, M. Hattori, Natural medicines **55**, 220 (2001).



## Page 5

* [10] S. Kadota, L. Marpaung, T. Kikuchi, H. Ekimoto, Chem. Pharm. Bull. **38**, 639 (1990).
* [11] M. M. Rao, E. M. Krishna, P. S. Gupta, P. P. Singh, Indian J. Chem. **16B**, 823 (1978).
* [12] B. Banerji, S. K. Nigan, Fitoterapia **55**, 3 (1984).
* [13] B. S. Mootoo, R. Ramsewak, J. Nat. Prod. **59**, 544 (1996).
* [14] T. R. Govindachari, G. N. K. Kumari, Phytochemistry **47**, 1423 (1998).
* [15] K. L. Mikolajczak, D. Weisleder, L. Parkanyi, J. Clardy, J. Nat. Prod. **51**, 606 (1988).
* [16] S. Kadota, L. Marpaung, T. Kikuchi, H. Ekimoto, Chem. Pharm. Bull. **38**, 894 (1990).
* [17] F. R. Garcez, W. S. Garcez, M. T. Tsutsumi, N. F Roque, Phytochemistry **45**, 141 (1997).
* [18] C. Arenas, L. Rodriguez-Hahn, Phytochemistry **29**, 2953 (1990).
* [19] D. A. G. Cortez, P. C. Vieira, J. B. Fernandes, M. F. G. F. da Silva, A. G. Ferreira, Phytochemistry **31**, 625 (1992).
* [20] F. R. Garcez, W. S. Garcez, N. F. Roque, E. E. Castelano, J. Zukerman-Schpector, Phytochemistry **55**, 733 (2000).
* [21] H. Harms, in A. Engler, K. Prantl (eds): Die Natartichen Pflanzenfamilien, 2nd edn, Vol. 19B, p. 1, Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig (1940).
* [22] T. D. Pennington, B. T. Styles, Blumea **22**, 419 (1975).
* [23] M. F. G. F da Silva, O. R. Gottlieb, D. L. Dreyer, Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **12**, 299 (1984).
* [24] M. F. G. F. da Silva, O. R. Gottlieb, Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **15**, 85 (1987).



