# 10.1021@np9703656.pdf

## Page 1



# Antifungal Amide from Leaves of Piper hispidum

Alberto Camilo Ale\(\hat{\text{c}}\),\(\hat{\text{t}}\) Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani,\(\hat{\text{t}}\) Maria Claudia Marx Young,\(\hat{\text{t}}\) Massuo Jorge Kato,\(\hat{\text{g}}\) and

Maysa Furlan\({}^{\ast,\dagger}\)

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14800-900, Aararaguara-SP, Brazil, Sega de Fisialogia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, CP 4005, 01061-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, and Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 26077, 05599-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Bioactivity-guided fractionation of a CH2Cl2 extract from leaves of Piper hispidum (Piperaceae) yielded a new pyrrolidine amide, N-[7-(3, 4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(Z),4(Z)-heptadienoy] pyrrolidine 1, in addition to two known amides N-[5-(3, 4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(E)-pentadienoy] pyrrolidine and N-[2-(3, 4-methylenedioxy-6-methoxyphenyl)-2(Z)-propanoyl]-pyrrolidine. The structure of compound 1 was elucidated by interpretation of spectral data, including ES-MS. Compound 1 showed antifungal activity against Cladosporium sphaerosm spermum.

Chemical studies carried out on Piperaceae species have revealed the occurrence of essential oils, pyrones, lignoids, and unsaturated amides.1 Some of these compounds have generated interest as a result of their potent insecticidal properties.2 In the course of our ongoing search for bioactive compounds from Brazilian flora,3 we have investigated the CH2Cl2 extract from leaves of Piper hispidum H. B. K. (Piperaceae) employing two preliminary bioassays: anticancer activity based on growth evaluation of genetically engineered mutants of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae4,5 and antifungal effect utilizing dried ibaoutography with the fungus Cladosporium sphaerospermum.6 The extract exhibited moderate and nonselective activity on all the mutant strains tested, suggesting the presence of antifungal agents rather than potential anticancer agents. In fact, it did show activity against the fungus C. sphaerospermum (MIC 1096 _m_). Subsequent bioactive-guided fractionation led to the isolation of a new amide N-[7-(3, 4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(Z),4(Z)-heptadienoy]pyrrolidine (1) and the known amides N-[5-(3, 4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(E)-pentadienoy]pyrrolidine and N-[2-(3, 4-methylenedioxy, 6-methoxyphenyl)-2(Z)-propanoyl]-pyrrolidine. Of these, the amide 1 exhibited antifungal activity.

Compound 1 has a molecular formula of C18H21NO3 as determined by electrospray mass spectral analysis (ES-MS) and 13C NMR data. The UV spectrum displayed an absorption at 262 nm, indicating the presence of a conjugated dienamide system. The IR spectrum exhibited bands at 1640 (conjugated carbonyl group), 1620 (conjugated double bond), and 925 (methylenedioxyphenyl group) m-1. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of 1 revealed signals for 3.4-methylenedioxyphenyl protons (d 5.86) and signals related to four olefinic protons. Two of the olefinic protons showed signals at d 5.77 (1H, d, J = 11.4 Hz) and 6.37 (1H, t, J = 11.4 Hz) assigned to protons H-2 and H-3, respectively, corroborating the a,b-unsaturated carbonyl system. Signals at d 7.30 (dd, J = 11.4 Hz) and 5.94 (dd, J = 11.4, 7.0 Hz) were assigned to the protons of the second double bond conjugated to the first one. Most of the amides isolated from Piper species possess the (E,E) configuration in the double bonds of the side chain; however, this compound differed from the normal skeleton judging by the coupling constant observed for protons H-2, H-3, H-4, and H-5. In compounds with (E) configuration, the coupling constants are normally J2,3 = 15.0 Hz and J4,5 = 15.0 Hz,7,8 while in the case of amide 1, these values were observed at J2,3 = 11.4 Hz and J4,5 = 11.4 Hz, indicating that the two double bonds possess the (Z,Z) configuration. The assignments of these protons were established by analysis of the 1H-1H COSY spectrum (Figure 1) and also by irradiation of the H-2, which caused the signal of H-3 to collapse to a doublet. On the other hand, the irradiation at the frequency of H-3 transformed the signal of H-2 into a singlet. The proposed stereochemistry was also corroborated by the signal of H-4 (d 7.30, g position), which showed significant deshielding when compared to the (E) configuration7 caused by its proximity to the carbonyl group (Figure 1). The presence of a benzylic carbon in 1 was supported by the appearance of a fragment ion at m/z 135 in its MS. The assignments of methylene protons H-7 (d 2.59, 2H) and H-6 (d 2.42, 2H) were confirmed by DQ-COSY spectrum, which showed correlation between such protons to each other. Additional correlation between proton H-6 and methine proton at H-5 (d 5.94, 1H) was also observed. The 13C NMR data

## Page 2

(Table 1) of 1 is in accordance with the proposed structure. The lowfield region of the spectrum exhibited an amide carbonyl at d 165.6, 10 definite and/or aromatic carbons and a methylenedioxyphenyl group at d 100.7. The assignments of the signals for the aromatic carbons based on the comparison with data described for piperdardine7 indicated that a 3, 4-methylenedioxyphenyl moiety is present in 1. Such amides with ds geometry are quite rare in nature. To date, only two cinnamoyl pyrrolidine amides showing a ds double bond at C-2 and C-3 have been reported by Sehgal et al.9 and Kiuchi et al.10

N-[5-(3, 4-Methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(E)-pentadienyl]-pyrrolidinidine (2) has the molecular formula C6H19NO3 by analysis of the MS data. Its 1H NMR spectrum was identical to that published for the same compound previously isolated from Piper nigrum.10 Its 13C NMR data (Table 1) is being published for the first time. N-[2-(3, 4-Methylenedioxy, 6-methoxyphenyl)-2(Z)-propenyl]-pyrrolidine, a cinnamoyl pyrrolidine amide, was previously isolated from P. peepuloides and was identified by comparison of its spectral data.11

The antifungal activity of amide 1 was evaluated by means of direct bioautography in a TLC bioassay12 and the centerpoint-inoculation-disk assay.13 The MIC for 1 was found to be 8.0 _m_g.

### Experimental Section

General Expert in metal Procedur es. Si gel (Merck 230-400 mesh) was used for all column chromatography unless otherwise stated, and solvents were redistilled prior to use. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, using CDCl3 as a solvent and TMS as reference. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer. ES-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. HPLC separations were performed on a Shimadzu LC-10AS using a reversed-phase column (Water s Nova Pack, C16; 3.9 x 150 mm) eluted with MeOH-H2O (6:4), flow rate of 0.5 mL/min and detection at 254 nm.

Plant Material. P. hispidum H. B. K. (Piperaceae) leaves were collected in Parque Estadual do Morro do Diabo, Teodoro Sampaio, SP, and classified by Dr. Waldir Mantovani. The voucher specimen is deposited at Departamento de Ecologia, Instituto de Biocnicas-USP.

Bioassays. The experimental screening methods utilizing mutant yeast strains of S. orevisiae have been described elsewhere.4,5 The 1C12 values refer to the concentration in _m_g/mL required to produce an inhibition zone 12 mm in diameter around a 100-_m_L well during a 48-h incubation period at 37 degC. The microorganism used in the antifungal assay, C. sphareospermum (Pemzig) SPC 491, has been maintained at Instituto de Botanica.

Antifungal Assay. Dilutions containing 750-1500 _m_g of crude extract and 100, 50, 10, 1, 0.1 _m_g of pure compound were applied on precoded TLC plates. TLC plates were developed with hexane-EtOAc (7:3). The chromatogram was sprayed with a spore suspension of C. sphareospermum in glucose and salt solution12 and incubated for 72 h in darkness in a moistened chamber at 25 degC. Clear inhibition zones appeared against a dark back ground, indicating the minimal amount of 1 (10 _m_g) required for inhibition of fungal growth on TLC plate. Nystatin (5 _m_g) and miconazole (1 _m_g) were used as positive controls.

Extraction and Isolation. The dried, powdered leaves of P. hispidum (3.1 g) were extracted three times at room temperature with CH2Cl2 (150 mL each) in the course of 2 days. The resulting CH2Cl2 extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford 1.84 g of a green gum. Part of this extract (1.69 g) was applied to a Si gel column (300 g) and eluted with hexane contain

Figure 1: Selected ‘H−1H COSY correlations for 1.



## Page 3

ing increasing volumes of EtOAc (up to 100%) to give 38 fractions. Fraction 25 (125 mg) was applied to a Si gel column (2.0 g) 230\(-\)400 mesh, eluted with hexane containing increasing concentrations of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give 1 (12.3 mg). The fraction 28 (198 mg) was chromatographed via Si gel column chromatography, eluted with hexane containing increasing volumes of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give N-[5-(3, \(A\) -methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(E)-pentadienyl) pyrrolidine (3.7 mg). Fractions containing N-[2-(3, 4-methylenedioxy, 6-methoxyphenyl)-2(Z)-propenoyl]pyrrolidine were combined and concentrated in vacuo to give a green gum (21.0 mg), which was further purified by reversed-phase HPLC, as described in the general experimental procedures.

N-[7-(3, 4-Methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(Z),4(Z)-heptadienyl]pyrrolidine (1): amorphous solid; UV (MeOH) \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\) (log \(\epsilon\)) 262 nm (1.9); IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}\) (KBr) 3010, 2923, 2874, 1640, 1620, 1488, 1443, 1035, 925 cm\({}^{-1}\); ES-MS m/z (rel int) 322 [M + Na] (100); NMR see Table 1.

Acknowledgment. This work was funded by grants from FAPESP and PADCT/CNPq. M. Furlan, V. da S. Bolzani, and M. J. Kato are grateful to CNPq for the fellowships. We thank Dr. D. G. I. Kingston (Department of Chemistry, VPI & S. U.) for the yeast strains.

## References and Notes

* [1] Grewe, R.; Freist, W.; Neumann, H.; Kersten, S. Chem Ber. 1970, 103, 3752.
* [2] Miyako, M.; Nakayama, I.; Ohno, N. In Inseciadics of Plant Origin; Annason, J. T., Philogene, B. J. R., Morand, P. Eds.; ACS Symposium Series; Am. Chem. Soc.: Washington, DC, 1989; p. 387.
* [3] Corsino, J.; Bolzani, V. da S.; Pereira, A. M. S.; Franca, S. C.; Furlan, M. Phytochemistry (in press).
* [4] Gunatilaka, A. L.; Kingston, D. G. I.; Johnson, R. K. Pure Appl. Chem. 1994, 662, 2219-2222.
* [5] Gunatilaka, A. L.; Samanayake, G.; Kingston, D. G. I.; Hofmann, G.; Johnson, R. K. J. Nat. Prot. 1992, 55, 1648-1654.
* [6] Young, M. C. M.; Braga, M. R.; Dietrich, S. M. C.; Gottlieb, H. E.; Trevisan, L. M. V.; Bolzani, V. da S. Phytochemistry 1992, 31, 3433-3435.
* [7] Araujo-Junior, J. X.; Da-Cunha, E. V. L.; Chaves, M. C. de O.; Gray, A. I. Phytochemistry 1997, 44, 559-561.
* [8] Ahn, J.-W.; Ahn, M. J. Z.; Bee, O.-P.; Kim, S.-G.; Kim, H. J.; Kubo, I. Phytochemistry 1992, 31, 3609-3612.
* [9] Sehgal, C. K.; Kadono, P. L.; Sharma, R. L.; Taniga, S. C.; Ohar, K. L.; Latah, C. K. Phytochemistry 1979, 18, 1685-1867.
* [10] Kiuchi, F.; Nakamura, N.; Tsuda, Y.; Kondo, K. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 1988, 36, 2452-2465.
* [11] Shah, S.; Kalla, A. K.; Ohar, K. L. Phytochemistry 1986, 25, 1997-1998.
* [12] Homans, A. L.; Fuchs, A. J. Chromatography 1970, 51, 325-328.
* [13] Rios, J. L.; Re\(\tilde{\text{o}}\), M. C.; Viller, J. Ethnopharmacol. 1988, 23, 127-149.



