# 10.1002@ps.1278.pdf

## Page 1

Bioactivity of extracts and isolated compounds from _Vitex polygamma_ (Verbenaceae) and _Siphoneugena densiflora_ (Myrtaceae) against _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (Lepidoptera: Nocutuidae)+
Footnote †: Correspondence to: Margareti BC Gallo, Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar), CP 676, 13565-905, São Carlos-SP, Brazil

E-mail: mraper@uol.com.br

Margareth BC Gallo, Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar), CP 676, 13565-905, São Carlos-SP, Brazil

Waldireny C Rocha, Ulemerson S da Cunha, Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de San Carlos (UFSCar), CP 676, 13565-905, São Carlos-SP, Brazil

E-mail: mraper@uol.com.br

Fernanda A Diogo, Fernando C da Silva, Paulo C Vieira, Jose D Vendramim, Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de San Carlos (UFSCar), CP 676, 13565-905, São Carlos-SP, Brazil

M. Fernandes, M. Fatima das GF da Silva and Luciane G Batista-Pereira

###### Abstract

The effects of crude extracts, fractions and isolated compounds from _Vitex polygamma_ Cham. and _Siphoneugena densiflora_ Berg were evaluated on the development of _Spodoptera frugiperda_ JE Smith, a destructive insect pest of corn and several other crops. The extracts and fractions were incorporated into an artificial diet at 1 mg g\({}^{-1}\) and offered to the insect during its larval stage. Length and viability of larval and pupal stages as well as pupal weight were assessed. Isolated compounds were tested through superficial contamination of the diet at 0.1 mg g\({}^{-1}\). Weight and viability of ten-day-old larvae were determined. Methanolic and hydroalcoholic _S. densiflora_ extracts caused 100% larval mortality, while leaf and fruit hydroalcoholic extracts from _V. polygamma_ were the most active. Among the isolated compounds, flavonoids presented the best insecticidal results, and tannins the best larval growth inhibition.

(c) 2006 Society of Chemical Industry 2006 62 1072 1081 2006 1

Taruma; Uvatinga; Hoja Menuda; fall armyworm; _Vitex polygamma; Siphoneugena densiflora; Spodoptera frugiperda_; botanical insecticide; pest control

## 1 Introduction

With a projected increase in world population to 10 billion over the next four decades, an immediate priority for agriculture is to achieve maximum production of food and other products in a manner that is environmentally sustainable and cost effective.1 One major limiting factor to global food production is damage by pests, during both growth and storage stages. The use of synthetic pesticides has been an effective way to control pests, but their efficacy is constantly weakened by development of resistance in economically important pests.2 Increasing interest in the application of plant secondary metabolites in insect pest management, as an alternative to the use of synthetic insecticides, has led to the search for active plant compounds, less poisonous to the environment and with low mammalian toxicity.3

_Spodoptera frugiperda_ JE Smith (Lepidoptera: Nocutuidae), the model insect pest selected, has a record of injuring over 80 plants, among them important field crops such as corn, cotton, soybean and wheat. Larvae destroy the plant growth potential by consuming foliage and burrowing into its growing points. The control of the damage requires high volumes of insecticide, resulting in resistance to several kinds of insecticidal compound.4

Of the two Brazilian plant species chosen to be bioassayed and phytochemically investigated, _Vitex polygamma_ Cham. (Verbenaceae) had already been studied, and many of its compounds characterized, but none was considered as a potential insecticide.5-9 This plant is commonly called 'Maria-Preta', 'Taruma', 'Congonha-cinco-folhas' and the like.10,11 Its leaf tea has been used in folk medicine to treat kidney diseases.11 The other plant, _Siphoneugena densiflora_ Berg (Myrtaceae), belongs to a genus comprising only eight species, with two of them vulnerable to extinction in Sao Paulo State.12,13 Popularly named 'Uvatinga',13 it has been pointed out as a source of energy generation in a recent investigation,14 and herbarium observations by the present authors indicate that this species shows strong resistance to insect attack.



## Page 2

Even though the selected plant species have not been ordinarily employed in pest control, their families comprise several species with injurious properties to insects reported in the literature.15-21 The present paper specifically deals with the effects of crude extracts, fractions and isolated compounds from _V, polygamma_ and _S. densiflora_ against fall armyworm (_S. frugiperda_). Aspects examined include insecticidal and growth regulatory activities.

## 2 Materials and Methods

### General

Heteronuclear single-quantum correlation (HSQC) and heteronuclear multiple-bonding correlation (HMBC, \(J\) 8.0 Hz) experiments as well as 1D and 2D nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded in deuterated solvents (deuteropyridine, acetone-d6 or deuteromethaneol) from Aldrich Chemical Company, Inc. (Milwaukee, WI, USA), or Merck-Schuchardt (8011 Hohenbrunn bei Munchen), using TMS (tetramethylsilane) as internal reference. The equipment employed was either a Bruker Avance DRX-400 spectrometer (Karlsruhe, Germany; 1H, 400 MHz; 13C, 100 MHz) or a Bruker ARX-200 spectrometer (1H, 200 MHz; 13C, 50 MHz). Low-resolution electrospray mass spectroscopy (ESI/MS) was carried out on a Micromass Quattro LC triple-quadrupole instrument (Manchester, UK). IR spectra were measured on a Bomem MB-102 spectrophotometer (Quebec, Canada) in potassium bromide pellets. UV spectra were obtained on a Varian Cary 500 Scan/UV-Vis-Nir spectrophotometer (Mulgrave, Australia). The high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system consisted of a Shimadzu LC-10AD pump (Kyoto, Japan), an SPD-10A UV-Vis detector and a CBM-10A interface, using a Shodex Asahipack GS-310 preparative column (50.0 x 2.5 cm ID). Data acquisition was performed on CLASS LC10 software.

Column chromatography (CC) was performed on silica gel (70-230 or 230-400 mesh; Merck KGaA, 64 271, Darmstadt, Germany), Sephadex(r) LH-20 (25-100 mm; Pharmacia Fine Chemical Co. Ltd, Uppsala, Sweden) or XAD7(r) (Aldrich Chemical Company, Inc., Milwaukee, WI, USA). Spots were visualized under 254 nm UV light and by spraying with either vanillin sulfuric acid solution followed by heating or FeCl3 acid solution. Methanol (JT Baker, Philipsburg, PA, USA) used for the mobile phase in HPLC analysis was HPLC grade. All other solvents used in extraction and isolation of compounds were of analytical grade (Mallinkrodt Baker, SA, Xalostoc, Mexico) or home distilled.

### Plants

_Vitex polygamma_ and _Siphoneugena densiflora_ were collected in July 2000, in the city of Pocos de Caldas, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Voucher specimens were deposited at the Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora Herbarium (Minas Gerais) and at the Botany Institute Herbarium, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil, respectively.

### Extraction and isolation

The powder of the air-dried plant organs was extracted successively with hexane and methanol by percolation at room temperature. Crude extracts were obtained after filtration and removal of the solvents under vacuum at 40 degC. Hydroalcoholic extracts were obtained by stirring 100 g of the residue with methanol + water (50 + 50 by volume; 3 x 300 mL) with ultrasonic mixing for 10 min. The resulting filtrates were combined, evaporated under vacuum (40 degC) and lyophilized (Table 1). Some crude extracts were dissolved in water + methanol (1 + 1 by volume) and fractionated through liquid-liquid partition using solvents of increasing polarity (dichloromethane, ethyl acetate, butanol). The corresponding labeled layers are characterized in Table 1.

Compounds **1** to **43** were obtained by submitting the most active extracts (see Table 2) to several chromatographic techniques. Procedures to isolate the substances bioassayed (**1, 9, 14** to **18, 25, 26** and **43;** see Fig. 1) are described below. Some of them, like compounds **15** and **16**, were isolated from more than one different extract of the same plant.

#### Isolation of compounds **13** to **19** from Siphoneugena densiflora (_SD-EMR layer_)

A quantity of 9 g of SD-EMR (Table 1) was subjected to CC using silica gel (38.0 x 5.0 cm) with dichloromethane + ethyl acetate (7 + 3 by volume) as eluent and gradient elution. A total of 65 fractions of 150 mL were collected, and the similar ones were pooled into 22 fractions (R1 to R22) according to their composition determined by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and visualized under UV light and spraying with color reagent. Fraction 11 (R11, 317.0 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (52.0 x 3.0 cm) using methanol as eluent. A total of 40 fractions of 30 mL were collected and combined according to their similarities, affording 15 fractions (R11a to R11p). Fraction 6 (R11f) was identified as compound **16** (14.7 mg). Fraction 12 (R12, 900.0 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (66.0 x 2.0 cm) and eluted with methanol + acetone (8 + 2 by volume). A total of 22 fractions of 30 mL were obtained and combined into 11 fractions (R12b to R12m). The constituent of fraction 3 (R12d) was identified as compound **19** (23.0 mg). Fraction 6 (R12f, 176.0 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (60.0 x 2.0 cm) using methanol + acetone (7 + 3 by volume) as eluent and yielded 14 fractions of 30 mL each, which were pooled into nine fractions (R12f1 to R12f9). Fraction 4 (R12f4, 50.0 mg) afforded a substance identified as **13,** and fraction 7 (R12f7, 60.0 mg) was identified as compound **17**. Fraction 18 (R18, 698.0 mg) was chromatographed over XAD-7 (67.0 x 4.0 cm) using methanol as eluent. Ten

## Page 3

fractions of 200 mL were collected and pooled into four fractions (R18a to R18d). Fraction 1 (R18a) was further purified by R-HPLC (column ASAHIPAK GS-310 SHODEX, mobile phase methanol, flowrate 2 mL min-1; \(\lambda\) 330 nm) to yield compound **18** (second peak, 109.4 mg) after one cycle of 74 min. **A** quantity of 240 mg of fraction 19 (R19, 434.5 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (52.0 x 3.0 cm) using methanol as eluent. A total of 31 fractions of 30 mL were obtained and pooled into eight fractions (R19a to R19h). Fraction 8 (R19h, 127.6 mg) was rechromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (52.0 x 3.0 cm) using methanol as eluent. **A** total of 36 fractions of 30 mL were collected and pooled into ten fractions (R19h1 to R19h10). Fractions 8 (R19h8) and 10 (R19h10) produced brown solids identified as compounds **15** (75.0 mg) and **14** (19.6 mg) respectively.

3.2 Isolation of compounds **16** and **25** to **29** from **S**iphoneugena densiflora (SD-EML layer)

**A** quantity of 4.7 g and 700 mg of SD-EML (Table 1) were chromatographed on a silica gel 60 column (30.0 x 5.0 cm) and eluted in a step gradient from acetone + ethyl acetate (95 + 5 by volume) to 100% methanol. A total of 47 fractions of 150 mL were collected and pooled into 15 fractions (L1 to L15). Fraction 2 (L2, 96.4 mg) was submitted to CC using Sephadex LH-20 (100.0 x 2.5 cm) and methanol as eluent, resulting in 24 fractions of 30 mL each, which were combined into ten fractions (L2a to L2j). The constituent of fraction 5 (L2e) was identified as compound **16** (57.3 mg), and that of fraction 10 (L2j) as compound **25** (4.0 mg). Fraction 5 (L5, 236.0 mg) was submitted to CC using Sephadex LH-20 (38.0 x 3.0 cm) and methanol as eluent, yielding 17 fractions of 30 mL each, which were pooled into eight fractions (L5a to L5h). Fraction 5 (L5e) afforded the flavonoid 26 (8.0 mg). Fraction 6 (L5f) was identified as compounds **27** and **28** in mixture (13.3 mg). Fraction 6 (L6, 784.0 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (100.0 x 2.5 cm) using methanol as eluent. A total of 25 fractions of 30 mL were collected and pooled into eight fractions (L6a to L6h). The constituent of fraction 2 (L6b) was identified as compound **29** (61.0 mg).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} Plant material (g) & Extraction solventa & Extract code & Amount obtained (g) & Liquid/liquid partition solventa & Layer code & Amount obtained (g) \\ SD leaves (b23) & H & SD-HL & 8.2 & & & \\  & M & SD-ML & 164.8 & D & SD-DML & 9.5 \\  & & & & E & SD-EML & 14.6 \\  & & & & B & SD-BML & 12.0 \\  & & & & A & SD-AML & 12.5 \\  & HA & SD-HAL & 22.1 & & & \\ SD stem (2247) & H & SD-HS & 0.9 & & & \\  & M & SD-MS & 177.6 & D & SD-DMS & 1.62 \\  & & & & E & SD-EMS & 7.67 \\  & & & & B & SD-BMS & 12.7 \\  & & & & A & SD-AMS & 35.4 \\  & HA & SD-HAS & 5.5 & & & \\ SD twigs (1288) & H & SD-HT & 1.0 & & & \\  & M & SD-MT & 131.0 & & & \\  & HA & SD-HAT & 5.7 & & & \\ SD root bark (400) & H & SD-HR & 0.3 & & & \\  & M & SD-MR & 73.2 & D & SD-DMR & 0.9 \\  & & & & E & SD-EMR & 10.5 \\  & & & & A & SD-AMR & 52.0 \\  & HA & SD-HAR & 2.4 & & & \\ VP leaves (423) & H & VP-HL & 5.1 & & & \\  & M & VP-ML & 40.4 & & & \\  & HA & VP-HAL & 31.0 & E & VP-EHAL & 2.2 \\  & & & & B & VP-BHAL & 12.8 \\  & & & & A & VP-AHAL & 22.6 \\ VP twigs (415) & H & VP-HT & 0.85 & & & \\  & & & & D & VP-DMT & 2.6 \\  & & & & E & VP-EMT & 3.9 \\  & & & & A & VP-AMT & 8.4 \\  & HA & VP-HAT & 2.3 & & & \\ VP fruit (171) & H & VP-HF & 1.1 & & & \\  & M & VP-MF & 2.0 & & & \\  & HA & VP-HAF & 0.9 & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Extracts and fractions obtained from _Siphoneugena densiflora_ (SD) and _Viter polygamma_ (VP)

## Page 4



#### 2.3.3 Isolation of compounds **15** and **43** from

Siphoneugena densiflora _(SD-HAS extract)_

A quantity of 1.3 g and 300 mg of SD-HAS extract (Table 1) were subjected to CC using XAD7 (63.0 x 4.5 cm) and subsequent elution with 500 mL of water (XA), water + acetone (1 + 1 by volume) (XWA) and methanol + acetone (1 + 1 by volume) (XMA). The dried fraction XWA (672.8 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (46.0 x 3.0 cm) using methanol as eluent. A total of 29 fractions of 30 mL were obtained and combined into ten fractions (XWA1 to XWA10). Both fractions 6 (XWA6) and 8 (XWA8) afforded brown powders identified as compounds **43** (78.6 mg) and **15** (97.3 mg) respectively.

#### 2.3.4 Isolation of compounds **1**, **7** and **8** from_ Vitex polygamma _(VP-BHAL layer)_

A quantity of 10.7 g and 700 mg of VP-BHAL layer (Table 1) were subjected to CC using XAD7 (46.0 x 4.0 cm) and subsequent elution with 500 mL of water (WV) and water + methanol (1 + 1 by volume) (WMV) and 2 L of methanol (MV). A quantity of 1 g of the dried fraction MV (6.75 g) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (53.0 x 3.0 cm) using MeOH

Figure 1: Chemical structures of compounds tested on _Spodoptera frugipera_.



## Page 5

as eluent, resulting in 41 fractions of 30 mL, which were pooled into seven fractions (MV1 to MV7). Fraction 4 (MV4, 168.1 mg) was rechromatographed over the same column containing Sephadex LH-20 and eluted with methanol. A total of 23 fractions of 30 mL were collected and pooled into seven fractions (MV4s to MV4z). Fraction 4 (MV4v, 57.9 mg) was further purified by R-HPLC (column ASAHIPAK GS-310 SHODEX, mobile phase methanol, flowrate 3 mL min-1; \(l\) 330 nm) to yield compound 1 (first peak, 5.5 mg) and substances 7 and 8, identified as a mixture, (second peak, 3.1 mg), after three cycles of 54 min.

#### 2.3.5 Isolation of compounds **9** to **11** from Vitex polygamma (_VP_-_EMT_ (_layer_)

A quantity of 1.9 g and 900 mg of VP-EMT layer (Table 1) were submitted to column chromatography (3.0 x 46.0 cm) using Sephadex LH-20 and methanol as eluent. A total of 23 fractions of 50 mL were collected. Similar fractions were combined, yielding seven fractions (EMT1 to EMT7). Fraction 3 (EMT3, 551.0 mg) was rechromatographed over silica gel (230-400 mesh) using gradient elution from ethyl acetate + dichloromethane (9 + 1 by volume) to methanol; 60 fractions of 50 mL were obtained and combined into 17 fractions (EMT3a to EMT3r). Fraction 5 (EMT3e, 140.5 mg) was purified by preparative TLC on silica gel 60 \(F\)254 with double development, using dichloromethane + acetone (1 + 1 by volume) as mobile phase and UV detection, yielding compounds **9** (77.7 mg), **10** (11.0 mg) and **11** (14.3 mg) respectively.

### _Insect rearing_

Larvae of _S. frugipreda_ used in the experiments were obtained from cultures at the Departamento de Entomologia, Fitopatologia e Zoologia Agricola of the Escola Superior de Agronomia Luiz de Queiroz, Universidade de Sao Paulo (ESALQ/USP), and maintained in environmental chambers at 25 +- 1 degC, 70 +- 5% RH and 12:12 h light:dark photoperiod. The artificial diet used for the bioassay and previously described22 contained cooked 'carioca' bean 37.5 g,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c} Treatment & Larval & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Pupal weight} & Survival \\ (plant) & mortality & Pupation & & & & & \\  & (\%b) & time (days) & (mgb,c (±SEM) & (\%)d & (\%)e & (\%)e & time (days)c & (\%)f \\ \hline SD-HL & 10.0 & 21 & 249.2 (±6.84)a & 89 & 60 & 32 & 50 \\ SD-ML & 100.0 & – & – & – & – & – & \\ SD-HAL &

## Page 6

wheat germ 30.0 g, soy meal 15.0 g, casein 15.0 g, yeast extract 18.75 g, tetracycline 56.5 mg, agar 11.5 g, Vanderzant vitamin mixture for insects 4.5 mL, ascorbic acid 1.8 g, sorbic acid 0.9 g, methyl _p_-hydroxybenzoate 1.5 g, formaldehyde (40% v/v) 1.8 mL and distilled water 600 mL, in a total volume of 720 mL.

### _Toxicity bioassays by ingestion against Spodoptera frugiperda_

#### 2.5.1 Crude extracts and layers

A quantity of 100 mg of crude extracts or fractions was diluted in a small volume of acetone (e.g. 2 mL) along with ascorbic acid (ingredient of the artificial diet). The solvent was allowed to evaporate for 1 h, and the resultant mixture was ground to powder and incorporated into the liquid diet (100 g), at a final concentration of 1 mg g-1. The liquid diet was distributed in portions (10 g) into ten glass tubes (8.5 x 2.5 cm, previously sterilized for 1 h at 170 degC), covered with sterile hydrofugous (not absorbent) cotton and then left for 24 h at room temperature to eliminate excess humidity. One first-instar _S. frugiperda_ larva (from 0 to 3 h old) was then placed in each tube and held at 25 +- 1 degC, 70 +- 5% RH and 12:12 h light:dark photoperiod for about 20 days until pupation (each experiment comprised ten glass tubes, each containing a single first-instar _S. frugiperda_ larva, totaling 10 larvae). Mortality was determined for each larva every 24 h; cessation of movement followed by color change to black was the criterion used for judging mortality. The percentage insect mortality was corrected using Abbot's formula.23 On the day after pupation, live pupae were weighed and transferred to transparent plastic vials (6.0 x 6.0 cm) containing filter paper at the bottom (4.0 x 4.0 cm), wetted by two drops of distilled water and maintained at the same conditions as the larvae until adults emerged (10-20 additional days). Other developmental factors were recorded, such as time to pupation and adult emergence.

The control diet was prepared by adding the mixture of ascorbic acid and acetone previously evaporated and ground.

Methanoic and hydroalcoholic extracts insoluble in acetone were prepared in methanol and water respectively, as well as their respective controls.

#### 2.5.2 Isolated compounds

Four well plates (24 x 1.5 mL wells) were filled with the liquid diet and left for 1 h at room temperature in a decontaminated (UV light) laminar flow hood. Each compound (12.0 mg) was dissolved in 3 mL of distilled water, and 30 mL aliquots were layered on the top of each well containing the artificial congealed diet. The final concentration was about 0.1 mg g-1. The surface excess solvent was allowed to evaporate for about 1 h under sterile conditions. Subsequently, a single second-instar _S. frugiperda_ larva was placed on the diet mixture in each well and maintained for 10 days, under the same conditions as in Section 2.5.1. The percentage insect mortality was corrected using Abbot's formula.23 Each single experiment contained a total of 96 larvae (each plate of 24 wells with four replicates). Controls were carried out in a similar way without addition of the test compound.

### _Statistical analysis_

Data consisting of the average value for each experimental unit were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA). Differences between treatment means were established by Tukey's test.24 Results are given in the text as probability values, with \(P\) < 0.05 adopted as the criterion of significance. Complete statistical analysis was performed by means of the SAS program.25

## 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### _Structure elucidation_

Substances **1** to **43** were identified by comparison of their NMR, MS, UV and IR spectroscopic data with data previously reported in the literature. Data are given only for those compounds that were tested independently (see Table 3).

#### 3.1.1 Compounds identified in the VP-BHAL layer

Caffeoyl 6-O-b-d-glucopyranoside (**1**) and caffeoyl 6-O-a-d-glucopyranoside (**2**; C15H18O9): amorphous yellow solid; ESI/MS _m_/_z_ 341 [M - H]-; 1H NMR (400 MHz, acetone-d6-): glucopyranose 6: 7.18 (H2-2; d; \(g\) 2.5 Hz); 6.88 (H-5; d; \(g\) 8.2 Hz); 7.08 (H-6; m); 7.56 (H-7; d; \(g\) 15.9 Hz); 6.31 (H-8; d; \(g\) 7.15 Hz); _a_-glucose: 8.512 (H-1; d; \(g\) 3.6 Hz); 3.38 (H-2; m); 3.71 (H-3; t; \(g\) 7.9.1 Hz); 3.36 (H-4; m); 3.54 (H-5; ddd; \(g\) 9.1, 6.2 and 2.0 Hz); 4.26 (H-6b; dd; \(g\) 11.8 and 6.2 Hz); 4.43 (H-6a; dd; \(g\) 11.8 and 2.0 Hz); _b_-glucose: 4.53 (H-1; d; \(g\) 8.0 Hz); 3.17 (H-2; t; \(g\) 8.0 Hz); 3.42 (H-3; m); 3.39 (H-4; m); 4.03 (H-5; m); 4.30 (H-6b; dd; \(g\) 7.11.8 and 5.8 Hz); 4.49 (H-6a; dd; \(g\) 11.8 and 2.0 Hz); UV and 13C NMR data were identical to data previously reported.26 Isoorientin (**3**) and orientin (**4**; C21H20O11); carlinoside (5**) and isocarlinoside (6**; C26H28O15); schaffoside (7) and isoschaffoside (**8**; C26H28O14).

#### 3.1.2 Compounds identified in the VP-EMT layer

20-hydroxycedyonse (**9**; C27H44O7): amorphous colorless solid; ESI/MS _m_/_z_ 479 [M - H]-; 13C NMR (50 MHz, deuteropyridine): \(d\) 38.1 (C-1); 68.5 (C-2); 68.3 (C-3); 32.7 (C-4); 51.6 (C-5); 204.1 (C-6); 121.9 (C-7); 166.6 (C-8); 34.7 (C-9); 38.9 (C-10); 21.4 (C-C-11); 32.3 (C-12); 48.4 (C-13); 84.5 (C-14); 31.9 (C-15); 21.7 (C-16); 50.4

## Page 7



#### 3.1.3 Compounds identified from the SD-EMR layer

Gallic acid (**13**; C7H6O5). Casuarinin (14; C41H28 O26): amorphous brown powder; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 935 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (400 MHz, acetone-d6/deuterium oxide): \(d\) 7.13 (gallvol group; s); 6.88, 6.58 and 6.53 (HHDP groups; s); glucose moiety: 5.53 (amomeric proton; d; \(g\) 5.0 Hz); 4.58 (H-2; dd; \(g\) 7.20 and 5.0 Hz); 5.39 (H-3 and 4; m); 5.26 (H-5; dd; \(g\) 7.8 and 2.6 Hz); 4.80 (H-6a; dd; \(g\) 13.7 and 3.8 Hz); 4.02 (H-6b; d; \(g\) 13.7 Hz); IR, UV and 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Castalagin (15; C41H2026): amorphous brown powder; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 933 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (400 MHz, acetone-d6/deuterium oxide): \(d\) 6.70, 6.69 and 6.55 (HHHDP groups; s); glucose moiety: 5.60 (anomeric proton; d; \(g\) 4.6 Hz); 4.94 (H-2; 3 and 6a; m); 5.12 (H-4; t; \(g\) 7.1 Hz); 5.49 (H-5; bdr; \(g\) 6.5 Hz); 3.95 (H-6b; d; \(g\) 12.6 Hz); 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Syringic acid (**16**; C6H10O5): amorphous white powder; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 197 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (200 MHz, acetone-d6): \(d\) 7.25 (H-2 and 6; s); 3.61 (OCH3-3 and 5; s); 13C NMR and UV data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Ellagic acid 4-O-a-L-rhamnopyranoside (17; C20H16O12): pale yellow powder; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 447 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD): \(d\) 7.84 (H-5; s); 7.49 (H-5'; s); 5.52 (H-1'; d; \(g\) 1.6 Hz); 4.20 (H-2'; dd; \(g\) 1.6 and 3.4 Hz); 4.02 (H-3'; dd; \(g\) 9.5 and 3.4 Hz); 3.48 (H-4'; t; \(g\) 9.5 Hz); 3.77 (H-5'; dd; \(g\) 9.5 and 6.2 Hz); 1.27 (H-6'; d; \(g\) 6.2 Hz); IR, UV and 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Ellagic acid (**18**; C14H6O8): amorphous pale yellow solid; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 301 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (200 MHz, CD3OD): \(d\) 7.47 (H-5 and 5'; s); 13C NMR and IR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Daucosterol (**19**; C39H6O6); ellagic acid 4-O-a-L-2'-O-acetylfhamnopyranoside (**20**) and ellagic acid 4-O-a-L-3''-O-acetylfhamnopyranoside (**21**; C22H18O13); siphoneugenin (**22**; C21H2O14); 3, 4'-di-O-methylellagic acid 4-O-b-D-6''-O-acetylglucopyranoside (**23**; C24H22O14) and 3,4'-di-O-methyl-ellagic acid 4-O-b-D-3'', 6''-di-O-acetylglucopyranoside (**24**; C26H24O15).

#### 3.1.4 Compounds identified in the SD-EML layer

Gallic acid (**13**); casuarinin (14); syringic acid (16). Quercetin (25; C5H16O7): yellow powder; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 301 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (200 MHz, acetone-d6): \(d\) 12.17 (OH; s); 7.82 (H-2'; d; \(g\) 2.0 Hz); 7.70 (H-6'; dd; \(g\) 8.0 and 2.0 Hz); 7.00 (H-5'; d; \(g\) 8.0 Hz); 6.52 (H-8; d; \(g\) 2.0 Hz); 6.26 (H-6; d; \(g\) 2.0 Hz); UV and 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Quercetin-3-O-a-L-rhamnopyranoside or quercetin (26; C22H2O11): yellow solid; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 447 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD): \(d\) 7.33 (H-2'; d; \(g\) 7.21 Hz); 7.31 (H-6'; dd; \(g\) 8.3 and 2.1 Hz); 6.91 (H-5'; d; \(g\) 8.3 Hz); 6.36 (H-8; d; \(g\) 2.1 Hz); 6.19 (H-6; d; \(g\) 2.1 Hz); 5.34 (H-1'; d; \(g\) 1.5 Hz); 4.21 (H-2'; dd; \(g\) 3.3 and 1.5 Hz); 3.75 (H-3'; dd; \(g\) 9.3 and 3.3 Hz); 3.41 (H-5'; m); 3.35 (H-4'; d; \(g\) 9.3 Hz); 0.93 (H-6'; d; \(g\) 7.61 Hz); 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Quercetin-3-O-a-L-arabinopyranoside or guiaiavirenin (**27**) and quercetin-3-O-b-D-xylopyranoside or regnuortrin (**28**; C20H18O11); chebuloside II (**29**; C36H58O11) and 28-b-D-glucopyranosyl-6-b-dxyroxmaslinate (**30**; C36H58O10).

#### 3.1.5 Compounds identified in the SD-DML layer

\(\alpha\)-Amyrin (**31**), _b_-amyrin (**32**) and lupeol (**33**; C30H59O); terminolic (**34**) and madecassic acids (**35**; C30H48O6); sisatic acid (**36**; C36H58O11).

#### 3.1.5 Compounds identified in the SD-DML layer

Gallic acid (**13**); casuarinin (**14**); syringic acid (16). Quercetin (25**; C5H16O7): yellow powder; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 301 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (200 MHz, acetone-d6): \(d\) 12.17 (OH; s); 7.82 (H-2'; d; \(g\) 7.20 Hz); 7.70 (H-6'; dd; \(g\) 8.0 and 2.0 Hz); 7.00 (H-5'; d; \(g\) 8.0 Hz); 6.52 (H-8; d; \(g\) 2.0 Hz); 6.26 (H-6; d; \(g\) 2.0 Hz); UV and 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Quercetin-3-O-a-L-rhamnopyranoside or quercetin (26; C22H2O11): yellow solid; ESI/MS \(m/z\) 447 \(\left[{\text{M} - \text{H}} \right]^{-}\); 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD): \(d\) 7.33 (H-2'; d; \(g\) 7.21 Hz); 7.31 (H-6'; dd; \(g\) 8.3 and 2.1 Hz); 6.91 (H-5'; d; \(g\) 8.3 Hz); 6.36 (H-8; d; \(g\) 2.1 Hz); 6.19 (H-6; d; \(g\) 7.21 Hz); 5.34 (H-1'; d; \(g\) 7.15 Hz); 4.21 (H-2'; dd; \(g\) 3.3 and 1.5 Hz); 3.75 (H-3'; dd; \(g\) 9.3 and 3.3 Hz); 3.41 (H-5'; m); 3.35 (H-4'; d; \(g\) 9.3 Hz); 0.93 (H-6'; d; \(g\) 7.1 Hz); 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.28 Quercetin-3-O-a-L-arabinopyranoside or guiavirenin (**27**) and quercetin-3-O-b-D-xylopyranoside or regnuortrin (**28**; C20H18O11); chebuloside II (**29**; C36H58O11) and 28-b-D-glucopyranosyl-6-b-dxyroxmaslinate (**30**; C36H58O10).

#### 3.1.5 Compounds identified in the SD-DML layer

\(\alpha\)-Amyrin (**31**), _b_-amyrin (**32**) and lupeol (**33**; C30H59O); terminolic (**34**) and madecassic acids (**35**; C30H48O6); sisatic acid (**36**; C36H58O11).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Treatment (plant) & Larval mortality (\%) (±SEM)b,c & (mg) (±SEM)c,d & (\%)e \\
**1** (V/P) & _2.8_ (±2.77) a & 293.1 (±15.09) ab & 85.6 \\
**9** (V/P) & 0 a & 262.6 (±3.91) b & 76.6 \\
**14** (SD) & 3.1 (±1.04) a & 100.8 (±12.14) b & 39.9 \\
**15** (SD) & 1.6 (±1.56) a & 300.2 (±20.07) ab & 87.6 \\
**16** (SD) & 26.1 (±6.13) a & 199.7 (±30.10) ab & 91.3 \\
**17** (SD) & 21.0 (±1.88) a & 308.6 (±2.52) ab & 90.1 \\
**18** (SD) & 8.9 (±1.55) a & 192.3 (±4.44) ab & 76.2 \\
**25** (V/P) & 78.0 (±0) b & ne \\
**26** (V/P) & 85.0 (±0) b & ne \\
**43** (SD) & 0 a & 121.4 (±25.24)b & 48.1 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Activity of compounds **1**, **9**, **14** to **18**, **25** to **26** and **43** from _Siphenougena densiflora_ (SD) and _Viftex polygana_ (PP) on viability and weight of second-instar _Spoodotra fungiperolaxa_ after 10 days of incubation

## Page 8



#### 3.1.6 Compounds identified in the SD-DMS layer

Gallic (**13**) and arjunic acids (**37**; C30H4S0)5; vanillic acid (**38**; C8H9O4); 2,4,6-trimethoxybenzoic acid (**39**; C10H12O5); 2,4,6-trimethoxybenzaldehyde (**40**; C10H12O4) and _trans-2,4,6-trimethoxyphenylpropendalehyde (**41**; C12H14O4); 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfur-aldehyde (**42**; C6H6O3).

#### 3.1.7 Compounds identified in the SD-BMS layer

Casuarinin (**14**). _b_-Pedunculagin (**43**; C34H24O22): amorphous off-white solid; ESI/MS _m/z_ 783 [M - H]-; 1H NMR (200 MHz, acetone-d6): 6.71 and 6.56 (HHDP group; brs); 5.53 (anomeric proton; d; d 6.9 Hz); IR, UV and 13C NMR data were similar to those reported in the literature.29

#### 3.1.8 Compounds identified in the SD-EMS layer

Gallic acid (**13**); casuarinin (**14**); castalagin (**15**); ellagic acid 4-O-a-L-rhamnopyranoside (**17**).

### _Larval mortality_

Very large differences in larval stage mortality, ranging from zero to 100% of the exposed larvae, resulted from treatments with different extracts (Table 2). _S. densiflora_ polar extracts (SD-ML, SD-HAL, SD-MS, SD-HAS, SD-MT, SD-HAT, SD-MR, SD-HAR) were responsible for the highest mortalities (100%), followed by VP-HAL (60%), VP-HF (90%) and VP-HAF (100%) extracts from _Vitex polygamma_, taking into account the treatment period (Table 2). They were then considered promising sources of active secondary metabolites and were further submitted to liquid-liquid partition.

Partition of VP-HAL produced a VP-BHAL fraction with increased activity (100%), whereas the resultant fractions in the SD-MR partition (SD-EMR and SD-AMR respectively) retained the same potent activity as the original extract (100%, Table 2).

The VP-MT extract (Table 2) was also fractionated, in spite of its lack of activity, on the basis of literature reports that a similar extract of _Vitex madiensis_ caused death by disruption of the moulting cycle in _S. frugiperda_.30 Ecdysteroids **9** to **12** (Fig. 1), known for their various effects on insects,31 were obtained in the fractionation of this extract.

Flavonoid 7, isolated from the VP-BHAL layer, is reported in the literature32 to have an insecticidal effect, but it was not isolated in sufficient amounts to be bioassayed. The flavonoids quercetin (**25**) and quercetin (**26**) were highly active substances causing larval mortality of 78 and 85% (Table 3) respectively after 10 days of treatment. This result could be explained by earlier reports indicating that quercetin (**25**) may be a potent inhibitor of mitochondrial ATPase,33 of cytochrome P450-dependent mixed function oxidases (MFO)34 and of midgut glutathione _S_-transferases from _S. frugiperda_.35 In addition, quercetin (**26**), a flavonol glycoside, may be hydrolysed when ingested by some insects, so releasing its aglycone, quercetin.32 The other compounds tested (Fig. 1) showed poor results, with a maximum larval mortality of 26%, a value statistically not significantly different (_P_ < 0.05) from the control (Table 3). Compound **17**, when layered on the top of the diet, became dark-brownish after a few hours, probably indicating oxidation and loss of activity.

### _Developmental effects_

In general, no statistically significant differences in pupation time and emergence were observed in the tests with extracts and fractions, except for two, VP-HL and VP-HF, which showed significantly extended larval periods of 6 and 15 days respectively above those of the controls (Table 2). Moreover, VP-HL caused 10% of malformed pupae, 20% of uncompleted second-instar larvae and 30% of pupae that did not reach adult stage.

Compound **9**, originating from an inactive extract (VP-MT, Table 2), caused a moderate but statistically significant larval weight loss in relation to the control after 10 days of treatment (_P_ < 0.05; Table 3). The effects of ecdysteroids are known to be surprisingly complex and dependent on the concentration of compound and the developmental stage of the insect,31 which could explain that result.

Although the bioassay used does not address behavioral responses (inhibition of feeding), the results suggest that larval weight loss caused by compounds **14** and **43** (Table 3) may be correlated with feeding deterrence. In fact, it is known that tannins reduce plant palatability and act as inhibitors of digestion by precipitating food protein and digestive enzymes.36 In addition, there is evidence that some species of Lepidoptera have taste receptors that respond to some phenolics.32 However, tannins **15** and **17** were practically inactive in this respect, probably because some tannins may be oxidized37 or hydrolyzed during passage through the insect gut,36 reducing their effectiveness. According to Urrea-Bulla _et al._,38 gallic acid (**13**), the compound isolated from several extracts of _S. densiflora_ and also a probable product of hydrolysis of compound **14**, significantly reduces larval growth of _S. frugiperda_ at 1 mg g-1.

## 4 CONCLUSIONS

Polar extracts from _S. densiflora_ and the VP-BHAL layer displayed considerable insecticidal activity, and may be efficient alternatives to conventional synthetic insecticides in the integrated pest management of _S. frugiperda_. Moreover, the feeding deterrence caused by tannin **14** along with the insecticidal effects of flavonoids **25** and **26** might explain the 100% outcome when the SD-ML extract was tested. In addition, compound **14** might be acting synergistically with **43**, and in concert with daucosterol (**19**), known for its insecticidal action,15 phenolic acid **13** and other

## Page 9

compound(s) not tested or characterized, emphasizing the excellent results obtained with extracts SD-MS and SD-MR respectively.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Dr Fatima R Salimena-Pires (Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora - UFJF) and Marcos Sobral (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG) for botanical identifications, and to ALCOA Alumimio S/A for facilitating plant collections. This study has been financially supported by Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) and Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP).

## References

- Gatchouse AM, The role of biotechnology in crop protection: current status and future perspectives. _XXX Brazilian Congress of Patomology. Gramado
- RS, Brazil.__Abstract Book._ p. 101 (2004).
- Denholm I, Horowitz AR, Cahill M and Ishaya I, Management of resistance to novel insecticides, in _Insectidicts with Novel Models of Action_, ed. by Ishaya I and Deghecle D. Springer, Berlin, pp. 260
- 282 (1998).
- Rosenthal GA, The chemical defense of higher plants. _Sciam Amor_ 94
- 99 (1986).
- University of Florida, USA [Online]. Available: [http://www.creatures.ifas.utl.edu/field/fall.armyworm.htm](http://www.creatures.ifas.utl.edu/field/fall.armyworm.htm) [November, 2005].
- Mensor LL, Menezes FS, Leitao GG, Reis AS, Santos TC, Coube CS, _et al_, Screening of Brazilian plant extracts for antioxidant activity by the use of DPPH free radical method.
- Phytometry Rev._ 15 : 127
- 130 (2001).
- Leitao SG, Melo FPG, Delle Monache F, Goncalves JL and Wigg MD, Inhibitory activity of _Vitex polygama_ extracts against _Hopes simplex_ type-1. _Boll Chim Famac_ 136 : 121 (1997).
- Leitao SG, Fonseca EN and Santos TC, Essential oils from Brazilian _Vitex_ species.
- Acta Hor 500 : 89
- 92 (1999).
- Santos TC, Delle Monache F and Leitao SG, Lefosteroids from two Brazilian _Vitex_ species. _Fluorantz_ 72 : 215
- 220 (2001).
- Leitao SG and Delle Monache F, '2'-O-caffeyoertinin from _Vitex polygama_.
- Phytochemistry 49 : 2167
- 2169 (1998).
- Moldenke HN and Moldenke AL, Materials toward a monograph of the genus _Vitex_.
- Phytologia 6 : 80
- 89 (1957).
- Rodrigues LA, Estudo floristico e extrundate da comunidade abruusita e arborea de una floresta em Laminarias, MG, e informacoes entoboticnias da populacao local. _Master's Dissertation_,Universidade Federal de Luras, 190 pp. (2001).
- Fundacao Biodiortus [Online]. Available: [http://www.bio-diversitas.org.br/lorable/SP_species.amecadas.pdf](http://www.bio-diversitas.org.br/lorable/SP_species.amecadas.pdf) [November, 2005].
- Proenca C, A revision of _Sibbonougana_ Berg. _Edinb J Bot_ 47 : 239
- 271 (1990).
- Paula JE, Silva Jr FG and Silva APP, Anatomic characterization of wood from gallery forest in Midwest of Brazil. _Sci Forestidis_ 58 : 73
- 89 (2000).
- Punggero CR, Garcia M, Gianello JC, Sosa ME and Tonn CE, Insectidal and antifeedant effects of _Jundila apera_ (Verbenaceae) triterpenes and derivatives on _Sibonihas oryzae_ (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). _J Storad Prod Res_ 41 : 433
- 443 (2005).
- Tapondjou AL, Adler C, Fontem DA, Bouda H and Reichmuth C, Bioactivities of cymol and essential oils of _Cuprususus supervients and Eucalyptus salipana_ against _Sibonihas zeanai_ Motschulsky and _Tribolium confususus_ du Val. _J Stored Prod Res_ 41 : 91
- 102 (2005).
- Jannet HB, Harraallah-Shiri F, Mighri Z, Simmonds MSJ and Blaney WM, Responses of _Spheoptera titurolus_ larvae to Tunisian plant extract and to neo-clerodane diterpenoids isolated from _Ajuga pseudovica_ leaves. _Fioteroia_ 71 : 105
- 112 (2000).
- Hernandez MM, Heraso C, Villarreal ML, Vargas-Arisupo I and Aranda E, Biological activities of crude plant extracts from _Vitex triplica_ L. (Verbenaceae). _J. Ethnopharmacol._ 67 : 37
- 44 (1999).
- Khambay BPS, Beddie DG, Hooper AM and Simmonds MS, Isolation, characterization and synthesis of an insecticidal tetramethyltetradychochromenedione-spiro-bicyclo [3.1.1] cyclobutepane from two species of Myrtaceae. _Tetrahedron_ 59 : 7131
- 7133 (2003).
- Regnault-Roger C and Hamraoui A, Comparison of the insecticidal effects of water extracted and intact aromatic plants on _Acanthocoides obucnus_, a bruchi beetle pest of kidney beans.
- Chronoecology_ 5 : 1
- 5 (1994).
- Papachristos DP, Karamanoli KI, Stamapoulos DC and Meniksoglu-Spirotolu U, The relationship between the chemical composition of three essential oils and their insecticidal activity against _Acanthosocides obucnus_ (Say). _Pest Manag Sci_ 60 : 514
- 520 (2004).
- Kasten JP, Precetti AACM and Parra RPJ, Dados Biologicos compartoides de _Spoletra fugiperda_ (JE Smith, 1797) em duas dietas artificiais e substratu natural. _Rev Agric_ 53 : 68
- 78 (1978).
- Abbott WS, A method of computing the effectiveness of an insecticide. _J Econ Entomol_ 18 : 265
- 267 (1925).
- Snedecor GW and Cochran WG, _Statistical Methods_, 8th edn. Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA (1989).
- SS_ 45N User's Guide: Statistics, Version 6.12. SAS Institute, Cary, NC_ (1997).
- Shimomura H, Sashida Y and Adachi T, Phenylpropanol glycose esters from _Prunus buregariana. Phytochemistry_ 27 : 641
- 644 (1988).
- Gallo MBC, Beltrame FL, Vieira PC, Cass QB, Fernandes IB and Silva MFG, Quantitative determination of 20-hydroxyestocone in methanolic extract of twigs from _Vitex polygama_ Cham. (Verbenaceae). _J Chromatogr B_ 832 : 36
- 40 (2006).
- Gallo MBC, Silva FC, Vieira PC, Fernandes JB and Silva MFG, New natural products from _Sibbonougana dusiflora_ and their chemotaxonomic significance. _J Praz Chem Soc_ 17 : 279
- 288 (2006).
- Okuda T, Yoshida T, Ashida M and Yazaki K, Tannins of _Casanara and Stacylymus_ species. Part I. Structures of pedunculagin, casuarietin, strictinin, casuariin, and stachyurin. _J Chem Soc Perkin Trans J_ 1765
- 1772 (1983).
- Kubo I, Matsumoto A and Ayafor JF, Efficient isolation of a large amount of 20-hydroxyestocone from _Vitex machonii_ (Verbenaceae) by droplet counter-current chromatography.
- _Agric Biol Chem_ 48 : 1683
- 1684 (1984).
- Wilson DD, The cedstroids, in _CRC Handbook of Natural Fusticides, Vol. II
- Insect Growth Regulators, Part A_, ed. by Morgan ED and Mandava NB. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 15
- 87 (1987).
- Simmons MSJ, Importance of flavonoids in insect-plant interaction: feeding and oviposition. _Pytochemistry_ 56 : 245
- 252 (2001).
- Lang DR and Racker E, Effects of quercetin and F1 inhibitor on mitochondrial ATPase and energy-linked reactions in sub-mitochondrials particles. _Biochem Biophys Acta_ 333 : 180
- 186 (1974).
- Mitchell MJ, Keogh DP, Crooks JR and Smith SL, Effects of plant flavonoids on insect cytochrome P-450 dependent steroid hydroxylase activity. _Insect Biochem Mol Biology_ 23 : 65
- 71 (1993).
- Post Manag Sci_ 62 : 1072
- 1081 (2006)


## Page 10

* [35] Yu SJ and Abo-Elghar GE, Allelochemicals as inhibitors of glutathione S-transferases in the fall armyworm. _Pestic Biochem Physiol_**68**:173-183 (2000).
* [36] Bernays EA and Chamberlain DJ, A study of tolerance of ingested tannin in _Schinticocera gregaria_. _J Insect Physiol_**26**:415-420 (1980).
* [37] Su J, Osawa T, Kawakishi S and Namiki M, Tannins antioxidants from _Obscelia dinemisi. Phytochemistry_**27**:1315-1319 (1988).
* [38] Urrea-Bulla A, Suarez M and Moreno-Murillo B, Biological activity of phenolic compounds from _Alchemoa glandulosa. Fineterougia_**75**:392-394 (2004).



