# 10.1055@s-0029-1185364.pdf

## Page 1



# _In vitro_ Trypanocidal Activity of Phenolic Derivatives from _Peperomia obtusifolia_

Jonas da Silva Mota, Ana Cristina Leite, Joao Marcos Batista Junior, Silvia Noeil Lopez, Daniela Luz Ambrosio, Gabriela Duo Passerini, Massuo Jorge Kato, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Regina Maria Barretto Gcarelli, Mayas Furlan

# Abstract

The trypanocidal activity of crude extracts and fractions from the leaves and stems of _Peperomia obtusifolia_ (Piperaceae) was evaluated _in vitro_ against the epinsatogue forms of _ Trypanosoma cruzi_. Bioactivity-guided fractionation of the most active extracts afforded seven known compounds, including three chromanes, two furofuran in lignans and two flavone _C_-diglycosides. The most active compounds were the chromanes per-pectubusin A and 3.4-dihydro-5-hydroxy-2-7-di-methyl-8-(2a-"methyl-2a-"butteroluethyl-2-(4"-methyl-1',3"-pentadienyl)-2H-1-benzopyran-6-carbohydrate).

## Introduction

**V**

Chagas' disease (American trypanosomiasis) affects 16-18 million people, mostly from Central and South America, where 25% of the total population are at risk of infection [1]. The treatment of Chagas' disease is still a challenge, since the currently available drugs, nitrurilmox (Lampit(r), discontinued by Bayer), a nitrofuran derivative, and benzimidazole (Rochagan(r), Roche), a nitroimidazole derivative, have shown limited efficacy, strong side effects, and low effectiveness [2].

The _Peperomia_ genus belongs to the Piperaceae family and consists of approximately 1 700 species [3]. In contrast to the extensive studies involving compounds isolated from Piper species [4,5], only a few species of _Peperomia_ have been subjected to systematic phytochemical investigation. _Peperomia obtusifolia_ is a well-known ornamental plant distributed from Mexico to South America. A previous phytochemical investigation of the aerial parts of _P. obtusifolia_ showed the presence of five phenolic compounds bearing methyl, premyl and geranyl groups [6].

This study describes the isolation and _in vitro_ evaluation of the trypanocidal activity against _Thypanosoma cruzi_ (Y-strain) and unspecific cytotoxicity of seven known compounds (Fig. 1) from the active fractions of the ethanol extracts of _Peperomia obtusifolia_ leaves and stems. This is the first report of the isolation of compound **2**, the chromanase 3.4-dihydro-5-hydroxy-2-7-di-methyl-8-(2a-"methyl-2a-"butteroluethyl-2-"butteroluethyl-8-(2a-"methyl-2a-"methyl-1',3"-pentadienyl)-2H-1-benzopyran-6-carbohydrate acid, from _Peperomia obtusifolia_.

## Materials and Methods

**V**

### Plant material

Leaves and stems of _Peperomia obtusifolia_ A. Diet-er were collected in Poos de Caldas, MG, Brazil and identified by Dr. Ines Cordeiro (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil). The voucher specimen (KATO 070) has been deposited at the Herbario do Estado "Maria Eneyda P. Kaufmann Fidalgo" (Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil).



## Page 2

Extraction and isolation

The powdered air-dried leaves (600 g) and stems (64 g) were extracted at room temperature with EtOH (4 x 2 500 mL, 72 h each and 4 x 500 mL, 72 h each; respectively).

The crude leaves extract (39.6 g) was dissolved in 100 mL of H2O/MeOH (20 : 80 v/v) and partitioned using Hex (3 x 35 mL), Hex/EtOAc (30 : 70 v/v) (3 x 35 mL) and EtOAc (3 x 35 mL), which afforded EL-H, EL-HE, EL-E and EL-MH fractions, respectively. EL-H (15.5 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (20-63 mm, 7 x 15 cm) eluted with a gradient of hexane-EtOAc and EtOAc-MeOH (3 L and 1.5 L, respectively), yielding 26 fractions (170 mL each, A-1 to A-26). Compound **1** (50 mg) was obtained from A-7 (320 mg) by recrystallization in MeOH (45 degC).

EL-HE (2.2 g) was submitted to low-pressure column chromatography over a C18 column (4 x 18 cm), under gradient elution (5-100% EtOH in H2O) (1.5 l) yielding 14 fractions (100 mL each, B-1 to B-14). B-7 (232.8 mg) after semipermeative reversed phase HPLC (C18, 10 mm, 250 mm x 21.2 mm, MeOH/H2O 65 : 35 v/v, flow-rate 16 mL/min, UV detection at 254 nm), yielded **2** (40 mg, Rt = 19.8 min). Compounds **3** (6 mg, Rt = 7.8 min) and **4** (7.2 mg, Rt = 12.4 min) were purified from B-9 (160.0 mg) under the same conditions as for B-7.

EL-MH (10.8 g) was subjected to low-pressure column chromatography over a C18 column (5 x 28 cm), under gradient elution (5-100% MeOH in H2O) affording 14 fractions (C-1 to C-14). C-8 and C-9 (165 and 168 mg, respectively) were pooled and then subjected to semipermeative HPLC (phenyl-hexyl, 10 mm, 250 mm x 21.2 mm, MeOH/AcOH aqueous 0.5%, 22 : 78 v/v, flow rate 14 mL/min, UV detection at 254 nm) to yield **5** (23 mg, Rt = 20 min).

The stems ethanol extract (5.7 g) was dissolved in 60 mL of H2O/MeOH (20 : 80 v/v) and partitioned using hexane, EtOAc and n-BuOH (3 x 20 mL each) to give ES-H, ES-E and ES-B fractions, respectively. ES-H (2 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (20-63 mm, 3 x 12 cm) eluted with hexane-EtOAc and an EtOAc-MeOH gradient (300 mL and 150 mL, respectively), to afford 13 fractions (50 mL each, D-1 to D-13). D-5 (60 mg) was purified using preparative TLC with toluene/hexane (20 : 80 v/v) yielding **6** (5 mg, Rf = 0.7) and **7** (2 mg, Rf = 0.75). For compounds **1, 2, 5-7**, the purity (> 99%) was determined by HPLC analysis using a diode-array detector (monitoring at l = 254 nm) and two different chromatographic conditions (C8 and C18 stationary phases). Melting points of compounds **3** and **4** were determined and were in accordance with literature values.



## Page 3

HPLC and specific rotation analysis

Analytical and semiperaparative HPLC separations were performed using stainless-steel Phenomenex Luna(r) columns (250 x 4.6 mm I.D., 5 mm Cs and C18: 250 x 21.2 mm I.D., 10 mm; C18 and Pheny-hexyl; Phenomenex). Methanol was obtained from J.T. Baker. HPLC separations were carried out using a Varian Preparstar SD-1 equipped with a Rheodyne (Cotati) injector with a 2 mL sample loop and a Varian ProStar 320 UV-Vis detector. Specific rotations of the isolated compounds dissolved in chloroform were measured on a Perkin Elmer 241 polarimeter equipped with a Na lamp operating at 589 nm.

### Trypanacidal assay [7]

An in vitro assay was performed measuring the proliferation of Y-strain epimastigotes growing in arsenic culture. The samples to be tested were stored as 1 mg/mL stock solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and were serially diluted in LIT medium before use. The crude extracts, fractions and pure compounds were tested at 0.4, 1.2, 3.7, 11.1, 33.3, 100 and 300 mg/mL, in triplicate, using 1 x 105 epimastigotes/well. The number of remaining viable protozoa was established by counting in a Neubauer chamber following incubation at 28 degC for 72 h with the test samples. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) values and statistical data were determined with the probit analysis method using GW-BA-SIC 2.33 (Microsoft Software, 1987). The positive control benzimidazole (> 99% of purity by HPLC) was obtained from Rochagan(r) tablets (Roche Brazil).

### Cytotoxicity assay

The unspecific cytotoxic activity was determined according to the method of Mosmann, with minimal modifications [8]. Briefly, Bally/c isogenic mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with 3 mL of sodium thioglycolate 3%. The animals were sacrificed in a CO2 chamber 3 days after incubation. The peritoneal macrophages were extracted by injecting phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) followed by slight massage and suction using a syringe. The cells were transferred to a sterile tube in an ice bath and cellular suspension was prepared after centrifugation. The sediment cells were resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium with 5% fetal calf serum, 100 mg/mL of streptomycin, 100 U/mL of penicillin and 5 x 10-2 M of b mercaptoethanol at density of 5 x 106 cells/mL (stock suspension). In a 96-wells microtiter trap, 100 mL of cells from the stock suspension and 100 mL of test solutions dissolved in RPMI 1640 medium (final concentrations: 100, 50, 25, 10, 5, 2.5 and 1 mg/ml), were added. After incubation for 24 h at 37 degC and 7.5% CO2, 100 mL of an MTT solution (2.5 mg/mL) were added to each well and incubated for 3 h under the same conditions. The optical density (590 nm) of the formazan crystals dissolved in 2-propanol was measured and compared with the negative control (only RPMI). The positive control for the trypanacidal assay (benzindole) was also evaluated. All treatments were performed in triplicate and the IC50 values (with 95% confidence intervals), were determined by linear regression analysis of dose-response curves, using Origin 7.0 (OriginLab Software).

## Results and Discussion

### \(\boldsymbol{\nabla}\)

In this work, we assessed the anti-tr trypanosomal activity of crude extracts from the leaves and stems of _Peperomia obtrustofluia_, and their fractions obtained by liquid-liquid partition against the epis-mastigate forms of the _Trypanosoma cruzi_ Y-strain.

The crude ethanol extract from the leaves of _b. obtrustofluia_ showed significant trypanacidal activity (IC50 of 4.3 mg/mL) when compared to the positive control benzimidazole (IC50 of 2.7 mg/mL) (0 Table 1). Thus, this extract was fractionated and all fractions EL-H, EL-HE, EL- and EL-MH (IC50 of 3.9, 0.2, 5.6 and 7.7 mg/mL respectively) were also active, with EL-HE being the most active with an IC50 of 0.2 mg/mL. The crude ethanol extract from the stems of _P. obtrustofluia_ showed lower activity than EL (IC50 of 23.2 mg/mL), nevertheless it was partitioned as well. All fractions were tested and the hexane (ES-H) and ethyl acetate (ES-E) fractions were the most active with IC50 values of 2.8 and 7.2 mg/mL, respectively.

Chemical investigations of the active fractions led to seven (1 - 7, 0* Fig. 1) known compounds: the chromases 3,4-dihydro-5-hydroxy-2,7-dimethyl-8-(2"-methyl-2"-butenyl)-2-(4"-methyl-1"-3"-pentediatol)-2H-1-benzopyran-6'-carboxylic acid (1) [9], per-pothuan A (6) [6] and calculifol (7) [6] [10]; the furofuran ligands 2-epigesalisation (3) [11] and sextentrum (4) [12]; and the flavone C-diglycosides isoswertistin-4'-methyl-ether-2"a-l-rhamoside (**2**) and isoswertistin-2"a-t-rhamoside (**5**) [13, 14]. The structures of 1 - 7 were confirmed by IR, MS, 1H-, 13C-NMR and 2D NMR spectral data, which were in agreement with the reported data for the respective compounds.

Compounds **1, 6** and **7** had an optical activity [a]6: 0* (c. 1.0, CHCl3) suggesting a racemic mixture in the molecules bearing a chiral center at C-2. These results are in accordance with the data

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline
**Part of the plant** & **Extract/fraction** & **IC50 (ug/mL) ± SD** \\ \hline
**Leaves** & EL & 4.3 ± 1.0 \\  & EL-H & 3.9 ± 0.5 \\  & EL-HE & 0.2 ± 0.4 \\  & EL-E & 5.6 ± 1.2 \\  & EL-MH & 7.7 ± 1.4 \\
**Stems** & ES & 23.2 ± 8.0 \\  & ES-H & 2.8 ± 0.4 \\  & ES-E & 7.2 ± 3.0 \\  & ES-R & 132.0 ± 1.0 \\  & ES-MH & 24.4 ± 6.0 \\  & Benzimidazole(r) & 2.7 ± 0.5 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: In vitro trypanodidal activity of extracts and fractions from Peperomia obtrustofluia (Piperaceae) against epimastigotes forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ Y-strain®.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline
**Compound** & **IC50 (uM) ± SD** \\  & **Trypanacida(r)** & **Cytotoxicity (Si)** \\ \hline
**1** & 27.0 ± 0.8 & 405.0 ± 5.0 (14.9) \\
**2** & 678.2 ± 50.0 \\
**3** & 93.5 ± 9.0 \\
**4** & 289.1 ± 20.0 \\
**5** & 620.1 ± 45.0 \\
**6** & 3.1 ± 0.2 \\
**7** & 47.5 ± 4.0 \\
**8** & Benzidazole(r)** & 10.4 ± 0.5 \\
138.0 ± 2.0 (109) \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: In vitro trypanodial activity of the isolated compounds 1–7, and unspecific cytotoxicity of the most active compounds (1 and 6).



## Page 4

previously reported [6, 15]. This is the first report of the isolation of compound **1** from _P. obtusifolia_. It had previously been reported from _Peperomia ampliexiculis_ [9].

The trypanoidal activity of the isolated compounds was determined using benzimidazole as the positive control (IC50 of 10.4 uM, O **Table 2**). The chromanes **1, 6 and 7** showed better trypanoidal activity, with IC50 values of 27.0, 3.1 and 47.5 uM respectively, than the lignans and glycosylflavones isolated. The potent trypanoidal activity observed for these compounds bearing a benzopyran nucleus substituted with isoprenyl moieties supports our recent report which showed the trypanoidal activity of chromenes isolated from _Pipper gauidchaudiumum_ and _P. edumum_ and semisynthetic derivatives [7].

Even though the furofuran lignans 2-episesalatin (**3**) and essearmin (**4**) had been isolated from the most active fraction EL-HE (IC50 of 0.2 uMg/mL, O **Table 1**) they showed weak activity, indicating loss of the trypanoidal activity during fractionation. The flavone C-diglycosides **2** and **5** isolated from the leaves of _P. obtusifolia_ did not display any trypanoidal activity (o **Table 2**). As observed for the inactive lignans **3** and **4**, the fur further chromatographic fractionation of the active EL-MH fraction (IC50 of 7.7 ug/mL) resulted in the isolation of inactive compounds. Despite the negative results obtained for the flavone C-diglycosides **2** and **5** as well as for lignans **3** and **4** in the trypanoidal assay, further studies of EL-HE and EL-MH could be promising for the search of new trypanoidal compounds.

The most active compounds **1** and **6** were also evaluated for their unspecific cytotoxicity in mammalian cells (murine peritoneal macrophages), and the obtained values indicated that chromanes were not toxic at the level of their trypanoidal activity (IC50 of 405.0 and 402.1 uM, o **Table 2**). Nevertheless, the cytotoxic activity of **1** and **6** was higher than that of benzimidazole (IC50 of 1138.0 uM, o **Table 2**), which was included in order to establish a comparison with the only drug available for the treatment of Chagas' disease. As selectivity is a relevant characteristic for defining lead molecules, the cytotoxicities were compared to the antiparasitic activities by calculating the SI (selectivity index) [16]. The SI values for **1, 6** and benzimidazole were 14.9, 130.4 and 109, respectively, suggesting that **1** and particularly **6** have good selectivity for _T. cruzi_ eplastigstopes when compared with benzimidazole.

In conclusion, the present investigation revealed that the bioassay-guided fractionation of extracts from the leaves and stems of _P. obtusifolia_ led to the isolation of premylated benzopyrans with potent anti-trypanosomal activity and a good selectivity index when assayed in mammalian cells. These findings suggest that Piperaceae species are an important source of new trypanoidal compounds. More extensive and detailed studies on the trypanoidal activity of natural chromanes as well as chromane derivatives should be undertaken in order to provide an understanding of structural requirements for biological activity.

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank the financial support provided by FAPESP within the BIOTA/FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br), ACL, JMBJ and SNL also thank FAPESP for providing scholarships. MF, MJK, and VSB are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships.

## References

- 1 World Health Organization (WHO). Strategic direction for research: Chagas disease. Available at [http://www.who.int/tdr/diseases/chagas/directiethrin](http://www.who.int/tdr/diseases/chagas/directiethrin). Accessed May 24, 2002. 2 Urbina _Ab. Do Compo R. Specific chemotherapy of Chagase disease : controversies and advances. Trends Parasitol 2003 : 19 495
- 501. 3 Wunke MS, Jaramillo MA, Borsch T, Samain MS, Quandt D, Neuhuis C. Evolution of Piperales
- malt gene and tmtk intron sequence data reveal lineage specific concentration contrast. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007 : 42
- 497. 4 Hormar VS, Jan SC, Bisht KS, Jain R, Tangle P, Jha A, Tyagi OD, Prasad AK, Wengel J, Olsen GE, Boll PM, Phytochemistry of the genus _Pipper_ Phytochemistry 1997 : 45 573
- 677. 5


