# 10.1002@hlca.200790187.pdf

## Page 1



## A New _ent_-Kaurane Diterpene from Stems of _Alibertia macrophylla_ K. Schum. (Rubiaceae)

by **Viviane Candida da Silva**, **Andreia de Oliveira Faria**, **Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani**, and **Marcia Nasser Lopes***

Departamento de Quimica Organica, Instituto de Quimica, UNESP 'Julio de Mesquita Filho', C.P. 355, CEP 14801-970, Araraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil

(phone: + 55-16-33016662; fax: + 55-16-33016692; e-mail: mnlopes@iq.unesp.br)

## Introduction

Plants of the _Alibertia_ genus are known to be a rich source of pentacyclic triterpenes [1-3]. Moreover, _Alibertia_ belongs to the Ixoroideae subfamily in Rubiaceae, these being known for the occurrence of iridoids as main secondary metabolites [4]. Previous investigation of the leaves of _A. macrophylla_ resulted in the isolation of non-glycosidic iridoids 1_b_- and 1_a_-hydroxydihydrocoronin aglycones, and the caffeic acid esters 2-phenylethyl caffeoate and 2-methyl-4-hydroxybutyl caffeoate [5].

This paper reports the occurrence of a new _ent_-kaurane diterpene (**1**) from _A. macrophylla_ stems in addition to seven triterpenes **2** -**8**, four glucoside iridoids **9** - **12**, three phenolic acids **13** -**15**, and two steroids **16** and **17**. It is the first report of a diterpene from any _Alibertia_ species, but _ent_-kauranes were previously isolated from _Chiococca alba_[6] and _Tricalysia dubia_[7] species of the family Rubiaceae.

## Results and Discussion

- Dried and powdered stems of _Alibertia macrophylla_ were successively extracted with hexane, AcOEt and EtOH. The hexane extract was submitted to chromatography (column and preparative TLC) to afford lupenone (**2**), germanicone (**3**), _a_-amirenone (**4**), _b_-amirenone (**5**), lupeol (**6**), and oleanolic (**7**) and unsolic (**8**) acids. The AcOEt was fractionated by using a combined chromatographic column on silica gel and _RP18_, preparative TLC and preparative RP-HPLC to afford 6_a_- (**9**) and 6_b_-hydroxygeniposide (**10**), gardenoside (**11**), shanziside methyl ester (**12**), and protocatechuic (**13**), vanilic (**14**), and caffeic (**15**) acids, sitosterol (**16**) stigmasterol (**17**), and the new _ent_-kaurane-2\(b\),3\(a\),16_a_-triol (**1**).

Compounds **2** -**17** were identified by comparing their 1H- and 13C-NMR data with those previously published [1][8-13].

Compound **1** was isolated as a yellow amorphous powder. The HR-ESI-MS of **1** exhibited its [_M_ + Na]+ peak at _m_/_z_ 345.2574 (calc. 345.2502), consistent with the

## Page 2

molecular formula C20H34O3. The IR spectrum of **1** revealed OH absorptions (3373 cm-1). The 1D and 2D NMR data (_Table_) revealed the presence of four Me groups (\(\delta\)(H) 0.69/\(\delta\)(C) 16.8, \(\delta\)(H) 0.90/\(\delta\)(C) 28.9, \(\delta\)(H) 1.00/\(\delta\)(C) 18.7, and \(\delta\)(H) 1.22/\(\delta\)(C) 24.3), two oxygenated CH groups (\(\delta\)(H) 3.45/\(\delta\)(C) 67.2 and \(\delta\)(H) 2.72/\(\delta\)(C) 82.3), and one oxygenated quaternary C-atom (\(\delta\)(C) 76.7). The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectrum also showed the presence of seven CH2 and three more CH groups, and three additional quaternary C-atoms in the molecule. Based on these data, **1** was assumed to be a trihydroxy-kaurane diterpene. On the basis of its negative specific rotation value ([\(\alpha\)]\({}_{7}^{27}\) = \(-\)1.36), it is suggested that **1** belongs to the _ent_-kaurane series, similarly to the _ent_-kaurane series. The 

## Page 3

other analogous diterpenes [14][15]. The assignments of C(2) and C(3) were confirmed by the cross-peak correlations in the gHMQC spectrum of H\(-\)C(2) (\(\delta\) 3.45) and H\(-\)C(3) (\(\delta\) 2.72) with the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 67.2 and \(\delta\) 82.3, respectively, as well as the long-range connectivities shown by the gHMBC spectrum between the signals ascribed to H\(-\)C(18) (\(\delta\) 0.90) and \(\delta\) 82.3, and between H\(-\)C(19) (\(\delta\) 0.69) and \(\delta\) 82.3. The Me(20) group and H\(-\)C(5) are \(\alpha\)- and \(\beta\)-oriented, respectively, on biogenetic grounds [16]. The configuration at C(16) was determined as (\(R\)), the OH group at which has an equatorial orientation (\(\alpha\)) and the Me(17) group has an axial orientation (\(\beta\)). In this case, a chemical shift at C(16) ((\(R\))-configuration) appears at \(\delta\)(C) 76 - 79, and if C(16) has the configuration (\(S\)), the chemical shift would be \(\delta\)(C) 81 - 82. NOESY Interactions observed between H\(-\)C(5) (\(\delta\)(H) 0.76) and H\(-\)C(3) (\(\delta\)(H) 2.72), and also between H\(-\)C(5) (\(\delta\)(H) 0.76) and H\(-\)C(9) (\(\delta\)(H) 0.89 - 0.95) indicated the axial orientations (\(\beta\)) of H\(-\)C(5), H\(-\)C(3), and H\(-\)C(9) (_Fig._). The configuration at C(2) was determined from the multiplicity and coupling constant observed for H\(-\)C(2) and H\(-\)C(3) from the 1D TOCSY spectrum, and from interactions found for

Figure. _Important NOESY interactions in compound_ **1**



## Page 4

H - C(3) in NOESY spectrum. From the NOESY spectrum, H - C(3) was defined as being in an axial position (b), and its coupling constant of 9.5 Hz indicated that H - C(2) is also in an axial position but with an a-orientation. Compound **1** was, therefore, identified as _ent_-kaurane-2b,3\(a\),16_a_-triol.

Thus, this is the first report of this _ent_-kaurane in literature, and it is the first report of the isolation of a diterpene from the _Alibertia_ genus in Rubiaceae. The occurrence of triterpenes **2** - **8**, iridoids **9** - **12**, and phenolic acids **13** - **15** in _Alibertia_ is in agreement with chemosystematic correlations and botanical positioning of this genus in the subfamily Ixoroideae [17].

The authors wish to thank the _Brazilian Agencies_ for fellowships to _V. C. S._ (CNPq), _A. O. F._ (PIBIC/CNPq), and financial support from the _Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo_ (FAPESP).

## Experimental Part

_General._ Column chromatography (CC): silica gel (35 - 70 and 70 - 200 mesh; _Acros_) and silica _RP18_ (15 - 25 um; _Merck_). TLC: silica gel _60 G F234_ plates; visualization under UV light, I2 vapor and by spraying 0.5% anisaldehyde (in H2SO4), followed by heating. HPLC Separations were performed on a _Varian PrepStar Dynamax SD-1_ system with a UV/VIS detector and a _RP18_ column (_Phenomenex Luna C18_), eluting with MeOH/H2O. Optical rotations: _Polamat A Carl Zeiss Jena_ polarimeter. IR Spectra: _Nicolet 730 FT-IR_ spectrometer, with KBr discs; in cm-1. NMR Spectra: _Varian INOVA 500_ instrument; at 500 (1H) and 126 MHz (13C); d in ppm rel. to TMS, \(J\) in Hz. HR-ESI-MS: _Bruker Daltonics UltrOTOFQ_; in _m/z_.

_Plant Material. Albertia macrophylla_ K. Schum. was collected in the Mogi Guacu Ecological and Experimental Reserve in the Sao Paulo State (Estacao Ecologica e Experimental de Mogi-Guacu, Sao Paulo - SP), Brazil in November 2003 by Dr. _M. C. M. Young_ and identified by Dr. _I. Cordeiro_. The voucher specimen (SP 370.915) was deposited at the Botanical Institute Herbarium in Sao Paulo city, Sao Paulo State (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo - SP), Brazil.

_Extraction and Isolation._ The dried and powdered stems (550.0 g) of _A. macrophylla_ were successively extracted with hexane, AcOEt, and EtOH at r.t. After evaporation, the hexane extract (2.80 g) was submitted to CC (silica gel (70 - 200 mesh); gradient of hexane/AcOEt) to give ten _Fractions_ after TLC analysis. _Fr. 2_ (350.0 mg) was subjected to a CC (silica gel (35 - 70 mesh); hexane/AcOEt 98 : 02 (_v_/_v_)) to afford a mixture of **2** - **5** (133.6 mg). _Fr. 4_ (140.0 mg) was purified by a prep. TLC (hexane/AcOEt 4 : 1(_v_/_v_)) to afford **6** (54.8 mg). _Fr. 7_ (103.0 mg) was submitted to prep. TLC (hexane/AcOEt 7: 3 (_v_/_v_)) to afford a mixture of **7** and **8** (15.0 mg). The AcOEt extract (8.0 g) was subjected to CC (_RP18_; gradient of MeOH/H2O and EtOAc/MeOH) to give 13 _Fractions_ after TLC analysis. _Fr. 3_ (380.0 mg) was purified by prep. HPLC (_CI8_ column; MeOH/H2O 3 : 7 (_v_/_v_); 10 ml/min; \(l\) = 238 nm) to afford **9** (48.0 mg), **10** (13.2 mg), a mixture of **11** and **13** (15.0 mg), and a mixture of **14** and **15** (9.0 mg). _Fr. 4_ (1.5 g) was submitted to CC (_RP18_; gradients of MeOH/H2O and EtOAc/MeOH) to give eight subfractions after TLC analysis. _Fr. 4.4_ (70.0 mg) was purified by prep. HPLC (_CI8_ column; MeOH/H2O/MeCO2H 34 : 165 : 1(_v_/_v_/_v_); 10 ml/min; \(l\) = 254 nm) to afford **9** (8.3 mg), **10** (12.5 mg), **11** (5.8 mg), and **14** (3.0 mg). _Fr. 4.5_ (70.0 mg) was submitted to a purification by CC (_RP18_; MeOH/H2O gradient) to afford **12** (16.4 mg) and **14** (8.7 mg). _Fr. 6_ (800.0 mg) was submitted to a CC (silica gel (35 - 70 mesh); gradient of AcOEt/MeOH) to afford **1** (130.0 mg). _Fr. 7_ (300.0 mg) was purified by CC (silica gel (35 - 70 mesh); gradient of hexane/AcOEt) to afford a mixture of **16** and **17** (23.6 mg).

ent-_Kaurane-2b,3a,16a-triol_ (**1**). Yellow amorphous powder. [a]2\(g\) = - 1.36 (_c_ = 0.122, MeOH). IR (KBr): 3373, 2938, 2856, 1461, 1387, 1042, 1116. 1H- and 13C-NMR: see the _Table._ HR-ESI-MS: 345.2574 ([_M_ + Na]+, C20H34NaO3+; calc. 345.2502).

_Lupenone_ (**2**), _Germanicone_ (**3**), _a-Amirenone_ (**4**), _and b-Amirenone_ (**5**). The 1H- and 13C-NMR (in CDCl3) data of the mixture were in accordance with those reported in [1].



## Page 5

_Lupeol_ (**6**), _Ursolic Acid_ (**7**), _and Oleanolic Acid_ (**8**). The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (in CDCl\({}_{3}\)) data of these compounds were in accordance with those reported in [8].

_6\(\alpha\)-Hydroxyeniposide_ (**9**) _and 6\(\beta\)-Hydroxyeniposide_ (**10**). The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (in CD\({}_{3}\)OD) data of theses compounds were in accordance with those reported in [9].

_Gardenoside_ (**11**). The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (in (D\({}_{6}\))DMSO) data of this compounds was in accordance with those reported in [10].

_Shanziside Methyl Ester_ (**12**). The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (in (D\({}_{6}\))DMSO) data of this compounds was in accordance with those reported in [11].

_Protocatechuic Acid_ (**13**), _Vanilic Acid_ (**14**), _and Caffeic Acid_ (**15**). The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (in (D\({}_{6}\))DMSO) data of these compounds were in accordance with those reported in [12].

_Sitosterol_ (**16**) _and Stigmasterol_ (**17**). The \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (in CDCl\({}_{3}\)) data of these compounds were in accordance with those reported in [13].

## References

* [1] R. S. G. Olea, N. F. Roque, _Quim. Nova_**1990**, _13_, 278.
* [2] C. B. Brochini, D. Martins, N. F. Roque, V. da S. Bolzani, _Phytochemistry_**1994**, _36_, 1293.
* [3] V. da S. Bolzani, L. M. V. Trevisan, M. C. M. Young, _Phytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 2089.
* [4] E. Robbrecht, 'Tropical Woody Rubiaceae', National Botanica Garden of Belgium, Meise, 1988.
* [5] R. S. G. Olea, N. F. Roque, V. da S. Bolzani, _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**1997**, \(8\), 257.
* [6] R. B. Argaez, L. M. Baizabal, F. M. Pat, L. M. P. Rodriguez, _Can. J. Chem._**1997**, _75_, 801.
* [7] D. H. He, K. Matsunami, H. Otsuka, T. Shinzato, M. Aramoto, M. Bando, Y. Takeda, _J. Nat. Med._**2007**, _61_, 46; K. Nishimura, Y. Hitotsuyanagi, N. Sugeta, K. Sakakura, K. Fujita, H. Fukaya, Y. Aoyagi, T. Hasuda, T. Kinoshita, D. He, H. Otsuka, Y. Takeda, K. Takeya, _Tetrahedron_**2006**, _62_, 1512; D. He, K. Matsunami, H. Otsuka, T. Shinzato, M. Aramoto, M. Bando, Y. Takeda, _Phytochemistry_**2005**, _66_, 2857.
* [8] S. B. Mahato, A. P. Kundu, _Phytochemistry_**1994**, _37_, 1517.
* [9] S. Damtoft, R. S. Jensen, B. J. Nielsen, _Phytochemistry_**1981**, _20_, 2717.
* [10] L. J. El-Naggar, J. L. Beal, _J. Nat. Prod._**1980**, _43_, 649.
* [11] Y. Takeda, H. Nishimura, H. Inouye, _Phytochemistry_**1977**, _16_, 1401.
* [12] C. J. Pouchert, J. Behnke, 'The Aldrich Library of \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H FT NMR Spectra', Aldrich Chemical Company, Milwaukee, 1993.
* [13] P. Forgo, K. E. Kover, _Steroids_**2004**, _69_, 43; W. D. Nes, R. A. Norton, M. Benson, _Phytochemistry_**1992**, _31_, 805.
* and Higher Terpenoids', Chapman & Hall, London, 1991, vol. 2, p. 921
* [15] G. Delgado, L. Alvarez, A. R. Vivar, _Phytochemistry_**1985**, _24_, 2736; T. Sakai, Y. Nakagawa, _Phytochemistry_**1988**, _27_, 3769.

* [17] L. M. V. Trevisan, Livre-Doceneia, Thesis, Universidade Estadual Paulista at Araraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1993.



