# 10.1590@S0103-50532010000500016.pdf

## Page 1

Activities of Extracts and Compounds from _Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil. (Rutaceae) in Leaf-cutting Ants and their Symbiotic Fungus

Ana Paula Terezan,a Raquel Andrade Rossi,b Roberta N. A. Almeida,b Tats Garcia Freitas,b Joao B. Fernandes,b,a M. Fatima das Graças Fernandes da Silva,a Paulo C. Vieira,a Odair C. Bueno,b Fernando C. Pagnoccaa and Jose R. Piranic

###### Abstract

O estudo dos extratos dos galhos da planta _Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil. (Rutaceae) levou ao isolamento de alcaloides furoquinolinicos (dictamina, \(\gamma\)-fagarina e esquimianina) e 2-arilquinolin-4-ona (2-fenil-1-metilquinolin-4-ona) e limonoides (acido limonexico e limonina). Os compostos 2-fenil-1-metilquinolin-4-ona e acido limonexico form isolados pela primeira vez no gnero _Spiranthera_. Os alcaloides furoquinolinicos, 2-arilquinolin-4-ona e os limonoides mostraram atividade insecticide e/ou fungicidalo no ninho da formiga _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.

The study of the _Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil (Rutaceae) branches extracts led to the isolation of the furoquinoline (dictamine, \(\gamma\)-fagarina and skimminaine) and 2-arylquinol-4-one (1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one) alkaloids and limonoids (limonexic acid and limonin). The compounds 1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one and limonexic acid were isolated for the first time from the _Spiranthera_. These furoquinoline and 2-arylquinol-4-one alkaloids and limonoids showed insecticidal and/or fungicidal activity in the nest of the _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.

Spiranthera odoratissima, furoquinoline alkaloids, limonoids, _Atta sexdens rubropilosa, Leucoagarcius gongylophorus_

## Introduction

_Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil. (Rutaceae), popularly know as Manaca, is a shrub found in the savannah and forest of Central Brazil, and in Bolivia.[1] In folk medicine is used in the treatment of rheumatism, gout, kidney infections, urinary retention, abdominal pains, acne and boil.[2] According to Matos _et al._,[3] the ethanolic extract of the _S. odoratissima_ roots contain compounds with analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity.

In previous phytochemical studies of _S. odoratissima_ roots and leaves were reported to contain furoquinoline and \(\beta\)-indoloquinazoline alkaloids, coumarin, terpene, steroid and limonoids.[4, 5]

Leaf-cutting ants (Hymenoptera) are dominant herbivores in the tropics and can be found from the United States Southern to Northern Argentina countries.[6] They cultivate a symbiotic fungus for feeding using leaf fragments as substrate, thus they are considering plague.[7] Therefore, the biological control of these insects has been the aim of many studies.

In this work was determined the toxicity of crude extract and compounds isolated from _S. odoratissima_ branches in nest of the _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

The \({}^{1}\)H NMR, \({}^{13}\)C NMR and 2D correlations spectra were obtained using Bruker DRX-400 spectrometer, with CDCl\({}_{3}\) and acetone-\(d_{6}\) using TMS as internal standard.



## Page 2

For ESIMS analysis, low resolution, was used on triple quadrupole Micromass Quattro LC instrument. GC/MS (EI) analysis was used a QP5000 Shimadzu, capillary column DB 5MS (30 m, 0.25 mm id, film 0.25 mm). The temperature was programmed initially at 70 degC for 4 min, them increased with a rate of 10 degC min-1 to 280 degC respectively, injection volume was 1 mL in a split mode and temperatures of the detector/ injector were 300 /280 degC. The mass selective detector at 70 eV with scans from 50 to 500 u.

### Plant material

Branches of _S. odoratissima_ were collected in Rio Verde-Jatai, GO, Brazil in January/2001 and identified by Dr. Jose Rubens Pirani. Voucher specimens (4778) were deposited at the Institute of Bioscience herbarium of the University of Sao Paulo.

### Compounds extraction and isolation

The dried and powdered branches (1.1 kg) were subsequently extracted with _n_-hexane (1.9 g), CH2Cl2 (7.2 g) and MeOH (16.7 g). The concentrated CH2Cl2 extract was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) using a _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient. The CH2Cl2-EtOAc fraction (4.1 g) was chromatographed on silica gel (230-400 mesh), eluting with a _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient to give 3 fractions A-C. Fraction A (34.4 mg) was fractionated as above, _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc gradient. The fraction A-1 (15.0 mg) was purified by preparative TLC using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:4) yielding **1** (7.8 mg). Fraction B (689.3 mg) was fractionated using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient yielding 26 fractions. The fraction B-15 (37.0 mg) was purified by preparative TLC using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:4) yielding **2** (8.7 mg). Fraction B-16 (210.1 mg) was fractionated using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (3.5:6:0.5) and yielded 32 fractions. The fraction B-16.27 (44.5 mg) was purified by preparative TLC using hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (0.5:4:0.5) yielding **3** (7.4 mg). Fraction C (2.1 g) was fractionated using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, yielding 70 fractions. The fraction C-34 (397.5 mg) was fractionated using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient and fraction C-34.86 was purified by preparative TLC using CH2Cl2-acetone (4:1) and yielded **4** (18.0 mg). Fraction C-67 (40.4 mg) was fractionated by TLC using CH2Cl2-MeOH (2:3) yielding **5** (5.0 mg). The concentrated MeOH extract was submitted to liquid partition with _n_-hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH. The union of the _n_-hexane and CH2Cl2 fractions (510.0 mg) was chromatographed on Sephadex LH-20 eluting with MeOH, MeOH-CH2Cl2 (4:1, 3:2 and 1:1) to give 38 fractions. Fraction 22 (89.0 mg) was submitted to centrifugational chromatography (Cromatroton) using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, yielding 10 fractions. Fraction 22-2 (20.0 mg) was purified by preparative TLC using _n_-hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (1:8:1) and yielded **6** (16.0 mg).

### Identification of the isolated compounds

The isolated compounds were identified using NMR, MS techniques. The furoquinoline alkaloids, dictamine (**1**), g-fagarine (**2**) and skimmianine (**3**) presented spectral data in agreement with the literature.8-9 1-Methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (**4**)10: Amorphous solid, EIMS _m_/z (rel. int. %) [M+] 235 (100), 207 (71), 178 (6), 165 (11), 102 (19), 89 (9), 77 (17), 51 (11). Limonexic acid (**5**)11: Amorphous solid. ESIMS, _m_/_z (rel. int. %): 501 [M-H]-(100). Limonin (**6**)11: white solid, mp 295-299 degC; ESIMS, _m_/_z_ (rel. int. %): 469 [M-H]-(100).

### Fungicidal bioassay

The fungus _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_ (Singer) Moller (syn _Rozites gongylophorus_) was isolated from an _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ laboratory nest.

The medium for fungus maintenance and methods for the bioassays were previously described.12 Solvent (_n_-hexane or dichloromethane or methanol) or solution of each extract or solution of compounds (1.0 mL) were added to 9.0 mL of culture medium composed of (g L+): glucose (10.0), sodium chloride (5.0), peptone (5.0), malt extract (10.0) and agar (15.0). Control tubes received 1.0 mL of solvent and 9.0 mL of medium. After the addition, the tubes were autoclaved at 121 degC by 15 min and then slanted. The final concentration of _n_-hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH extracts were 1000 mg mL-1 and of the compounds **1**, **2** and **3** were 50 mg mL-1. The fungal suspension was prepared by transferring aseptically pieces of the mycelia (obtained from 1-month-old culture growing in slant culture) to an all-glass tissue grinder containing sterile peptone (1.0 g L-1) and gently fragmented. This suspension (1.0 mL) was spread onto the surface of the agar slant and incubated at 25 (+-1) degC for 30 days. The assays were run twice (two sets of five tubes each). Fungal growth was estimated macroscopically on the basis of the mycelial surface and density using the modal value.

### Leaf-cutting ant insecticide bioassay

The _A. sexdens rubropilosa_ workers used in the assays were randomly removed from laboratory nests. They had 

## Page 3

a body mass of 20-25 mg. Before the assays the nests were supplied daily with leaves of _Eucalyptus sp._, oat seeds and occasionally with leaves of other plants such as _Hibiscus sp._, _Ligustrum sp._ or rose petals. Fifty ants were removed from the nests and put into five Petri dishes (ten ants each) for each treatment. During the assay the ants were maintained on an artificial diet prepared with glucose (50.0 g L-1), bacto-peptone (10.0 g L-1), yeast extract (1.0 g L-1), and agar (15.0 g L-1), in distilled water (100 mL).13 The diet (0.4-0.5 g per dish) with the addition of compounds (experiment) or without (control) were offered daily in a small plastic cap. The control was prepared with the diet and the solvent. To ensure that undetectable remaining amounts of the solvent did not affect the ants, a comparison made with another set of dishes in which water was used instead of solvent. As expected, the same survival rates were obtained with both systems (data not shown). The compounds were poured into the hot diet immediately after it was autoclaved. The final concentration of the extracts added to the diet were 2000 mg mL-1 and of the compounds 100 mg mL-1 or 500 mg mL-1. During the assays the material was maintained in an incubator at a temperature 25 (+-1) degC and relative humidity ranging between 70-80%. The maximum length of observation was 25 days and number of dead ants was registered daily.

The survival median 50% (S50) was calculated and survival curves were compared by the computer-assisted software Graph-Pad(tm) using the log-rank test.

## Results and Discussion

The compounds isolated from dichloromethane crude extract of the _S. odoratissima_ branches were dictamine(8), g-fagarine(2), skimmianine(r) (3), 1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (4), limonexic acid (5) and limonin (6) (Figure 1). The 1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (4) and limonexic acid (5) were isolated for the first time from the _Spiranthera_.

Compounds **1**-**3** were identified by comparison of NMR spectral data with those described in the literature,8,9 and the structures of compounds **4, 5** and **6** were confirmed on the basis of 1H NMR, EIMS and ESIMS spectra, and carbon attributions that were made by HSQC and HMBC correlation spectra.

The _S. odoratissima_ branches crude extracts showed high inhibitory activity on _L. gongylophorus_ growth and dichloromethane and methanolic extracts present insecticidal activity on _A. sexdens rubropilosa_ ants.

The _n_-hexane, dichloromethane and methanol crude extract (1000 mg mL-1) showed 100% of inhibitory activity on symbiotic fungus (_L. gongylophorus_). The activities of compounds **1**-**3** were comparable to those of extracts above. However, **1** and **2** were more fungicide than **3**, the two first inhibiting fungus growths at 100% and the later 80%. The compounds **4, 5** and **6,** were not tested in this bioassay. These results suggest that the furoquinoline alkaloids are the potentially active compounds in the fungicidal bioassay of dichloromethane crude extract. The fungicidal activity of furoquinoline alkaloids skimmianine, kokusaginine, maculine, dictamine, flindersiamine and quinolone obtained from Rutaceae family,10,14 already had been described in literature as powerful inhibitors of symbiotic fungus growth.

The _n_-hexane, dichloromethane and methanolic extracts were tested in ants (_A. sexdens rubropilosa_) ingestion bioassay (Table 1) and dichloromethane and methanolic extracts present insecticidal activity. In contrast with high fungicidal activity of furoquinoline alkaloids against the symbiotic fungus of the leaf-cutting ants, the ingestion bioassay showed that compounds **1** and **2** showed weak activity in ants ingestion assay, which had S50 ranging from 11.0 and 14.0, respectively, while in the control S50 was 15.0. Only compound **1** presented statistic difference in comparison with control (Table 2), according to the log-rank test (_p_ < 0.05), which considered all tested period. Compound **3** was tested in previous work15 and showed not be toxic to the leaf-cutting ants. Compounds **4**-**6** isolated from dichloromethane and methanolic extracts showed toxicity against leaf-cutting ants (Table 3). The ants survival median (S50) were in the 7th and 4th day of the experiment, respectively, compared with the control (S50 = 12 days) for

Figure 1.: Molecular structures of the compounds isolated from _S. odoratissima_ branches extracts: **1**: dictamine, **2**: g-fagarine, **3**: skimmianine, **4**: 1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one, **5**: limonexic acid and **6**: limonin.



## Page 4

1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (**4**) and limonin (**6**) in concentration of 500 mg mL-1. For limonexic acid (**5**), the most potent compound, at concentration of 500 mg mL-1, the survival median (S0) of the ants were in the 3\(n\) day of the experiment and 98% mortality occurred at the 17th day. This latter result was also observed by Biavatti _et al._16 Therefore, these results indicate that the compounds **4-6** are potentially active compounds against _A. sexdens rubropilosa_.

The potential insecticidal and fungicidal activities of the _S. odoratissima_ extracts and of the compounds isolated from the dichloromethane and methanolic extracts suggest the use of this plant in the nest of the leaf-cutting ants control, and the continuation of the investigation of the _S. odoratissima_ bioactive compounds.

## Supplementary Information

Supplementary data are available free of charge at [http://jbcs.sba.org.br](http://jbcs.sba.org.br), as PDF file.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) by financial support.

## References

* Pirani (1999) Pirani, J. R.; _Free Teaching Thesis_, _Estudos Taxonomicos de Rutaceae_, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1999.
* De-La Cruz (1997) De-La Cruz, M. G. F.; _MSc Dissertation_, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Brazil, 1997.
* Matos et al. (2005) Matos, L. G.; Pontes, I. S.; Tresvenzol, L. M. F.; Paula, J. R.; Costa, E. A.; _Plytother. Res._**2005**, _18_, 963.
* Ribeiro et al. (2005) Ribeiro, T. A. N.; Ndiaye, E. A. S.; Velozo, E. S.; Vieira, P. C.; Ellena, J.; Sousa Jr., P. T.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2005**, _16_, 1347.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c c} \hline \hline Compounds & \multicolumn{8}{c}{days} & \multicolumn{8}{c}{S\({}_{50}\)} \\ \cline{2-11}  & 1 & 2 & 3 & 6 & 8 & 10 & 14 & 17 & 21 & 25 & \\ \hline Control & 0 & 2 & 2 & 6 & 8 & 14 & 38 & 60 & 72 & 86 & 15.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\ Dictamine (**1**) & 0 & 0 & 0 & 20 & 36 & 48 & 64 & 74 & 86 & 96 & 11.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\ \(\gamma\)-Fagarine (**2**) & 0 & 0 & 0 & 6 & 18 & 26 & 54 & 64 & 76 & 80 & 14.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular} \({}^{\text{o}}\) significant difference according to the long-rank test (b: \(p\) < 0.05).

\end{table}
Table 2: _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ workers mortality (%) and survival median (S50) when fed with compounds **1-2** (100 mg mL-1) isolated from _Spiranthera odoratissima_ branches

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c c c} \hline \hline Compounds & \multicolumn{8}{c}{days} & \multicolumn{8}{c}{S\({}_{50}\)} \\ \cline{2-11}  & 1 & 2 & 3 & 6 & 8 & 10 & 14 & 17 & 21 & 25 & \\ \hline Control & 2 & 14 & 24 & 32 & 32 & 32 & 68 & 72 & 72 & 76 & 12.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\
1-Methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (**4**) & 0 & 8 & 28 & 46 & 58 & 60 & 84 & 86 & 94 & 96 & 7.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\ Limonexic acid (**5**) & 8 & 46 & 66 & 84 & 84 & 84 & 92 & 98 & 100 & 100 & 3.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\ Limonin (**6**) & 2 & 28 & 46 & 60 & 62 & 72 & 88 & 94 & 96 & 96 & 4.0\({}^{\text{o}}\) \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular} \({}^{\text{o}}\) significant difference according to the long-rank test (b: \(p\) < 0.05).

\end{table}
Table 3: _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ workers mortality (%) and Survival median (S0) when fed with compounds **4-6** (500 mg mL-1) isolated from _Spiranthera odoratissima_ branches

## Page 5

* (5) Freitas, C. M. D.; Lucchese, A. M.; Silva, F. S.; Velozo, E. D.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2003**, _31_, 805.
* (6) Mariconi, F. A. M.; _As Sauvas_, Agronomica Ceres: Sao Paulo, 1970.
* (7) Weber, N. A.; _Mem. Am. Philos. Soc._**1972**, _92_, 17.
* (8) Facundo, V. A.; da Silveira, A. S.; Braz-Filho., R.; Pinto, A. C.; Rezende, C. M.; _Quim. Nova_**2005**, _28_, 224.
* (9) Tillequin, F.; Koch, M.; Sevenet, T. H.; _Planta Med._**1980**, _38_, 3830.
* (10) Biavatti, M. W.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Victor, S. R.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Albuquerque, S.; Caracelli, I.; Zukerman-Schpector, J.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2002**, _13_, 66.
* (11) Biavatti, M. W.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Albuquerque, S.; _Z. Naturforsch., C: J. Biosci._**2001**, _56_, 570.
* (12) Pagnocca, F. C.; Silva, O. A.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; _Bull. Entomol. Res._**1990**, _80_, 349.
* (13) Bueno, O. C.; Moroni, M. S. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Silva, O. A.; _An. Soc. Entomol. Bras._**1997**, _26_, 107.
* (14) Almeida, R. N. A.; Penaflor, M. F. G. V.; Simote, S. Y.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M.J. A.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Fernandes, J. B.;Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; _Bioassay_**2007**, \(2\), 2.
* (15) Simote, S. Y.; _PhD Thesis_, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Brazil, 2006.
* (16) Biavatti, M. W.; Westerlon, R.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Penaflor, M. F. G. V.; Bueno, O. C.; Ellena, J.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2005**, _16_, 1443.



## Page 6

_J. Braz. Chem. Soc.,_ Vol. 21, No. 5, S1-S11, 2010.

Printed in Brazil - 02010 Societade Brasileira de Quimica

**Activities of Extracts and Compounds from _Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil. (Rutaceae) in Leaf-cutting Ants and their Symbiotic Fungus

_Ana Paula Terezan,\({}^{a}\) Raquel Andrade Rossi,\({}^{b}\) Roberta N. A. Almeida,\({}^{b}\) Tats Garcia Freitas,\({}^{b}\) Joao B. Fernandes,\({}^{a,a}\) M. Fatima das Graças Fernandes da Silva,\({}^{a}\) Paulo C. Vieira,\({}^{a}\) Odair C. Bueno,\({}^{b}\) Fernando C. Pagnocca\({}^{b}\) and Jose R. Pirani\({}^{c}\)_

\({}^{a}\)_Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil_

\({}^{b}\)_Centro de Estudos de Insetos Sociais, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Campus Rio Claro, CP 199, 13506-900 Rio Claro-SP, Brazil_

\({}^{c}\)_Departamento de Botanica, Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05508-900 Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil_

## Page 7

Figure S2: \({}^{1}\)C NMR spectrum of dictamine (CDCl\({}_{2}\), 200 MHz).



## Page 8

Figure S4: \({}^{1}\)C NMR spectrum of \(\gamma\)-lagarine (CDCl\({}_{x}\), 200 MHz).



## Page 9

Figure S6. 11C NMR spectrum of skimminginanine (CDCl, 200 MHz).



## Page 10

Figure S8: COSY spectrum of 1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (CDC1, 400 MHz).



## Page 11

Figure S10. HSQC contour map of 1-methyl-2-phenylquinolin-4-one (CDCl\({}_{y}\), 400 MHz).



## Page 12

Figure S12: H NMR spectrum of limonin (CDCl\({}_{y}\), 400 MHz).



## Page 13

Figure S14: HMBC contour map of limonin (CDC1, 400 MHz).



## Page 14

Figure S16: \({}^{\rm H}\) NMR spectrum of limonexic acid (acetone-\(d_{y}\), 400 MHz).



## Page 15

Figure S18: \({}^{1\rm{C}}\) NMR spectrum of limonexic acid (acetone-\(d_{v}\), 400 MHz).



## Page 16



**Figure S20.** HMRC contour map of limonexic acid (acetone-\(d_{o}\) 400 MHz).



