# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)95115-X.pdf

## Page 1



# Lipophyllic antioxidants from _Iryanthera juruensis_ fruits

Dulce H.S. Silva

dhsilva@iq.unesp.br

Francisco C. Pereira

Maria V.B. Zanoni

Massayoshi Yoshida

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, CEP 14800-900, Araraquara-SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 26077, CEP 05599-970, Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil

Received 7 January 2000; received in revised form 9 October 2000

###### Abstract

The phytochemical investigation of the hexane extract of _Iryanthera juruensis_ (Myristicaceae) fruits led to the isolation of two toctorienols and four lignans which exhibited antioxidant activity towards b-carotene on TLC autographic assay. Two inactive quinones and three o-arylalkanoic acids were also isolated. The isolates were investigated for their redox properties using cyclic voltammetry. The structure elucidation of the new compounds (one locotrienol, one quinone and three o-arylalkanoic acids) was based on analysis of spectroscopic data. (c) 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Keywords: Iryanthera juruensis_; Myristicaceae; Tocotrienol; Plastoquinone; o-Arylalkanoic acid; Lignan; Antioxidant

## 1 Introduction

_Iryanthera juruensis_ is a widespread Amazonian species known as ucu-uba, which means fat-producing tree, this being a general designation given to myristicaceous species. Their seeds are valued in Brazil for their high yields of fatty acids, mainly myristic acid (C-14), which is extensively used in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries. Other _Iryanthera_ species were reported to have their crushed leaves used by Amazon indians for healing seriously infected wounds and cuts and to have their latex from the banks mixed with warm water for treating stomache infections (Schultes and Holmstedt, 1971). In the course of our systematic studies on _Iryanthera_, we have demonstrated the presence of toctorienols with higher antioxidant activity than a-tocopherol in fruits of _I. grandis_ and _I. lancifolia_, evaluated through malondialdehyde (MDA) and chemiluminescence (CL) assays (Barros et al., 1993) and of antioxidant dihydrochalcones and flavonolignans in _I. lancifolia_ (Silva et al., 1999). Studies on toctorienol biological activities revealed the ability of a- and -tocotrienol in inhibiting solid tumour growth of sarcoma 180 and also the highly metastatic Lewis lung carcinoma cells (Komiyama et al., 1992). Moreover, these toctorienols are effective against vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, which plays a central role in atherosclerosis (Azzi et al., 1992). Oxidative damage to cell components is the initial event in several human disease processes including cancer and atherosclerosis (Gordon, 1996), and this has intensified the search for natural antioxidants. The antioxidant activity of a compound depends ultimately on its ease of oxidation and, for a variety of natural or synthetic compounds, good correlations have been observed between antioxidant activities and low oxidation potentials (Born et al., 1996). In this work we report on the isolation of antioxidant compounds of _I. juruensis_ fruits guided by the b-carotene TLC assay (Pratt and Miller, 1984) and the evaluation of their oxidation potentials through cyclic voltammetry. Further examination of the lipophyllic constituents led to isolation of inactive compounds, which were also investigated electrochemically.

## 2 Results and discussion

Dried and powdered fruits were extracted with hexane. Fractionation of the crude extract guided by the antioxidant TLC assay afforded **1**, **2** and **6**-**9**. In addition, inactive metabolites **3**, **4** and **5a**-**e** were isolated (see Experimental).

The structural determination of compounds **1** and **2** was based on analysis of their NMR and MS spectra as well as on comparison with literature data for similar

## Page 2

compounds (Vieira et al., 1983a). The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra of compounds **1** and **2** showed two doublets at \(d\) _d_ \(d\) _d_ \(d\) _d_ = 9.7\(\pm\)0.1 Hz) and \(d\) _d_ 6.17\(\pm\)0.02 (_d_, \(J\) = 9.7\(\pm\)0.1 Hz) assigned to H-3 and H-4, respectively, typical of the chromene ring of C-3 unsaturated toctortienols, which had only been found previously in brown seaweeds from genera _Sargassum_ and _Stypopodium_ (Kusumi et al., 1979; Gerwick and Fenical, 1981). The other spectral features are similar to those of C-3 saturated toctortienols; therefore, \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data could be assigned by comparison with _d_-tocotrienol and 17-carboxy-d-cotortienol, previously isolated from pericarps of _I. lancifolia_ and fruits of _I. grands_ (Vieira et al., 1983b; Lopes et al., 1998). Tocotrienol **2** was identified as sargaschromenol, originally isolated from _Sargassum seratifolium_ (Kusumi et al., 1979). The new toctorienol **1** differs from **2** by one additional methyl group on the chromene ring (C-7); its only aromatic proton was placed at C-5 after observation of NOE interactions between H-5 and H-4. Further NOE observations, COSY and DEPT as well as ESMS data led to elucidation of **1** as 2,7,8-tri-methyl-2-[(_3E,7Z_)-4,12-dimethyl-8-carboxyl-3,7,11-tri-decatrienyl]-3-chromen-6-ol for which we propose the name 7-methyl-sargachromenol.

The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra of **3** and **4** showed two signals at \(d\) 187.7 \(\pm\) 0.2 and \(d\) 187.9 \(\pm\) 0.1 for two ketone groups conjugated to sp\({}^{2}\) carbons, which were assigned, respectively, to C-1 and C-4 of the quinone ring. DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\) experiments indicated the presence of six methyl groups in compound **3** and five methyl groups in **4**. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra of **3** and **4** showed one doublet at \(d\) 3.05 (_J_ = 7.1 Hz) integrating for two hydrogens on a sp\({}^{3}\)carbon linked to two sp\({}^{2}\) carbons. The \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum showed the correlation of this signal with the multiplet centered at \(d\) 5 and the signal at \(d\) 6.39, assigned to H-2\({}^{\prime}\) and H-3, respectively, and confirms the placement of the only quinone ring hydrogen of compound **3** on C-3. The additional methyl group of compound **3** was then placed at C-5. The remaining spectral data were consistent with the proposed structures, including the placement of a carboxyl group on the isoprenic chain, determined through MS data (Fig. 1). The structure of this new quinone, named as 3-methyl-sargaquinoic acid, was established as 2,3-dimethyl-6-[(_2E,6E,10Z_)-3,7,15-trimethyl-11-carboxyl-2,6,10,14-hexadecatetraenyl]-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione. Compound **4**, which was identified as sargaquinoic acid after comparison of its NMR spectrum and MS profile with literature data, was originally isolated from the brown algae _Sargassum seratifolium_ (Kusumi et al., 1979) and differs from **3** only concerning the quinone ring substitution pattern. The new compounds **1** and **3** follow the \(\gamma\)-tocotrienol pattern, while the known **2** and **4** follow the \(\delta\)-tocotrienol substitution pattern.

Compounds **5a**-**c** were identified as o-aryalkanoic acids based on a broad singlet at \(d\) 1.18 of a methylene chain and the absence of a terminal methyl group, (ca. \(d\) 0.8, _t_) in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum, associated to the signal at \(d\) 179.4 on the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum and the presence of an aromatic ring. The substitution pattern of this ring, linked to the methylene chain, was defined through observation of two doublets at \(d\) 6.61 (_J_ = 1.6 Hz) and \(d\) 6.66 (_J_ = 7.7 Hz) and one doublet of doublets at \(d\) 6.55 (_J_ = 1.6 and 7.7 Hz) in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum. The presence of a methylenedioxy group was inferred through observation of signals at \(d\) 5.85 and \(d\) 100.6 in the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra, respectively. The LC-UV-MS analysis of the mixture of **5a**-**c** evidenced the presence of three substances (_R_T 15.0, 16.1 and 17.1 min.), which absorbed at _l_max 284 nm. The ESMS analysis indicated a molecular weight of 362, 390 and 418 for compounds **5a**-**c**, inferred from base peaks at _m_/_z_ 385, 413 and 441 ([M + Na]\({}^{+}\)), respectively. The on-line analysis showed additional peaks at 363, 391 and 419 ([M + 1]\({}^{+}\)) which confirmed the length of the methylene chains of these compounds. The o-aryalkanoic acids **5a**-**c** result biogenetically from condensation of substituted dihydrocinnamic acid and lauric, myristic and palmitic acids, respectively. As these o-aryalkanoic acids proved to be new natural products, their isolation was subsequently undertaken. Their EIMS spectra showed base 

## Page 3

peaks at \(m/z\) 135 [C7H5.CH2O2]\({}^{+}\), which confirmed the proposed structures for these compounds. These o-ary-alkanoic acids had not been isolated from natural sources yet and are probably the biosynthetic precursors of juruenolides, o-aryalkanoic acids condensed with pyruvic acid followed by \(\gamma\)-lactonization, found in the trunk wood of _Iryanthera juruensis_ (Vieira et al., 1983b) and pericarps of _Virola surinamensis_ (Lopes et al., 1998).

Lignans **6**-**9** were identified as _epi_-guaiacin, guaiacin, verrucosin and nectandrin B, respectively, from their spectroscopic data and comparison with literature (Majunder et al., 1972; Gottlieb et al., 1976; Joshi et al., 1979; Moro et al., 1987; Ward, 1997).

Antioxidative properties of compounds **1**-**9** were evaluated against b-carotene (Pratt and Miller, 1984). By using b-carotene as a TLC spray reagent, tocotrienols **1** and **2** and lignans **6**-**9** (10 mg) appeared as yellow spots against a white background, meaning these compounds inhibited the bleaching of b-carotene. The same amounts of quinones **3** and **4** and o-aryalkanoic acids **5a**-**c** were completely inactive.

The evaluation of the redox properties of tocotrienols **1** and **2** was carried out electrochemically in order to compare their voltammetric behaviour and to correlate the corresponding oxidation potentials with antioxidant properties of these compounds (Born et al., 1996). Firstly, the electrochemical behaviour was investigated with a-tocopherol being used as reference compound. In addition, taking into consideration that oxidation products of tocopherols and tocotrienols can be electrochemically reduced, the reduction of the oxidized products of tocotrienols **1** and **2**, previously generated on the electrode surface after oxidation step were also studied and compared to the voltammetric behaviour of plastoquinolones **3** and **4**. The cyclic voltammograms of a-tocopherol and tocotrienols **1** and **2** showed oxidation peaks at \(+\,0.28,\;+\,0.23\) and \(+\,0.32\) V (Table 1) respectively, suggesting a higher antioxidant capacity for tocotrienol **1**, when compared to a-tocopherol. The comparison among oxidation potentials of tocotrienols **1** and **2** and a-tocopherol shows that **1** is the most easily oxidizable compound. Alkyl groups _meta_ to the aromatic hydroxyl have little effect on the oxidation ability of phenolic compounds, but inductive effects from either _ortho_ or _para_ alkyl groups may lower the oxidation potential and make the molecule even easier oxidized than the phenol itself (Marcus and Hawley, 1970). This could explain the lower oxidation potential of **1** when compared to **2**, as they possess the aromatic substitution pattern of g- and d-tocotrienol, respectively. The lower oxidation potential of **1** when compared to a-tocopherol might be due to its C-3 double bond, which is conjugated with the aromatic ring and stabilizes the intermediate cation previous to completion of oxidation steps.

The structure-activity relationship indicates, in this case, that the stabilizing effect of the C-3 double bond on the intermediate cation due to the presence of one aromatic methyl group _ortho_ to the hydroxyl (e.g. compound

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Substance & EPould. (V) & EPrd. (V) \\ α-Tocoferola & \(+\,0.28\) & \(-\,0.90\)a \\
**1a** & \(+\,0.23\) & \(-\,0.43\)a; \(-\,1.00\)a \\
**2a** & \(+\,0.32\) & \(-\,0.38\)a; \(-\,0.93\)a \\
**3** & \(-\) & \(-\,0.50\); \(-\,0.90\) \\
**4** & \(-\) & \(-\,0.38\); \(-\,0.8

## Page 4

1) overcomes, although slightly, the stabilizing effect of two aromatic methyl groups _ortho_ to the hydroxyl, if the C-3 double bond is absent (e.g. _a_-tocopherol). The contribution of this double bond is, however, not enough to keep up the intermediate cation stability if no methyl group _ortho_ to the hydroxyl group is present in the molecule, as in compound **2**. The electrochemical behaviour of quinones **3** and **4** was compared to those of the oxidized products of tocotrienols **1** and **2**, respectively. The great similarity observed for the reduction potentials of these oxidation products and tocotrienols **1** and **2** suggests that the products generated after oxidation of tocotrienols **1** and **2** are structurally closely related to quinones **3** and **4**, respectively.

The high oxidation potential of the o-aryalkanoic acids **5a**-**c** is probably a result of the lack of aromatic hydroxyl groups in these molecules. The absence of oxidation peak in the cyclic voltammograms of **3** and **4** as well as the high value (+1.52) for **5a**-**c** are in agreement with the inactivity observed on the b-carotene assay for these compounds.

The cyclic voltammograms of lignans **6**-**9** showed oxidation potentials in the range 0.8-0.9 V, suggesting that they should act as rather less effective antioxidants than tocotrienols **1** and **2**. The structure-activity correlations of these results can not be promptly inferred, as electron donor groups _ortho_ to a hydroxyl should enhance the stabilization capacity of the molecule after hydrogen radical loss (Rice-Evans et al., 1996). The lower oxidation potential of tocotrienols might nonetheless be explained by the stabilization of the molecule conferred by the C-3 double bond conjugated with the aromatic ring, which might enhance the ease of oxidation of tocotrienols more efficiently than the methoxyl group _ortho_ to the hydroxyl group in lignans **6**-**9**. Nevertheless, the qualitative analyses of the anti-oxidative properties of tocotrienols **1**, **2** and lignans **6**-**9** through the b-carotene assay showed all these compounds were active, as previously referred.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

The UV and IR spectra were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 3B and a Perkin-Elmer FT-IR 1750 spectrophotometer, respectively. NMR spectra (1H, 13C, COSY and NOE experiments) were measured on a Bruker DPX-300 spectrometer (300 MHz for 1H and 75 MHz for 13C) in CDCl3 for all compounds; the chemical shifts are reported in ppm with TMS as internal standard, and coupling constants (_J_) are given in Hz. EIMS spectra were measured at 70 eV on a HP 5988-A. Elemental analyses were performed on a Perkin-Elmer CHN Elemental Analyzer 2400.

### Plant material

Fruits were collected in Reserva do Mocambo, in the Amazon Forest, in the rainy season and identified as _Iryanthera juruensis_ Warburg by Botanist Nelson Rosa. A voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbarium Joao Murca Pires at Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi.

### Extraction and isolation

The dried fruits were grounded and extracted with hexane. The extract was dried under reduced pressure and partitioned between hexane and 90% methanol. The hydroalcoholic fraction (7.6 g) was submitted to vacuum column chromatography over silica gel, which was eluted with hexane/EtOAc mixtures of increasing polarity to yielded 8 fractions (A-H). Flash column chromatography over silica gel of fraction B eluted with gradient of hexane/EtOAc afforded **2** (31 mg), **4** (53 mg) and other 13 pooled fractions. Purification of fractions B-5 and B-11 through prep. TLC (hexane/EtOAc 8:2) gave **3** (15 mg) and **1** (12 mg), respectively. Purification of fraction B-8 through prep. TLC (hexane/EtOAc 8:2) gave the mixture of the o-aryalkanoic acids **5a**-**c**, which was further purified by HPLC (RP-18, MeOH/H2O 85:15) to afford **5a** (5 mg) and **5c** (6 mg). Compound **5b** was not isolated as the HPLC analysis indicated it was a minor compound (~5% of the mixture of **5a**-**c**). Flash column chromatography over silica gel of fraction E eluted with a gradient of hexane/EtOAc gave 6 pooled fractions (A-F'). Purification of fraction C' through prep. TLC (hexane/EtOAc 1:1) and HPLC (RP-18, MeOH/H2O 86:14) gave **6** (8 mg). Partial dissolution of fraction D' in CHCl3 gave a precipitate which was further washed with MeOH to give **7** (60 mg). Purification of fraction E' through prep. TLC (CHCl3/MeOH 95:5) and HPLC (RP-18, MeOH/H2O 78:22) gave **8** (6 mg) and **9** (4 mg).

### \(\text{Lc}/\text{UV}/\text{MS}\)

The separation of compounds **5a**-**c** was achieved by using MeOH:H2O in the isocratic mode (85:15, 1 ml/ min.). UV spectra were recorded from 200 to 400 nm. For MS, the temperature of the electrospray (ES) source block was set to 75degC. The cone voltage was 70 V and ionization was achieved in the positive mode at an ionization voltage of 4.5 kV. Nitrogen was used as a nebulizing and curtain gas. Nebulizer gas was set to 0.5 l/min, curtain gas to 5.0 l/min. Full-scan spectra from _m/z_ 150 to 550 were recorded every 1.2 s.

### 2,7,8-Trimethyl-2-[(3E,7Z)-4,12-dimethyl-8-carb-oxyl-3,7,11-tridecatrienyl]-3-chromen-6-ol (**1**)

Brown oil. Found: C, 76.62; H, 8.76. C28H38O4 requires: C, 76.71; H, 8.68%. UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{MedH}}\) nm (_e_): 326 (3800). IR

## Page 5

\(v_{\rm max}^{\rm film}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3408, 2923, 1686, 1634. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 1.27 (3H, \(s\), H-7), 1.50 (6H, \(s\), H-14\({}^{\prime}\), H-16\({}^{\prime}\)), 1.59 (3H, \(s\), H-13\({}^{\prime}\)), 1.9-2.2 (8H, \(m\), H-1\({}^{\prime}\), H-2\({}^{\prime}\), H-5\({}^{\prime}\), H-10\({}^{\prime}\)), 2.04 (3H, \(s\), H-2), 2.05 (3H, \(s\), H-8), 2.2-2.3 (2H, \(m\), H-9), 2.50 (2H, \(dd\), \(J\)=14.4, 7.3 Hz, H6\({}^{\prime}\)), 5.45 (1H, \(d\), \(J\)=9.6 Hz, H-3), 6.14(1H, \(d\), \(J\)=9.6 Hz, H-4), 6.22 (1H, \(s\), H-5); \({}^{13}\)C NMR (75 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 11.5 (\(q\), Me-8), 11.9 (\(q\), Me-7), 15.7 (\(q\), C-16\({}^{\prime}\)),17.5 (\(q\), C-14\({}^{\prime}\)), 22.6 (\(t\), C-2\({}^{\prime}\)), 25.4

## Page 6

placed under natural light until discoloration of background. The yellow spots remaining indicated the presence of antioxidant substances.

### Electrochemical assay

The cyclic voltammograms were carried out with a Polarecord E-506 (Metrohm) potentiostat. A three electrode system (663 VA, Metrohm) with a working electrode of glassy carbon (GC), a Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a carbon auxiliary electrode was used. Dichoromethane (Merck) was used as solvent and tetra-_n_-butyl ammonium tetrafluorborate (Merck), as the supporting electrolyte. Vitamin E (Aldrich) was used as reference compound. The working electrode was polished with aluminium oxide 0.3 um (Buehler) and special polishing cloth (Buehler) prior to each measurement, because formation of a polymeric film inactivated the electrode after each scan. The electrode was then washed thoroughly with water, dried and cycled several times in the range \(-1.6\) to \(+\,0.6\) V in order to reassure the absence of voltammetric signal due to the supporting electrolyte. Each compound was dissolved to concentrations of 10-20 mM in dichloromethane and added to a 15 ml aliquot of the supporting electrolyte. The solns. were then deoxygenated with nitrogen for 10 min. and the cyclic voltammograms were carried out at scan rate of 50 mV/s.

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank to FAPESP, FUNDUNESP, CNPq and CAPES for financial support.

## References

* [Azzi et al.1992] Azzi, A., Boscoboinik, D.O., Chatelain, E., 1992. Modulation of cell proliferation by tocopherols and toctorienos: role in arteriosclerosis. In: Ong, A.S.H., Parker, L. (Eds.), Lipid-soluble Antioxidants: Biochemistry and Clinical Applications. Birkhaeuser, Basel, pp. 123-133.
* [Barros et al.1993] Barros, S.M.B., Ishii, I., Silva, D.H.S., Yoshida, M., 1993. Antioxidant properties of toctorienos isolated from _Iryanthera grandis_. In: IV International Symposium on Orthomolecular Medicine, Sao Paulo, p. 34.
* [Born et al.1996] Born, M., Carrupt, P.-A., Zini, R., Bree, F., Tillemnt, J.-P., Hostettman, K., Testa, B., 1996. Electrochemical behaviour and antioxidant activity of some natural polyphenols. Helvetica Chimica Acta 79, 1147-1158.
* [Gerwick and Fenicial1981] Gerwick, W.H., Fenicial, W., 1981. Ichthyotoxic and cytotoxic metabolites of the tropical brown alga _Stypopodium zonale_ (Lamouroux) Paperfuss. Journal of Organic Chemistry 46, 22-27.
* [Gordon1996] Gordon, M.H., 1996. Dietary antioxidants in disease prevention. Nat. Prod. Rep. 13, 265-273.
* [Gottlieb et al.1976] Gottlieb, O.R., Maia, J.G.S., Ribeiro, M.N.deS., 1976. Neolignans from _Virola carinata_. Phytochemistry 15, 773-774.
* [Joshi et al.1979] Joshi, B.S., Viswanatha, N., Balakrishnan, V., Gawad, D.H., Ravindranath, K.R., 1979. Attenuol -- structure, stereochemistry and synthesis. Tetrahedron 35, 1665-1671.
* [Komiyama et al.1992] Komiyama, K., Hayashi, M., Cha, S., Yamaoka, M., 1992. Antitumor and antioxidant activity of toctorienols. In: Ong, A.S.H., Parker, L. (Eds.), Lipid-soluble Antioxidants: Biochemistry and Clinical Applications. Birkhaeuser, Basel, pp. 152-159.
* [Kusumi et al.1979] Kusumi, T., Shibata, Y., Ishitsuka, M., Kinoshita, T., Kakisawa, H., 1979. Structures of new plastoquinones from the brown alga _Sarasim serarifolium_. Chemistry Letters 277-278,.
* [Lopes et al.1998] Lopes, N.P., Silva, D.H.S., Kato, M.J., Yoshida, M., 1998. Butanolides as a common feature of _Iryanthera lancifolia_ and _Virola surinamensis_. Phytochemistry 49, 1405-1410.
* [Majunder et al.1972] Majunder, P.L., Chaterjee, A., Sengupta, G.C., 1972. Lignans from _Machilus edulis_. Phytochemistry 11, 811-814.
* [Marcus and Hawley1970] Marcus, M.F., Hawley, M.D., 1970. Eletrochemical studies of the redox behavior of a-tocopherol. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 201, 1-8.
* [Moro et al.1987] Moro, J.C., Fernandes, J.B., Vieira, P.C., Yoshida, M., Gottlieb, O.R., Gottlieb, H.E., 1987. Neolignans from _Nectandra puberula_. Phytochemistry 26, 269-272.
* [Pratt and Miller1984] Pratt, D.E., Miller, E.E., 1984. A flavonoid antioxidant in Spanish peanuts (_Aracchia hypogea_). Journal of the American Oil Chemists Society 61, 1064-1067.
* [Rice-Evans et al.1996] Rice-Evans, C.A., Miller, N.J., Paganga, G., 1996. Structure-anti-oxidant activity relationships of flavonoids and phenolic acids. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 20, 933-956.
* [Schultes and Holmstedt1971] Schultes, R.E., Holmstedt, B., 1971. Miscellaneous notes on Myristicaceous plants of South America. Lloyda 34, 61-78.
* [Silva et al.1999] Silva, D.H.S., Davino, S.C., Barros, M.B., Yoshida, M., 1999. Antioxidant activity of flavonoids from _Iryanthera lancifolia_. Journal of Natural Products 62 (11), 1475-1478.
* [Vieira et al.1983a] Vieira, P.C., Gottlieb, O.R., Gottlieb, H.E., 1983a. Tocotrienols from _Iryanthera grandis_. Phytochemistry 22, 2281-2286.
* [Vieira et al.1983b] Vieira, P.C., Yoshida, M., Gottlieb, O.R., Paulino Filho, H., Nagem, T.J., Braz-Filho, R., 1983b. \(\gamma\)-Lactones from _Iryanthera_ species. Phytochemistry 22, 711-713.
* [Ward1997] Ward, R.S., 1997. Lignans, neoligans and related compounds. Nat. Prod. Rep. 14, 43-74.



