# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)88490-3.pdf

## Page 1

119-120deg [lit.2 m.p. 119-120deg]. Mass, NMR,2 UV2 and IR2 spectral measurements corroborated the identification. _Leaves_. Sselin was detected in the ethanol extract by TLC.

\({}^{2}\) S. N. Shanbhag, C. K. Mesta, M. L. Maheshwari, S. K. Pakhnkar and S. C. Bhattacharyya, _Tetrahedron_**20**, 2605 (1964).

_Key Word Index--Naucleopsis caloneura_; Moraceae; pyranocoumarin; sselin.

## Myrtaceae

_P_lants. Eugenia biflora (L.) DC., trivial name'murta' _Myrcia citrifolia_ (Aubl.) Urb., trivial name 'pedra-hume-cai', trees. _Source_. Manaus, Brasil.

_Leaves._ The light petroleum extracts were chromatographed on silica, giving _b_-amyrin and eucalyptin (5-hydroxy-4',7-dimethoxy-6,8-dimethylflavone), m.p. 198-200deg, acetate, m.p. 245-246deg [lit. m.p. resp. 198:5-200deg2 and 245-246deg3]. Mass, NMR, UV and IR spectral measurements corroborated the identifications. Eucalyptin has previously been isolated from Australian _Eucalyptus_2,4-6 and _Angoophora_6 species.

\({}^{\bullet}\) Part III in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Myrtaceae". For part II see ref. 1.

\({}^{\bullet}\) Part III in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Myrtaceae". For part II see ref. 1.

\({}^{\bullet}\) Part III in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Myrtaceae". For part II see ref. 1.

\({}^{\bullet}\) M. Koetsu, L. Lannes Moura, A. Moreira and M. Tavera Magalhaes, _Anals Acad. Brasil. Cinc._**42** (Suppl.), 143 (1970).

\({}^{\bullet}\) D. H. S. Horn, Z. H. Kranze and J. A. Lamberton, _Austral. J. Chem._**17**, 464 (1964).

\({}^{\bullet}\) A. C. Jain, P. D. Sapral and T. R. Seshadri, _Indian J. Chem._**4**, 481 (1966); _Chem. Abs._**66**, 94881 (1967).

\({}^{\bullet}\) M. A. Elkery, M. Darwish, F. M. Hashim and K. A. Assem, _Bull. Fac. Pharm._ (Cairo Univ.) **3**, 109 (1964); _Chem. Abs._**64**, 14160 (1966).

\({}^{\bullet}\) W. E. Hillis and K. Isoi, _P_ytochem. **4**, 541 (1965).

\({}^{\bullet}\) J. A. Lamberton, _Austral. J. Chem._**17**, 692 (1964).

_Key Word Index--Eugenia biflora_; _Myrcia citrifolia_; Myrtaceae; eucalyptin; _C_-methylflavone.

### _R_anunculaceae

STIGMASTEROL AND HYDOCARBONS OF _CLEMATIS DRUMMONDI_

Xorge Alejandro Dominguez, Lourdes Davila and Ashot Merjanian

Departamento de Quimica, Instituto Tecnologico de Monterrey, Sucursal de Correos "J", Monterrey, N.L. Mexico

_Plant. Clematis drummondi_, Torr. & Gray. _Source_. Hills near to Monterrey, N.L. Mexico. _Uses_. Unknown. _Previous work_. On sister species.1

\({}^{1}\) J. J. WILAMAN and B. G. Schubert, _U.S. Dept. Agric. Tech. Rep._ No. 1234, p. 183, Washington (1961).

\({}^{\bullet}\) Part III in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Myrtaceae". For part II see ref. 1.



