# 10.1016@j.chroma.2009.02.066.pdf

## Page 1

Isolation of xanthyletin, an inhibitor of ants' symbiotic fungus, by high-speed counter-current chromatography

Cristiane de Melo Cazal

Vanessa de Cassia Domingues

Jaqueline Raquel Batalhao

Odair Correa Bueno

Edson Rodrigues Filho

Maria Fatima G. Fernandes da Silva

Paulo Cezar Vieira

dpcv@power.ufscar.br Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Laboratorio de Produtos Naturais, Departamento de Quimica, Sao Carlos, SP 13.560-970, Brazil

Joao Batista Fernandes

###### Abstract

Xanthyletin, an inhibitor of symbiotic fungus (_Leucoogaricus gongytophorus_) of _leaf-cutting ant_ (_Atta sex-dens rubrologia_), as well as suberosion, seselin and xanthoxyletin were isolated from _Citrus sinensis_ grafted on _Citrus_ limonia. A two-phase solvent system composed of hexane/ethano|acetonitrile/water (10:8:1:1, v/v) was used for the high-speed counter-current chromatographic isolation of xanthyletin with high yield and over 99% purity as determined by liquid and gas chromatography with mass spectrometry detection. Identifications were performed by UV spectra, IR spectra, \({}^{1}\)H NMR and \({}^{13}\)C NMR.

## 1 Introduction

Coumarins constitute an important class of natural compounds with widespread distribution and exhibit a wide range of activity. Every year a large number of coumarins, having varied substitution patterns, are isolated from nature [1]. Xanthyletin (**1**, Fig. 1) is a coumarin isolated from _Citrus_ species. Several biological activities, such as anti-tumor and anti-bacterial activities and inhibition of the symbiotic fungus cultivated by leaf-cutting ants [2; 3; 4] have been associated with this compound.

Leaf-cutting ants, the dominant herbivores in the tropics, can be found from the Southern USA to Northern Argentina [5]. Leaf-cutting ants are known to be a serious pest for agriculture due to the high amounts of vegetal matter from crops used by them in order to cultivate a symbiotic fungus on which they rely for food and enzymes [6; 7]. The mutualism between the fungus and the ants is a point to be explored when alternative methods of control are being thought of. Several compounds have been used for the control of these ants as organophosphorus, pyrethroids and sulfuramid insecticides [3]. Consequently, an extensive search for alternate methods to control these insects has been made in an attempt to substitute traditional agrochemicals by high specificity and, therefore, causing less damage to the environment.

The preparative isolation and purification of xanthyletin from plant materials by conventional methods such as column chromatography has been reported previously [4]. But the method is tedious and requires multiple chromatography steps. The counter-current chromatography technique has been widely used today in the isolation of natural products, and it is a form of liquid-liquid partition without the use of adsorbents, using two or more immiscible liquids, which are the mobile phase and the other the stationary phase. It eliminates irreversible absorptive loss of samples onto the solid support matrix used in conventional chromatography. The technique allows complete recovery of the sample, and is suitable for separations in the gram range [8].

This study reports the isolation of xanthyletin using high-speed counter-current chromatography (HSCCC) for the first time. The optimum conditions were obtained for xanthyletin isolation with the purity at over 99%.

## 2 Experimental

### Apparatus

The HSCCC system employed in the present study was a P.C. Inc. (Potomac, MD, USA) instrument equipped with a quadruple multi-layer coil of 1.68 mm I.D. polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing and total capacity of 443 mL. The \(\beta\) value varied from 0.50 at the internal terminal to 0.85 at the external terminal and the revolution radius was 10 cm (\(\beta\) = _r_/_R_, where \(r\) is the distance from the coil to the holder, and \(R\), the revolution radius or the distance between the holder axis 

## Page 2

and the central shaft). The loop volume of the sample injection was 5 mL. The revolution speed of the apparatus can be regulated with a speed controller in the range between 0 and 1000 rpm. The flow rate was controlled with an FMI-50 QD-O SSY, BS/BS (Fluid Metering, New York, USA) constant-flow pump. The fractions were obtained with an automated fraction collector DC-1200 (Eyela, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

Gas chromatography and mass spectra (GC-MS) were performed in a Shimadzu GC-17A (Tokyo, Japan) instrument coupled to a Shimadzu QP5000 (EIMS) system.

High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analyses were performed using two Shimadzu pumps (LC-10AD and LC-10 Advp) and an SPD-M10Avp UV detector set at 205 nm. HPLC-grade solvents were obtained from Mallinckrodt, and H2O was purified in a Milli-Q system. LC-UV-electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS data were obtained using an Alliance 2695 liquid chromatography equipped with a Waters (Milford, MA, USA) PDA2996 photodiode array detection (DAD) system; mass spectral data were acquired in positive ion mode on a triple quadrupole Micromass Quattro LC spectrometer (Manchester, UK), equipped with a Z-Spray API ion source and a megaflow electrospray probe.

For NMR, Bruker (Rheinstetten, Germany) DRX 400 and ARX 200 instruments were used; for UV a Varian (Palo Alto, CA, USA) 500 Scan UV-vis-near infrared (NIR) system and for IR a Bomen-FT/IR (Quebec, Canada) instrument.

### Reagents and plant materials

All the solvents used for preparation of crude sample and HSCC separation were of analytical grade (Quimis) and the water used was distilled water. The root of Citrus sinensis grafted on _Citrus limonia_ were collected in Estacao Experimental de Citricultura do Instituto Agronomico de Campinas, Cordeiroopolis, Brazil.

### Preparation of crude extract

The roots (467 g) of C. _sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ were dried carefully by forced air at 40 degC and reduced to powder. The powdered dried root was extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH at room temperature for 3 times. After the evaporation of the solvents under reduced pressure, crude extracts were obtained: hexane (5.7 g), dichloromethane (7.6 g) and methanol (17.6 g).

### Selection of two-phase solvent system

Small amounts of crude extract of _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ were dissolved in separate test tubes containing the solvent systems to be tested. The test tubes were vigorously shaken and the compounds allowed to partition between the two phases [9,10]. In order to determine partition coefficient value _K_' of approximately 1, the distribution of the components between both phases of 11 solvents system tested was determined by silica gel thin-layer chromatography (TLC) (20 cm x 20 cm, 0.2 mm thickness, silica gel 60 F254mm, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) with hexane/ethyl acetate (8:2, v/v) as the eluting solvent. The compounds were visualized under a UV lamp at 254 and 365 nm and developed by spraying with solution acid of vanillin followed by heating to assist visual estimation of relative distribution of the xanthyletin.

### Choice of the mobile phase

In the choice of the mobile phase, small amounts of crude extract of _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ were applied on silica gel TLC and it was developed with the water-saturated organic layer (i.e., upper organic phase) as the eluting solvent.

### Preparation of two-phase solvent system and sample solution

The two-phase solvent system composed of hexane/ethanol/acetonitrile/water (10:8:1:1, v/v) was used for HSCC separation. Each solvent was added to a separator funnel and thoroughly equilibrated at room temperature. The two phases were separated and degassed by sonication prior to use.

The sample solution was prepared by dissolving the crude extract in a mixture of upper and lower phase (1:1, v/v) of the solvent system used for HSCC separation.

### HSCC separation

The upper phase was used as the mobile phase and the lower phase was used as the stationary phase in the tail-to-head elution mode. In each separation, the multilayer-coiled column was first filled entirely with the stationary phase. The mobile phase was then pumped into the tail end of the inlet column at a flow rate of 3.0 mL/min, while the apparatus was rotated at 850 rpm. After the mobile phase front emerged and hydrodynamic equilibrium was established in the column, 5.0 mL of the sample solution containing 1.2 g of the crude extract was injected.

### HPLC analysis and identification of HSCC peak fractions

The crude extract of _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ and each peak fraction from HSCC separation were analyzed by HPLC. Analysis of coumarins in the crude sample and each peak fraction from HSCC was performed on a C18 column (250 mm x 4.6 mm LD., 5 mm); flow rate 0.8 mL/min; detection wavelength, 220 and 270 nm. The mobile phase composed of MeOH:H2O (6:4) was eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min and the effluent was monitored at 220 and 270 nm. The retention time was compared with that of standard of each coumarin. LC-UV-ESI-MS/MS data were obtained using a 250 mm x 4.60 mm. 5 mm Luma Plphenyl-Hexyl column (Phenomenex, CA, USA); the gradient elution system consisted of the following steps (H2O, acetonitrile and methanol in lines A, B and C respectively): 40% line B at the beginning then goes to 50% B and 20% C in 10 min and stay so for 17 min; the column was then washed with 100% line C for 2 min and re-conditioned with 35 line B for 8 min; a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min was used for the analysis and the compounds were detected at 210-500 nm; mass spectral data were acquired in positive ion mode; a post column splitter was used to

Fig. 1: Structures of coumarins isolated from crude extract of the _Citrus sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ roots: xanthyletin (**1**), suberosin (**2**), seselin (**3**) and xanthocyletin (**4**).



## Page 3

send only 0.25 mL/min to the ion source; Nitrogen was used for nebulization (50 L/h) and desolvation (630 L/h); the ESI capillary was set at 3.36 kV and the sample and the extractor cones at 32 and 5 V respectively; Argon was used for the fragmentations experiments and the parent ions were accelerated using a collision energy ramp of 5-35 eV.

### Analyses GC-MS

GC-MS was performed in a 30 m x 0.2 mm DB-5 capillary column. The mass spectrometer was set to scan 40-650 m/z with an ionizing voltage at 70 eV. Samples were injected (1 mL) with a splitting ratio of 1:20 and the injector temperature was set to 250 degC. A continuous flow rate of 1 mL/min of chromatographic grade helium was used. The column oven was initially at 120 degC and was held for 1 min after injection, followed by temperature ramping at 10 degC/min up to 250 degC, hold for 10 min. The total run time was approximately 24 min.

## Results and discussion

### Optimization of HSCCC conditions, choice of CCC solvent systems and mobile phase

The essence of a successful CCC separation is the correct choice of chromatography solvent. One of the advantages of the technique is that if a solvent is not suitable and separation is not achieved, the sample can be quantitatively recovered. Hence, it is time consuming and it is preferable to start with the right solvent [9,11-15]. Several techniques can be used to obtain the best solvent system and TLC is a very rapid way of guiding method development.

The polar two-phase solvent systems tested for HSCCC obtaining xanthyletin are presented in Table 1. Among those the hexane/ethanol/acetonitrile/water (10:8:1:1, v/v) gave the best partition coefficient value, as well as it presented no emulsion formation and the time for phase separation was short (Table 1) for crude extract and pure xanthyletin and therefore was used for the HSCCC separation. The choice of the mobile phase has been done by TLC. The rapid TLC method to choice of two-phase aqueous solvent systems is the most applicable to the separations of a given extract [12]. If the _R_F values of the compounds to be separated are higher than about 0.5 (less polar solutes (_R_F < 0.5) the more polar layer should be used as the mobile phase. However, the organic phase was used as mobile phase because _R_F values of the compounds to be separated are higher than about 0.5 and it facilitates the evaporation of solvent from the collected fractions.

Several additional CCC optimization parameters were examined, i.e., number of columns, flow rates, volume of fractions collected, sample volume and mass injected and rotation speed. The number of columns had influenced on the separation and purity of the outcome sample. When the separation was conducted for four coumarins employing 2 and 3 columns, poor separation occurred. On the other hand, when 4 columns were used, good separation results and acceptable separation time could be obtained. Besides the recovered sample had higher purity for each coumarin studied. The best flow tested was 3 mL/min and 800 rpm.

### Isolation of xanthyletin, suberosin, seselin and xanthoxyletin

Atotal of 100 fractions of 10 mL each were obtained with an automated fraction collector. The collected fractions were monitored by TLC. The fractions 36-41, 47-53, 55-63, 71-94 contained, suberosin **2**, 30.8 mg, 93% purity), seselin (**3**, 17 mg, 86.9% purity), kanamycin/acetonitrile (**4**, 36.4 mg, 89.5% purity), and xanthyletin (**1**, 128.5 mg, 90% purity) respectively. The chemical structures are shown in Fig. 1. The difference between suberosin and the other coumarins is the existence of a dimethylallyl group in the molecule. This group confers lower polarity to the suberosin when compared with the other coumarins under study. As such, this compound is the first to be eluted in HSCCC analysis. The dimethylallyl group bonded to coumarin skeleton is able to cyclize with the phenol group, like the other coumarins, rendering them more planarity and with high interaction with aqueous phase. The structural difference between the seselin, xanthoxyletin and the xanthyletin is the presence of a methoxy group in the 5 position in xanthoxyletin of the angular or linear pyrane ring in seselin and xanthyletin, respectively. The lipophilicity of seselin and xanthoxyletin when compared with xanthyletin can be justified by the presence of the methoxy group and angular ring. These differences in lipophilicity are responsible for the observed compounds' elution.

### HPLC and GC-MS analyses and identification of the coumarins in HSCC fractions

Following preparative isolation and purification by HSCCC, the collected fractions were analyzed by TLC, GC-MS and HPLC-MS to determine the relative purities of each fraction. Fig. 2 presents HPLC chromatograms of crude extract of _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ and of xanthyletin, seselin and xanthoxyletin. Fig. 3A and B presents the mass and UV spectra of these compounds. Xanyl lutein was obtained with over 99% of purity after crystallization and 15.45 min retention time. The GC chromatography confirms this purity. Seselin and xanthoxyletin were obtained in 70% and 57%, respectively and their retention times were 15.9 and 16.6 min, respectively (Fig. 2). Suberosin was analyzed first by GC-MS and presented the purity of 93% (Fig. 4), but in the HPLC analysis (Fig. 5) it undergoes oxidation to a coumarin with 260 dalton. Further studies have to be done to determine the structure, mechanism and reason for this transformation to occur.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c} Solvent systems & Emulsion formation & Time for phase separation (s) & Volume organic (ml) & Volume aqueous (ml) & Extract amount (mg) \\ \hline  & – & – & – & – & & \\ Chloroform/methanol/water (5:4:3, v/v) & + & – & 25 & 15 & 5.1 & 6.9 & 5.5 \\ Dichloromethane/methanol/water (4:5:3, v/v) & + & – & 3400 & 15 & 4.0 & 8.0 & 5.0 \\ Hexane/acetonitrile/methanol (8:5.2, v/v) & – & – & 15 & 7 & 7.6 & 7.4 & 5.7 \\ Hexane/ethanol/water (6:5.5, v/v) & – & + & 1620 & 120 & 3.2 & 4.8 & 6.2 \\ Hexane/ethanol/acetonitrile/water (10:8:1:1, v/v) & – & 60 & 15 & 4.9 & 5.1 & 5.6 \\ Hexane/ethyl acetate/methanol/water (1:1:1:1, v/v) & + & – & 24 h & 15 & 5.2 & 2.8 & 5.2 \\ Hexane/electr acetate/methanol/water (3:7:5:5, v/v) & – & 60 & 25 & 4.9 & 5.1 & 5.7 \\ Hexane/ethanol/methanol/water (10:10:8:1, v/v) & + & – & 120 & 40 & 11.9 & 5.1 & 5.8 \\ Hexane/methanol/water (10:10:9:1, v/v) & + & – & 420 & 50 & 3.0 & 7.0 & 5.7 \\ Hexane/methanol/water (6:5:5, v/v) & + & + & 300 & 120 & 3.3 & 4.7 & 5.6 \\ Hexane/chloroform/methanol/water (3:6:3:2, v/v) & + & – & 24 h & 25 & 9.0 & 5.0 & 6.8 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Solvent systems tested, emulsion formation, time for phase separation and phases volume for crude extract’ and xanthyletin” (1 mg).



## Page 4



### Identification of the coumarins

The identification and structural elucidation of the xanthyletin, seselin, suberosin and xanthoxyletin were performed with UV spectra, IV spectra, GC-MS and HPLC-MS (Figs. 2-4), 1H NMR, 13C NMR spectroscopic methods and by comparison with literature data [16-20].

Xanthyletin (1): p.f.: 128-130 degC; UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (CH2Cl2) 263, 279, 371 nm; IR \(v_{\rm max}\) cm-1: 2967, 2929 (CH), 1719 (lactone), 1621, 1560, 1480, 1395, 1364, 1279, 1132. \(\beta\)H (400 MHz, CDCl3) 1.43 (6H, s, 2 x CH3), 5.71 (1H, d, J 9.6 Hz), 6.24 (1H, d, J 9.2 Hz), 6.36 (1H, d, J 9.6 Hz), 6.72 (1H, s), 7.04 (1H, s), 7.60 (1H, d, J 9.2 Hz). 13C NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): 161.1 (C-2), 131.2 (C-3), 143.3 (C-4), 112.7 (C-4a), 124.7 (C-5), 118.5 (C-6), 156.8 (C-7), 120.7 (C-8), 155.4 (C-8a),

Fig. 3: (A) UV spectra obtained for coumarins xanthyletin (1), seselin (3) and xanthoxyletin (4) by LC-DAD. (B) Product ion mass spectra for coumarins xanthyletin (1), seselin (3) and xanthoxyletin (4) obtained by LC-MS/MS.

Fig. 2: Chromatograms obtained by LC-DAD (plotted at 220 nm) for crude extract and coumarin rich fractions. % of each compound represents relative peak area.



## Page 5

Figure 4: Mass spectrum (A), and gas chromatogram (B) of suberosin (**2**).

Figure 5: Product ion mass and UV spectra obtained for suberosin (**2**) in fresh crude extract (A) and the major compound present in a suberosin rich fraction (B) previously analyzed by GC-MS.



## Page 6



