# 10.1590@S0102-695X2008000200010.pdf

## Page 1



# Purification of an antibacterial compound from _Lantana illacina_

Aline C. Pereira,\({}^{1}\) Hudson W. P. Carvalho,\({}^{1}\) Geraldo H. Silva,\({}^{2}\) Denilson F. Oliveira,\({}^{\#,\#,\#}\) Henrique C. P. Figueiredo,\({}^{3}\) Alberto J. Cavalleiro,\({}^{2}\) Douglas A. Carvalho\({}^{4}\)

\({}^{1}\)Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Lavras, Caixa Postal 3037, 37200-000 Lavras-MG, Brazil,

\({}^{2}\)Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Caixa Postal 35, 14801-970 Aranavapara-SP, Brazil,

\({}^{1}\)Departamento de Medicina Veterinaria, Universidade Federal de Lavras, Caixa Postal 3037, 37200-00 Lavras-MG, Brazil,

\({}^{2}\)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Federal de Lavras, Caixa Postal 3037, 37200-000 Lavras-MG, Brazil

E-mail: danilson@uflu.br, Tel +55-35-38291623, Fax +55-35-38291271

###### Abstract

Since the methanol extract of _Lantana illacina_ leaves collected in the city of Lavras (MG, Brazil) showed antibacterial properties in a preliminary study, a fractionation process guided by agar diffusion assays with _Aromanos hydroyilidia, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ and _Staphylococcus aureus_ was carried out to purify and identify the active compounds. After solvent partition and several chromatographic steps, [3-3,4-dihydoryphenyl]-ethyl(3'-O-a-L-mamopyranoside)(4'-O-cadecyl)-b-D-glyceropyranoside, known as acetologic, was isolated. The minimal inhibition concentration and the minimal bactericidal concentration of such substance against _A. hydroyilidia, B. subtilis, P. aeruginosa_ and _S. aureus_ were 0.12, 1.00, 1.00 and 0.25 mg/mL, respectively.

**Keywords:**_Lantana illacina_, Verbeneaceae, antibacterial activity, acetoside.

## Introduction

Although pharmaceutical industries have produced a large number of new antimicrobial agents, the emergence of resistant bacterial strains has become a public health problem all over the world. In the United States of America, for instance, each year, 70% of the two million cases of bacterial infections acquired in hospitals consist of strains resistant to at least one antibacterial compound (Alexandria, 2004). Moreover, adverse effects and the high cost of the antimicrobial substances make the search for new effective drugs extremely necessary.

As the biological activity of plants has been known since antiquity (Rios and Recio, 2005), a preliminary evaluation of local plant extracts was carried out to identify those with antimicrobial properties (Oliveira et al., 2007). During such study, a pronounced _in vitro_ antibacterial property was observed for the aerial parts of _Lantana illacina_ Desf. (Verbenaaceae), a 50-120 cm height native Brazilian shrub, which produces pink or purple flowers. Known as a weed and an ornamental plant (Lorenzi, 2000), it has been used in the traditional medicine to treat cold and bronchitis (Balbach, 1986). Although several substances have been identified in other species of the _Lantana_ genus (Begum et al., 2000; Siddiqui et al., 1995; Barbosa-Filho et al., 2006), only monoterpene glucoside esters were isolated from _L. illacina_ leaves (Dembitsky, 2004). No further studies concerning the chemical composition of this plant species have been found. Therefore, this research was aimed to purify and identify the antibacterial compounds present in the methanol extract of _L. illacina_ leaves.

## Material and Methods



## Page 2



## Plant material

Leaves from _Lantana llucina_ Desf (Verbenaceae) were collected in the city of Lavras, State of Minas Gerais (Brazil). Voucher specimens were identified by Prof. Valeria E. G. Rodrigues and deposited in the Herbarium ESAL (ESAL 15.172), at Universidade Federal de Lavras, Lavras.

## General experimental procedures

All reagents used were of recognized analytical grade. Acetic acid, acetonitrile, and methanol were HPLC-grade (Vetec, Brazil). During the purification steps, solvent concentration was carried out in a rotatory evaporator at 35 degC, followed by 24 h in a freeze-dier. Except when mentioned otherwise, all fractions were submitted to antibacterial diffusion assays to direct purification. Column chromatography was carried out on silica gel 60 (230-400 mesh, Merck). Mass spectra were obtained on an Agilent 1100 LC/MS Trap equipped with an electrospray interface. Samples (1.0 mg) were dissolved in MeOH (1.0 mL) and 20 mL were directly injected into the interface at a flow rate of 5 mL/min. Deuterated dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO-_d_6) and deuterated methanol (CD,OD) were used as solvents for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analyses performed on a Varian Unit 500 instrument using solvent peak as reference. 1H and 1C NMR spectra were obtained in both solvents, while HMBC, HMQC and TOCSY analyses were carried out only in DMSO-_d_6.

## Extraction and isolation

Fresh leaves of _L. lilucina_ were exhaustively extracted with methanol at room temperature. Part of the crude extract (0.5 mg) was dissolved in 0.5 mL of an ethanol:H2O (7:3; v/v) solution and submitted to the antibacterial diffusion assay. Another part (0.5 mg) of such extract was dissolved in 0.5 mL of an aqueous 1% (g/mL) Tween 80 solution and used in the broth microdilution assay.

The crude extract (10.0 g) was subsequently washed with hexane (10 x 100 mL), ethyl acetate (AoCEt; 10 x 100 mL) and methanol (MeOH; 10 x 100 mL). Part (3.5 g) of the MeOH fraction (M1) was successively eluted with MeOH, H2O and HCl 0.1 M through a silica gel column (4 x 15 cm). Part (1.8 g) of the resulting MoOH fraction (M2) was eluted with MeOH through a C-18 column (1 x 5 cm), yielding fraction M3 (1.0 g). Then, M3 was fractionated on a C-18 column (Luna C-18, 200 x 21.2 mm, 10 mM, Phenomenex, USA), using aqueous 0.1% acetic acid solution: MeOH (5% MeOH during 5 min, 5-100% MeOH during 60 min, 100% MeOH for 21 min), at a flow rate of 30 mL/min, as eluent. An UV detector set at 254 nm was employed to monitor the fractionation. One of the resulting fractions (F11; 169 mg; eluted between 18-19 min) was purified on the same column employing aqueous 0.1% acetic acid solution:MoOII (62:38) as eluent, at a flow rate of 20 mL/min. In this case the UV detector was set at 320 nm. This procedure yielded fraction 6 as a pure compound (F6; 15 mg; eluted between 10.2-12.5 min), which was identified as acetoside (Figure 1) by NMR and mass spectrometry analyses.

## Antibacterial assays

Antibacterial activity was evaluated with four standard bacterial strains acquired from the American Type of Culture Collection (ATCC, USA): _Bacillus subtilis_ ATCC 6633 and _Staphylococcus aureus_ ATCC 25923 (Gram-positive), _Aeromonas hydrophilla_ ATCC 7966 and _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ ATCC 27853 (Gram-negative). Agar diffusion assays (NCELS, 2003a) were carried out in duplicates. Briefly, after bacterial growth in triptic soy agar (TSA, Acumedia, USA) during 24 h at 37 degC, the resulting cultures were used to prepare cell suspensions in an aqueous 0.85% (g/mL) NaCl solution, at 0.5 turbidity according to MacFarland scale. Such suspensions were inoculated with a swab on the surface of Mueller-Hinton agar (Merck, Germany) Petri dishes and 40 mL of each sample were deposited into 6 mm diameter holes made on the inoculated medium. After 24 h at 37 degC, samples causing 7 mm or larger inhibition zone diameters around the holes were considered active.

Minimal inhibitory and minimal bactericidal concentrations (MIC and MBC) were determined by a broth microdilution assay (NCELS, 2003b). A twofold serial dilution of the reference (chloramphenicol succinate: Sigma, USA; 400 mg/mL) and samples were prepared using Mueller-Hinton broth (MHB: Boilfe, Italy) supplemented with calcium and magnesium cations (Alderman and Smith, 2001). The crude extract was dissolved in an aqueous 1% (g/mL) Tween 80 solution at a concentration of 10 mg/mL and filtered through a 0.22 mm membrane (GV Durapore PVDF, Milipore, USA). 7.5 x 104 CFU were poured into each well and the initial extract concentration was 5.0 mg/mL. Aqueous 1% Tween 80 and chloramphenicol solutions were employed as negative and positive control, respectively. After 24 h at 37 degC, 10 mL were withdrawn from each well with no bacterial growth and subcultured in TSA during 24 h at the same temperature. MIC was considered the lowest concentration of the extract that prevented visible growth in the well during 24 h and MBC was defined as the lowest concentration yielding negative subcultures during 24 h. The isolated compound (atecoside, Figure 1) was also submitted to a broth microdilution assay. It (2 mg) was dissolved in 100 mL of DMSO (P.A.) and diluted with MHB. The highest acetoside's concentration in the well was 1.0 mg/mL.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Rev.: Bras. Farmacogn. 1822. J. Pharmacogn. 205

## Page 3

As preliminarily observed (Oliveira et al., 2007), _L. lilacina_ methanol extract was able to inhibit the growth of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria strains (Table 1).

During all purification steps, only one active fraction was observed. Consequently, it seems that the antibacterial property of the crude extract was due only to the isolated substance, which amounted to 15 mg of a hygroscopic viscous oil that could get dark easily when exposed to light and air. In the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 2), obtained in DMSO-_d6_, it was clear that most signals belonged to groups linked to heteroatoms (2.7-5.0 ppm) or unsaturated carbons (6-2.7-5 ppm). Such result suggested aromatic rings linked to carbohydrate units. The \({}^{1}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions. Signals at 140 and 150 ppm suggested carbon sp\({}^{2}\) - heteroatom groups, while the one at 165 ppm seemed due to a carbonyl group, probably an ester (Silverstein and Webster, 1998; Pretsch et al., 1989). The NMR spectrum (Table 2) pointed to the same direction, since most signals were in the carbon sp\({}^{3}\)-heteroatom and carbon sp\({}^{2}\) regions.



## Page 4

interpretation of TOCSY 1D, 1H and 13C NMR spectra, as well as heteronuclear correlations at short (HMQC) and long distances (HMBC), permitted to attribute the structure of the [b-3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-ethyl]-(3'-_O_-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl)-(4'-O-cafeqyl)-b-D-glycopyrasonide, known as acetoside or verbascoside (Figure 1), to the isolated compound. It is worth to mention that the stereochemistry of the carboxyl moiety was clear in the 1H spectrum, since the coupling constant (_J_) between H7 and H8 was 16 Hz, which is characteristic of a _trans_ arrangement (Silverstein and Webster, 1998)

Although the spectra obtained in DMSO-_d_6 were in accordance with NMR data reported for the acetoside dissolved in the same solvent (Tanaka et al., 2004), CD3OD was also used, since it could afford a simpler 1H NMR spectrum. As a consequence, the a-L-rhamnose moiety with OR (linked to C1**) and OH (linked to C2**) in the axial positions was confirmed by the low \(J\) between H1**

## Page 5

Athayde-Filho PF, Silva MS, Cunha EVL, Almeida JRGS, Quintana-Jonitor LJ 2006. Natural products inhibitors of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. _Rev Bras Farmacogen 16_: 2588-285.
* [2001] Barros E 2001. _Antimicrobials: consulta ripida_. Porto Alegre (RS): Armed.
* [2000] Begum S, Wahab A, Siddiqui BS, Qamar F 2000. Nematicidal constituents of the aerial parts of _Lantana canara_. _J Nat Prod 63_: 765-767.
* [2004] Dembisky VM 2004. Chemistry and biodiversity of the biologically active natural glycosides. _Chem Biodiversity 1_: 673.
* [2004] Diaz AM, Abad MJ, Fernandez L, Silvan AM, De Santos J, Bermley P 2004. Demy/propanol glycoloses from _Scrrophularia scorodonia: in vitro_ anti-inflammatory activity. _Life Sci 74_: 2515-2526.
* [1999] Didry N, Seidel V, Dubrecht L, Tillegulin F, Bailleul F 1999. Isolation and antibacterial activity of phenylpropanol derivatives from _Ballola nigra_. _J Ethnopharmacol 67_: 197-202.
* [1991] Herbert JM, Maffrand JP, Taoubi K, Augereau JM, Fouraste I, Gley J 1991. Verbassoside isolated from _Lantana canara_, an inhibitor of protein kinase C. _J Nat Prod 54_: 1595-1600.
* [2003] Lima CSA, Amorim EL, Fonseca KX, Ribeiro S, Chiappeta AA, Nunes XP, Agra MF, Cunha EVL, Silva MS, Barbosa-Filho JM 2003. Antimicrobial activity of a mixture of two isomeric phenylpropanol glycosides from _Arvahidae Harleyi A.H. Gentry (Bignoniaceae) Rev Bras Ciea Farm 39_: 77-81.
* [2000] Lorenzi H 2000. _Plantana dannihas do Brasil: terrestres, agatitacas, parasites \(\alpha\) toxicas_. Nova Odessa (SP): Instituto Plantarum.
* [2003a] NCCLS 2003a. _Performance standards for antimicrobial dish susceptibility tests: approved standard_. Wayne, Pennsylvania 23 (1) (document M2-A8).
* [2003b] NCCLS 2003b. _Methods for dilution antimicrobial susceptibility tests for bacteria that grow aerobically: approved standard_. Wayne, Pennsylvania 23 (2) (document M7-A6).
* [1996] Ng TB, Ling JML, Wang ZT, Cai JN, Xu GJ 1996. Examination of coumarins, flavonoids and polysaccharide peptide for antibacterial activity. _Gen Pharmac 27_: 1237-1240.
* [2001] Ogundipe OO, Moody JO, Houghton PJ, Odelola HA 2001. Bioactive chemical constituents from _Alchornea Lafiflora_ (Benth) Pax and Hoffman. _J Ethnopharmacol 74_: 275-280.
* [2002] Ohno T, Inoue M, Ogihara Y, Saracoglu I 2002. Antimetastic activity of acetoside, a phenylethanoid glycoside. _Biol Pharm Bull 55_: 666-668.
* [2007] Oliveira DF, Pereira AC, Figueiredo HC, Carvalho DA, Silva G, Nunes AS, Alves DS, Carvalho HWP 2007. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts from Brazilian southeast region. _Fitoitoateria 78_: 142-145.
* [2008] Ono M, Morinaga H, Masuoka C, Ikeda T, Okawa M, Kinjo J, Nohara T 2005. New bisobalome-type sesquiterpenes from the aerial parts of _Lipipia dalicis_. _Chem Pharm Bull 53_: 1175-1177.
* [2008] Owen RW, Haubner R, Mier W, Giacosa A, Hull W, Spiegelhalder B, Bartsch H 2003. Isolation structure elucidation and antioxidant potential of the major phenolic and flavonoid compounds in brinded olive durpes. _Food Chem Toxicol 41_: 703-717.
* [2008] Rex, Braz. Farmacogen.
* [2005] Plaza A, Montoro P, Benavides A, Pizza C, Piacent S 2005. Phenypropanol glycosides from _Tynanthus paumenvises_: caracterization and LC-MS quantitative analysis. _J Agric Food Chem 53_: 2853-2858.
* [1989] Pretsch E, Clerc T, Seibl J, Simon W 1989. _Spectral data for structure determination of organic compounds_. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
* [2005] Rios JL, Recio MC 2005. Medicinal plants and antimicrobial activity. _J Ethnopharmacol 100_: 80-84.
* [1995] Siddiqui BS, Raza SM, Begum S, Siddiqui S, Firdous S 1995. Pentacyclic triterpenoids from _Lantana canara_. _Phytochemistry 38_: 681-685.
* [1998] Silvestrein RM, Webster FX 1998. _Spectrometric identification of organic compounds_. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 6th edition.
* [2003] Tanaka T, Ikeda T, Kaku M, Zhu XH, Okawa M, Yokomizo K, Uyeda M, Nohara T 2004. A new lignan glycoside and phenylcatend glycosides from _Strohlhames cucia_. Bremek, _Chem Pharm Bull 52_: 1242-1245.
* Complete assignments of H-1 and C-13 NMR data for 10 phenylethanol glycosides. _Magn Reson Chem 42_: 659-662.
* [2002] Zhang F, Jia Z, Deng Z, Fan J, Chen J, Wu H, Zhao C, Wei Y 2002. Inhibition of verbassoside on the telomerase activity of human gastric adenocarcinoma cell MKN 45. _Shieje Huaren Xiaohua Zatril 10_: 366-367.



