# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2010.05.012.pdf

## Page 1



# Diketopiperazines produced by endophytic fungi found in association with two Asteraceae species

Denise O. Guimaraes, Warley S. Borges, Noemi J. Vieira, Laiani F. de Oliveira, Carlos H.T.P. da Silva, Norberto P. Lopes, Luis G. Dias, Rosa Duran-Patron, Isidro G. Collado, Monica T. Pupo

Corresponding author. Fcl: +55 16 36024710; fax: +55 16 36024178.E-mail: mtpupo@fctp.usp.br (M.T. Pupo). Departamento de Fisica e Quimica, Facultad de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Facultad de Filosofa, Ciencias e Letras de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Cadiz, Cdidiz, Spain

###### Abstract

Diketopiperazine (DKP) derivatives, named colletopiperazine, fusaperazine C and E as well as four known DKPs were isolated from cultures of _Colletotrichum_ gloesopioroides, _Penicillium crustosum_, both endophytic fungi isolated from _Viguera robusta_, and a _Fusarium_ spp., an endophyte of _Viguera arenaria_, respectively. Their structures were established on the basis of their spectroscopic data. Conformational analysis of two known DKPs showed that folded conformations were as energetically stable as the extended one.

## 1 Introduction

Diketopiperazines (DKPs) are well known secondary metabolites produced by fungi (Laws and Mantle, 1985) that display several biological activities, such as antibiotic, anticultural and immunosuppressant properties (Ameur et al., 2004), as well a wide range of biological effects in cell cycle progression (Cui et al., 1996).

Condensation of two or three amino acid precursors is involved in the DKP biosynthetic pathway (Kozlovsky et al., 2000; Laws and Mantle, 1985), with the later also being known as cyclic dipeptides when derived from condensation of two amino acids. Secondary metabolites from fungi that incorporate more than one amino acid are typically synthesized via non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) (Mootz and Marahiel, 1997). A number of DKP derivatives feature either thionethyl groups or disulphide bridges (Mullbach et al., 1986), and those with an internal disulphide bridge are known as epipolythiodioxopiperazines (ETPs) which are typically toxic metabolites from fungi (Gardiner et al., 2005). The first and best-known ETP is gliotoxin, isolated from _Gliocadium fimbriatum_ (Weindling, 1941; Weindling and Emerson, 1936), which is involved in animal myceses and appears to be a factor contributing to virulence associated with invasive aspergillosis in immunocompromised patients (Gardiner et al., 2005). Labelling experiments demonstrated that amino acids are precursors of ETPs (Gardiner et al., 2005), although how sulphur atoms are introduced into ETPs is poorly understood. While it has been demonstrated that methonine, cysteine and sodium sulphate can act as sources of sulphur (Kirby et al., 1980), the mechanisms by which sulphur atoms are introduced are still unknown (Gardiner et al., 2005).

Endophytes have been identified as rich and relatively untapped sources of novel bioactive secondary metabolites (Bashyal et al., 2005; Clardy and Walsh, 2004; Gunatilaka, 2006; Strobel et al., 2004). Endophytic fungi can be detected within the tissues of apparently healthy plant hosts (Schulz and Boyle, 2005) and they have been found in almost all plants investigated to date (Arnold et al., 2000). Several novel bioactive metabolites have recently been isolated from these microorganisms (Gallo et al., 2007; Guo et al., 2008; Pupo et al., 2006; Borges et al., 2009). Interestingly, some endophytic fungi have been reported to produce bioactive compounds previously isolated from their host plants, including the therapeutic anticancer drugs taxol (Stierle et al., 1993, 1995; Strobel et al., 1996), vincristine (Yang et al., 2004), podophyllotoxin (Eyberger et al., 2006; Puri et al., 2006), camptothecin (Puri et al., 2005) and the bioactive compound hypericin (Kusari et al., 2008).



## Page 2

As part of our ongoing search for novel and bioactive compounds from endophytes found in association with Asteraceae species, we have focused studies on endophytic fungi strains that showed antimornal and antimicrobial activities (Borges and Pupo, 2006; Gallo et al., 2008; Guimaraes et al., 2008; Momoseso et al., 2008). These screening efforts have the fungal strains _Fusarium_ spp., an endophyte in _Viguiera enrania_, and _Colletotrichum gloesopioides_, an endophyte in _Viguiera robusta_, as good targets to be pursued due to their moderate antimicrobial activity against _Candida albicans_ and antitumor activity against JURKAT leukemia cell lines (Guimaraes et al., 2008). We have also successfully applied endophytic fungi to the biotransformation of drugs (Borges et al., 2007, 2008) and natural products (Verza et al., 2009). _Penicillium_ _crustosum_, an endophyte in _V. robusta_, catalyzed stereoselective S-oxidation of the neuroleptic drug thioridazine and has been studied in the biotransformation of other bioactive natural products (unpublished data). These results encouraged us to investigate the secondary metabolites of the endophytic fungal strains _Fusarium_ sp., _C. gloesoprioides_ and _P. crustosum_.

## Results and discussion

Compounds **1** and **2** were isolated from the endophyte _C. gloesopioides_, whereas compounds **3** and **4** were isolated from the culture of _Fusarium_ spp. DKPs **5-7** were obtained from _P. crustosum_ (Fig. 1).

The 1H, 13C NMR and MS spectroscopic data of **1** coincide with previously reported data for the compound bisdetithobis(methylthio)glutoxin, a secondary metabolite biosynthesized by the fungus _Glocladium deliquescens_ (Kirby et al., 1980). The absolute stereochemistry of **1** was investigated using electronic circular dichroism (ECD), and this allowed the determination of the absolute configurations of the asymmetric centers as 3(_R_), 6(_R_), 12(_S_) and 13(_S_) by comparison with previously reported data for compound 1 (Li et al., 2006). This compound is produced by irreversible disulphide bridge reduction and _S_-methylation of giotorxin (Kirby et al., 1980), a well known mycotoxin. Compound **1** acts as a specific inhibitor of the platelet activating factor (IC50 * 8.4 mM) and showed antibacterial activity against both methicillin-resistant and multidrug-resistant _Staphylococcus aureus_ (Okamoto et al., 1986; Li et al., 2006).

The molecular formula of compound **2** was established by HRESIMS as C14H18N2NaO4S (see Section 4). 1H, COSY, HMQC and HMBC NMR spectroscopic analyses and comparison with the data of compound **1** suggested that compound **2** is a new DKP derivative. The IR spectrum of compound **2** showed characteristic absorption bands of OH (broad, 3272 cm-1), amide carbonyls (1668 and 1638 cm-1) and one absorption band assigned to _v_N-H (1599 cm-1). The main 1H NMR spectroscopic differences between **1** and **2** are that the later has three aromatic hydrogens and only one methyl signal for the thiomethyl group. The presence of a 1,2,3-trisubstituted phenyl ring was evident from the 1H signals at \(d\) < 6.78 (_br_ \(d\), 7.7 Hz, H-1), \(d\) 6.83 (_br_ \(d\), 7.7 Hz, H-9) and \(d\) 7.10 (_t_, \(t\), 7.7 Hz, H-10), which were coupled in the COSY spectrum. The methyl thiomethyl group at \(d\) < 2.22 (s, 3H) showed long-range coupling with C-3 (_d_ 73.7) in the HMBC spectrum. Two hydrogens of an AX spin system were observed at \(d\) 4.51 (_d_, \(J\) 11.9 Hz, H-14) and \(d\) 3.97 (_d_, \(J\) 11.9 Hz, H-14) and are attached to the oxygen substituted methylene carbon at \(d\) 63.4, and this being in agreement with a serine unit. The 1H NMR spectrum also showed two singlets at \(d\) 3.19 (-NCH3) and \(d\) 8.54 (-OH), whereas the methyl group at \(d\) 3.19 had correlations to the carbons at \(d\) 170.0 (C-5) and \(d\) 73.7 (C-3), allowing us to locate the methyl group at N-4. Two methylene hydrogens were observed at \(d\) 3.35 (_m_, 2H) coupled to a hydrogen at \(d\) 5.09 (_dd_, \(J\) 9.1; 10.3 Hz; H-6) in the COSY spectrum. Therefore, analysis of the NMR spectroscopic data suggested a DKP structure for **2** closely resembling **1**. Due to the limited amount of the compound isolated, the carbon chemical shifts were obtained from the HMQC and HMBC experiments. Although seven carbons are missing, the HRESIMS and 1H NMR data support the proposed structure. The known compound dehydrodeptidoligotoxin, lacking both thioomethyl groups, is the structure most similar to compound **2** (Bell et al., 1958). Compound **2** is a new DKP derivative and is named colletopiperazine.

The molecular formula of compound **3** was established as C17H22N2O4 (see Section 4). The 1H NMR spectrum had two doublets belonging to an AAXX spin system at \(d\) 6.86 (_d_, \(J\) 8.7 Hz, H-10/10) and \(d\) 7.08 (_d_, \(J\) 8.7 Hz, H-9/9), suggesting a _para_-disubstituted aromatic ring in the structure. The HMQC data showed that these hydrogens are attached to carbons at \(d\) 115.2 (C-10/10') and \(d\) 131.7 (C-9/9'), respectively. The HMBC correlation between the hydrogens at \(d\) 7.08 (H-9/9) and the carbon at \(d\) 159.0 (C-11), and also the aromatic hydrogens shielded chemicals shifts, suggested a group containing oxygen at C-11. A pair of methylene hydrogens was observed as two doublets at \(d\) 3.20 (_d_, \(J\) 13.6 Hz, H-7b) and \(d\) 3.00 (_d_, \(J\) 13.6 Hz, H-7a) and HMQC showed their attachment to a carbon at \(d\) 48.4 (C-7). Both methylene hydrogens are correlated to the aromatic carbons at \(d\) 131.7 (C-9/9') in the HMBC spectrum. The hydrogen at \(d\) 3.00 (H-7a) also showed long-range correlations to carbons at \(d\) 82.6 (C-6) and \(d\) 167.3 (C-5). These data suggest that methylene hydrogens H-7a and H-7b are close to the aromatic ring, to the quaternary carbon at \(d\) 82.6 and to the amide carbonyl carbon at \(d\) 167.3 of the diketopiperazine ring, indicating the presence of a tyrosine moiety in the structure. Carbon 6 was observed as a quaternary carbon in the HMQC and presented a deshielded chemical shift compared to the sulphur

Fig. 1: Diketopiperazines produced by the endophytic fungi _Calletotrichum gloesopioides_ (**1–2**) _Fusarium_ spp. (**3–4**) and _Penicillium crustosum_ (**5–7**).



## Page 3

substituted carbons in compounds **1** and **2**, suggesting an hydroxyl group attachment at this position. Two hydrogens at \(d\) 4.50 (_d_, \(J\) 6.8 Hz, H-12) were coupled to a vinyl hydrogen at \(d\) 5.40 (_br_ t, \(J\) 6.8 Hz, H-13), which was observed as a broad triplet suggesting a long-range coupling with methyl hydrogens observed at \(d\) 1.80 (_br_ s, H-15) and \(d\) 1.74 (_br_ s, H-16). Methyl hydrogens gave long-range correlations with both vinyl carbons at \(d\) 119.7 (C-13) and \(d\) 138.9 (C-14), suggesting a premyl group attached to a tyrosine moiety. An alanine unit linked to the 0-prenyltyrosine moiety was evident from the 1H NMR spectrum by the presence of an AX spin system at \(d\) 2.75 (_d_, 17.6 Hz, 1H) and \(d\) 3.50 (_d_, \(J\) 17.6 Hz, 1H). Finally, the HHBC spectrum showed correlations among methyl group at \(d\) 2.84 (_s_, H-17) and carbons at \(d\) 52.1 (C-3) and \(d\) 167.3 (C-5), allowing the location of one methyl group to N-4. Compound **3**, fusaperazine C, was found to be a new 0-prenyltyrosine DKP derivative.

The molecular formula of compound **4** was established as C18H24N2O5S2 according to MS and NMR spectroscopic data. The NMR data showed similarities with the previously described DKP derivative **3**. The 0-prenyltyrosine moiety was evident from both 1H and 13C NMR data, and confirmed by analysis of the HMRBC spectrum. The HMC spectrum showed signals at \(d\) 1.14 (s, 3H, H-17) and \(d\) 2.14 (_s_, 3H, H-18), attached to carbons at \(d\) 9.4 and \(d\) 13.0, respectively, which indicated the presence of two thimethyl groups. The NMR and optical rotation data obtained were compared with previously described data and allowed us to establish compound **4** as a DKP derivative previously isolated from _Tolyopodium_ sp. (Chu et al., 1993) and _Fusarium chlamydosporum_ (Usami et al., 2002). However our 1H NMR spectroscopic data for both thimethyl groups were inverted when compared to the first published data (Chu et al., 1993) and in agreement with later published data (Usami et al., 2002). The more shielded chemical shifts for both hydrogens and carbon of thimethyl group at C-3 (_d_H 1.14, _d_C 9.4), compared to thimethylgroup at C-6 (_d_H 2.14, _d_C 13.0), could be explained by a spatial proximity to the phenyl ring. NOE irradiation of H-17 (_s_; \(d\) 1.14) showed dipolar couplings with the aromatic hydrogens H-10 (_d_; \(d\) 6.80) and H-9 (_d_; \(d\) 7.16), confirming this close spatial relationship. This proximity would only be possible if the thimethyl at C-3 and 0-prenyltyrosine groups are in a _cis_ configuration. In addition, compound **4** should adopt a folded conformation in order to account for the observed NOEs. Such a folded conformation has been reported for DKPs and other peptides, and it has been related with the biological activities of many compounds (Umezawa et al., 1999). The stability of **4** in this folded conformation might be explained by a CH/p interaction between the electrons of the aromatic ring and the polarized hydrogens of the thimethyl group, similar to the stabilization of many proteins and peptides (Umezawa et al., 1999). This interaction has been confirmed by molecular modeling studies (see discussion below). Compound **4** displayed weak inhibitory activity in a PAF assay in contrast with the _cis_ isomer which was found to be inactive (Chu et al., 1993) indicating that the spatial position of the thimethyl group is important for this activity.

The 1H NMR spectroscopic data of compounds **5** and **6** were similar to those observed for **4**, showing signals of an 0-prenyltyrosine group and of two thimethyl groups. The main difference was the presence of two additional -NCH3 groups for both compounds. The molecular formula of compounds **5** and **6** were established as C20H28N2O5S2 by MS. Structures were unequivocally established based on optical rotation, 1H, 13C NMR, NOE, HMQC and HMRC data, which are in agreement with previously published data for compounds **5** and **6** (Wang et al., 1998; Kawahara et al., 1987; Usami et al., 2002).

The molecular formula of compound **7** was established as C19H24N2O5S by HRESIM. The structure of **7** was assigned by analysis of its 1H, 13C, HMQC and HMRC NMR spectra. The 1H NMR spectrum showed similarities with the 1H NMR spectra of compounds **3-6**. The 1H NMR spectrum of **7** showed the same signals observed for the O-prenyltyrosine previously described for compound **3**. The 13C NMR spectrum showed six quaternary carbons at \(d\) 138.2; \(d\) 159.3; \(d\) 125.6; \(d\) 130.0; \(d\) 159.2; \(d\) 163.2. The quaternary carbon chemical shifts are similar to those observed for compounds **5** and **6**, except for the carbon at \(d\) 130.0, suggesting an analogue compound for **7** when compared with **5** and **6**. The main differences between **5-6** and **7** were at the DKP moiety. Compound **7** showed a vinyl carbon at \(d\) 130.0 instead of one thimethyl group. Attempts to unequivocally establish the geometry of the \(\Delta^{5.7}\) double bound through NOE irradiation did not result in reliable results. No NOEs were observed after irradiation of both H-7 and H-18 signals. However, C-7 and H-7 chemical shifts observed for **7** are in agreement with a previously related 6Z DKP derivative (Bryans et al., 1996). In order to establish the absolute configuration of **7** and also to get some insight regarding the \(\Delta^{6.7}\) configuration, experimental ECD were performed and the data obtained were compared with theoretical calculations for the four possible stereoisomers (3R,6E; 3S,6E; 3R,6Z; 3S,6Z) (see Supplementary information). The experimental ECD spectrum shows a positive Cotton effect at 311 nm ({[\(\theta\)}\({}_{311}\) +1061) and a negative Cotton effect at 252 nm ({[\(\theta\)}\({}_{252}\) -532). Theoretical calculations for the ECD were carried out in the solvent medium by time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) at the PBE1PE hybrid functional level and 6-31 + \(\text{G}^{*}\) basis set. Although a very nice agreement is lacking between the experimental and theoretical ECD, it is still possible to assign the data to the 3R,6Z-isomer. The same approach was also carried out for compounds **2** and **3**; however, the obtained data did not allow us to establish the absolute configuration by comparison between theoretical and experimental ECD spectra.

Interestingly, compounds **5**, **6** and **7** have been isolated from the culture of _P. crustosum_ in the presence of 10% 1-tetralone. When _P. crustosum_ was cultured in the absence of 1-tetralone, these compounds were not produced. Curiously, the cultivation of _P. crustosum_ in the presence of 10% chlorogenic acid also led to the production of compounds **5** and **6**, while in the absence of chlorogenic acid they were not produced. Therefore, these DKP derivatives might be related to chemical defense of the endophytic fungus.

Monte Carlo algorithmic analysis (Hehre, 2003; Leach, 2001) using MMFF molecular mechanics analysis and the Spartan '06 software (Spartan, 2006) was successful in assigning low-energy conformers and in providing quantitative estimates of conformational energy differences. Thus, two low-energy conformers, one extended and another folded, have been assigned for DKPs **4** and **6** (Fig. 2).

As a second step in the simulations, both the extended and folded conformations obtained for these two compounds were fully optimized in gas phase at B3LYP/6-31G\({}^{*}\) level of calculation (Spartan, 2006). Similar procedures were carried out with DKP **5**, yielding mainly the extended conformation. Regarding this compound, it showed an inverted configuration at C-3 in comparison with both compounds **4** and **6**. After optimization, short distances were assigned for the CH/p contacts in DKPs **4** and **6**. Despite the simulations performed in the gas phase, a trend of intramolecular interactions could be observed as expected for DKPs (Umezawa et al., 1999). No significant energy differences between folded and extended conformations were observed for either compound (especially DKP **4**) exhibiting a closer spatial position between their aromatic and thimomethyl groups.

Compounds **1**, **2**, **4-7** were evaluated in the _in vivo_ antibacterial assay using the nematode _Caenorhabditis elegans_ infected with the human opportunistic pathogen _Enterococcus faecalis_ according to a previously described protocol (Moy et al., 2006). All the compounds did not show significant ability to promote the nematode survival.



## Page 4



## 3 Conclusion

In conclusion, we have isolated and identified seven DKP derivatives from three endophytic fungi, three of which are described for the first time. Isolated compounds showed no significant antimicrobial activities. Five DKP derivatives exhibit one O-prepyridylyosine group which could be considered a relatively rare peptide building block of limited distribution in nature. Phomamide, cyclo-O-(g,\(\gamma\)-dimethylallyl)-l-t-t-t-sereins, was produced by the fungus _Phoma ingam_ and appears to be the first reported O-pre-tyrosine DKP derivative from a microbial source (Ferezou et al., 1980). Approximately 46 compounds possessing an O-prepyridylyosine unit have been reported so far; however, most of them are cyclic peptides and cyclodepsieptides. Novel _N_- and _C_-preynylated tryptophan DKP derivatives and other cyclic peptides have also been isolated from microbial sources (Schultz et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008). Therefore, our results coincide with the assertion that endophytic fungi are outstanding sources of novel chemical diversity.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

UV spectra were obtained in methanol (MeOH) solution using a SHIMADZU PC 1520 spectrophotometer and IR spectra were measured with a Nicole Protege 460 spectrophotometer. ECD spectra were obtained in MeOH solution using a JASCO J-715 spectropolarimeter. High-resolution ESI-MS data were obtained on an UltroTOF (Bruker-daltonics, Billarica, USA). Analytical and semi preparative HPLC analyses were carried out on a Shimadzu (LC-6AD apparatus, Japan) multisolvent delivery system, Shimadzu SPD-M10Avp Photodiode Array Detector, and an Intel Celeron computer for analytical system control, data collection and processing (software Class-VP). Shim-Pack CLC-ODS, 250/4.6 C-18 and VP 250/10 NUCLEOSIL 120-5 C18 columns were applied as stationary phases. HPLC analyses were also carried out on a Merck Hitachi HPLC coupled with pump L-7100 Merck, refraction index detector L-7490 Merck and Borwin software. NMR experiments were recorded on BRUKER DRX-400, BRUKER DRX-500 and VARIAN INOVA-400 MHz spectrometers with CD3OD, DMSOd6 and CDCl3 as solvents and TMS as internal standard. Optical rotations were measured with a JASCO DIP-370 spectrometer. Column chromatographies were carried out on silica gel 60 (Merck, 0.063-0.200 mm), silica gel 60 C8 reversed phase (Merck 0.063-0.200 mm) and silica gel for flash chromatography (Sigma-Aldrich, 230-400 mesh).

### Microorganisms

Endophytic fungi strain codes VR7 and VR4 were isolated from _V. robusta_ and identified as _C. gloeososporioides_ and _P. crustosum_, respectively, by conventional taxonomy. Strain VR7 was identified by Fundacao Andre Tosello, Campinas, SP, Brazil. Strain VR4 was identified by Central Bureau vapor Schimmelculture (CBS - Fungal Biodiversity Centre), The Netherlands. Strain VA17 was isolated from _V. arenaria_ and showed 98% identity to _Fusarium_ spp. on the basis of its ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequence (Guimaraes et al., 2008). Strain VR7 showed 100% rDNA sequence identity to _Glomerella cingulata_. In fact, _G. cingulate_ is the telecomorph (sexual) stage of _C. gloeosporioides_. The strains were maintained on potato dextrose agar slants, on agar plugs in sterile water and on silica gel (1-4 mm Synth, Brazil), stored at 4 degC, at our laboratory. The strains were deposited at the Laboratorio de Quimica de Microorganismos, FCFRP-USP, under voucher numbers VR4, VR7 and VA17. (VA17 and VR7 sequences available in Supplementary information).

### Culturing of microorganisms and isolation of diketopiperazines

_C. gloeosporioides_ and _Fusarium_ spp. were cultured using a two-step fermentation process. First, suspension of the mycelium was aseptically inoculated into 1000 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL of seed medium (Jackson et al., 1993). The flasks were incubated for 48 h at 30 degC on a rotary shaker (New Brunswick Scientific Co. Inc., model INNOVA TM 4300 - New Jersey, USA) operating at 120 rpm, with the mycelia vacuum filtered from the culture broths (discarded) and transferred into 2000 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 400 mL of Czapek fermentation medium (Alviano et al., 1992). One flask was used for _C. gloeosporioides_ cultivation (400 mL fermentation medium) while _Fusarium_ spp. was cultivated in 12 flasks (4800 mL fermentation medium). Cultures were incubated for an additional 6 days at 30 degC, 120 rpm. After fermentation, the culture broths of _C. gloeosporioides_ and _Fusarium_ spp. were separated from the mycelia by vacuum filtration and extracted with EtOAc (3 x 150 mL for _C. gloeosporioides_ broth and 3 x 1800 mL for _Fusarium_ spp. broth). The organic solvent was evaporated under vacuum, yielding the EtOAc extracts.

The EtOAc extract from _C. gloeosporioides_ culture (123.7 mg) was subjected to silica gel 60 CC eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 4:1 (200 mL) and _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1 (100 mL) yielding 7 fractions. Sub-fraction 7 (34.1 mg), obtained from _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1, was subjected to silica gel 60 C8 reversed-phase CC eluted with MeOH/H2O 1:1 (300 mL) to yield 12 fractions. Sub-fraction 6 (3.9 mg) was purified using analytical reversed-phase HPLC (Shim-Pack CLC-ODS, 250/4.6 C18) with MeOH/H2O 1:1 as the mobile phase at a flow rate 1 mL min-1, 260 nm to yield compounds **1** (1.1 mg; _t_R = 15.3 min) and **2** (1.1 mg; _t_R = 13.7 min).

The EtOAc extract from the fermentation of _Fusarium_ spp. (232.0 mg) was applied to a silica flash (230-400 mesh) column eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1 (625 mL), 1:4 (150 mL), EtOAc (100 mL) and MeOH (400 mL), yielding 10 fractions. Sub-fraction 8 (16.0 mg), obtained from _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:4 was subjected to semi preparative reversely-phase HPLC (VP 250/10 NucleOSIL 120-5 C18) with MeCN/H2O 7:13 as the mobile phase at a flow rate 4 mL min-1, 225 nm to yield compound **3** (0.6 mg; _t_R = 10.6 min).

Fig. 2: Folded conformations obtained and investigated with MONTE CARLO/DFT for compounds **4** (a) and **6** (b).



## Page 5

The mycelium of _Fusarium_ spp. was extracted by maceration with MeOH for 7 days at room temperature. After this period, the mycelium was separated from the culture broth by vacuum filtration and discarded. The organic solvent was concentrated to yield the MeOH crude extract (9.4 g), which was suspended in MeOH/H2O 1:3 (400 mL) and partitioned with CH2Cl2 and EtOHac, in sequence, both for three consecutive times (150 mL each). The CH2Cl2 fraction was concentrated in vacuo, resuspended in MeOH (100 mL) and partitioned with _n_-hexane (3 x 100 mL). The MeOH fraction was combined with the EUOAc fraction yielding a crude extract (974.9 mg). This extract was subjected to silica gel 60 CC eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 4:1 (300 mL), 1:1 (680 mL), EtOHac (100 mL) and MeOH (200 mL), yielding 9 fractions. Sub-fraction 7 spontaneously crystallized (11.4 mg) and the precipitate was washed with MeOH yielding compound **4** (6.7 mg).

_P. crustosum_ was cultivated in 35 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL) containing 200 mL of Czapek medium (Alviano et al., 1992). The flasks were incubated for 72 h at 25 degC on a rotary shaker operating at 200 rpm. The mycelia were vacuum filtered from the culture broth (discarded) and transferred into 35 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL) containing 200 mL of Czapek medium without glucose and supplemented with 20 mg of 1-tetraolene per flask. After fermentation, the culture broth of _P. crustosum_ was separated from the respective mycelia by vacuum filtration and extracted with EtOAc (3 x 100 mL each flask). The organic solvent was evaporated under vacuum yielding the EtOAc extract. The EtOAc extract from _P. crustosum_ (700 mg) was subjected to silica gel 60 CC eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 7:3 (350 mL), 3:7 (350 mL) and EtOAc (350 mL), yielding 6 fractions. Sub-fraction 4 (81.4 mg), obtained from _n_-hexane/EtOAc 3:7, was subjected to semi preparative normal phase HPLC (LiChroCART 250-10-LiChrospher Si 60, 10 mm), mobile phase _n_-hexane/EtOAc 7:3 at a flow rate 3 mL min-1, refractive index detector (RID) to yield compounds **5** (7.4 mg; _t_R = 22.6 min), **6** (33.5 mg; _t_R = 79.4 min) and **7** (1.5 mg; _t_R = 62.3 min). Cultivation of _P. crustosum_ under the same conditions as previously described, but adding of chlorogenic acid (20 mg) per flask, instead of 1-tetraolene at the fermentation step, also led to production of a crude extract containing compounds **5** and **6**. Compounds **5** and **6** were identified in the crude extract using 1H NMR spectroscopic and analytical HPLC analyses using the previously isolated compounds **5** and **6** as standards. _P. crustosum_ was cultivated at the same conditions, but with no addition of either 1-tetraolene or chlorogenic acid for control purposes, and HPLC profile analyses of both cultures did not show the production of **5**-**7**.

_Computed 2_ (_colletopiperazine_). Amorphous white powder; \(\left[ \alpha \right]_{25}^{25}\) -29.3 (c 0.001, MeOH); UV (MeOH) \(\left. \alpha \right._{\text{max}}\)/nm (log _e_): 217 (3.12); 243 (3.12); 269 (3.13); IR (KBr) \(\left. v_{\text{max}}\text{/cm}^{-1}\text{:}\text{:}\text{3272}\text{(OH)}\text{,}\text{2920}\text{,}\text{1668(C=0),}\text{1638(C=0),}\text{1599,}\text{1420,}\text{1390,}\text{1262}\text{775}\text{;}\text{HRES}\text{IMS}\left[ \text{M}\text{N}\text{+}\text{N}\text{]}^{\text{*}}\text{ Found}\text{:}\text{

## Page 6

basis set but only minor differences were found. Thus, only calculations with 6-31 + G* basis set are shown. Solvent effect (methanol) was included in the predictions using the Conductor Polarizable Continuum Model (CPCM). Rotational strengths (R), the parameter representing the intensity and sign of a Cotton effect, were calculated by the Rosenfeld expression. In our case, the dipole velocity and dipole length forms for R were identical. For comparison between the theoretical and experimental ECD, the line spectrum is convoluted with Gaussian line shapes and scaled by the maximum value of the experimental data. On average, the Gaussian line shapes are taking into account the uncertainty principle, vibronic terms and interactions with the medium. All TDDFT calculations including CPCM were performed with Gaussian03 suite of programs (Frisch et al., 2003).

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the "Fundacao de Amparo Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo" (FAPESP), to the "Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico" (CNPq), to the "Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal Coordenacao de Pessoal de Nivel Superior" (CAPES) and to "Ministerio de Educacao e Ciencias da Espana" (DGU) for their financial support. W.S.B. thanks CAPES and CNPq, and D.O.G acknowledges FAPESP for scholarships awarded for PhD studies. N.J.V. and L.F.O. also acknowledge FAPESP for their scientific initiation scholarships. We thank Prof. Dr. Antonio G. Ferreira, from the Laboratorio de Ressonaica Magnetica Nuclear, DQ-UFSCar, for the NOE experiments on compounds **6** and **7**, and Prof. Antonio J. da Costa-Filho, IFSC-USP, for the obtainment of CD spectra. We also thank to Prof. Frederick M. Ausubel, from Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA, for the _in vivo_ antibacterial assays.

## Appendix A Supplementary material

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.phytochem.2010.05.012.

## References

* Alviano et al. (1992) Alviano, C.S., Farbiarz, S.R., Travassos, L.R., Angluster, J., Souza, W., 1992. Effect of environmental factors on _Fonaceae pedrocl morphogenesis_ with emphasis on scleroticis included by propranolol. Mycopathologia 119, 17-23.
* Ameur et al. (2004) Ameur, R.M.B., Mellouli, L., Chabchoub, F., Fosto, S., Bejar, S., 2004. Purification and structure elucidation of two biologically active molecules from a new isolated Streptomyces by US 24 strain. Chem. Nat. Comp. 40, 510-513.
* Arnold et al. (2000) Arnold, A.E., Maynard, E., Clibert, C.S., Coley, D.W., Taar, T.A., 2000. Are tropical fungal endophytes hyperisser? ICDt. 1, 3:267-274.
* Bashyil et al. (2005) Bashyil, B.P., Wijeratne, E.M.K., Faeth, S.H., Gunatilaka, A.A., 2005. Globosomes A-C, cytotoxic oscillator elicited esters from the sozant desert endophytic fungus under Germany bisonn. J. Nat. Food. 68, 724-728.
* Bell et al. (1958) Bell, M.R., Johnson, J.R., Wildi, B.S., Woodward, R.B., 1958. The structure of gliotoxin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 80, 1001.
* Borges et al. (2006) Borges, W.S., Pupo, M.T., 2006. Novel anthraquinone derivatives produced by _Phoma sorghum_, an endophyte found in association with the medicinal plant _Tithio chrysifolia_ (Netracace). J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 17, 929-934.
* Borges et al. (2007) Borges, K.B., Borges, W.S., Pupo, M.T., Bonato, P.S., 2007. Endophytic fungi as models for the stereoselective biotransformation of thiiodriazine. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 76, 669-674.
* Borges et al. (2008) Borges, K.B., Borges, W.S., Pupo, M.T., Bonato, P.S., 2008. Stereoselective analysis of thiiodriazine-2-sulfoxide and thiiodriazine-5-sulfoxide: an investigation ofrachloridine: biotransformation by some endophytic fungi. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 46, 945-952.
* Borges et al. (2009) Borges, W.S., Borges, W.S., Bonato, P.S., Said, S., Pupo, M.T., 2009. Endophytic fungi: natural products, enzymes and biotransformation reactions. Curr. Opg. Chem. 13, 1137-1163.
* Byams et al. (1996) Byams, J., Charlton, P., Chicarelli-Robinson, I., Collins, M., Faint, R., Latham, C., Shaw, I., 1996. Inhibition of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 activity by two diketoproliferativezins. XR330 and XR334 produced by _Streptomyces_ sp. J. Arbitol. 49, 1014-1021.
* Chu et al. (1993) Chu, M., Mierzawa, R., Traumnees, I., Gentile, F., Patel, M., Gullo, V., Chan, T.-M., Paar, M.S. 1993. Two novel diketopimerizes isolated from the fungus _Tolyopodium_ by e-betrahedron Lett. 34, 7537-7540.
* Cardy & Walsh (2004) Cardy, J., Walsh, C., 2004. Lessons from natural molecules. Nature 432, 829-837.
* Cui et al. (1996) Cui, C.B., Kakeya, H., Okada, G., Onose, R., Osada, H., 1996. Novel mammalian cell cycle inhibitors, trypostoxins. A b and other diketopiperazines produced by _Asprestrislims_. J. Antibiol. 49, 527-533.
* Eyberger et al. (2006) Eyberger, A.,L., Dondapati, R., Porter, J.R., 2006. Endophyte fungal isolates from _Polyphimurium_ predator produce polydynolitoxin. J. Nat. Prot. 69, 112-1124.
* Fereneu et al. (1980) Fereneu, J.-P., Quesneau-Thierry, A., Barbier, M., Kollmann, A., Bousquet, J.-F., 1980. Structure and synthesis of phamamide, a new piperazine-2, 5-dione related to the sideroclins, solanited from the culture-medium of Difom-ignon led. Clem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 113-115.
* Nelson et al. (2006) Nelson, M.J., Trucks, C.W., Schlegel, H.B., Cuseriu, C.E., Robb, M.A., Cheeseman, J.A., Montgomery, J.A., Vreenev, T., Kufla, K.N., Burant, J.C., Millam, J.M., Jvengar, S.S., Tomasi, J., Barone, V., Mennucci, S., Cosil, M., Selamian, G., Rega, N., Peterson, G.A., Nakatsuki, H., Hada, M., Bhara, M., Toyota, K., Fukuda, R., Hasegawa, I., Ishida, M., Nakajima, T., Honda, Y., Kitao, O., Nakai, H., Kne, M., Li, Y., Know, I.E., Hrachtai, H.P., Cross, J.A., Adam, C., Jaramillo, J., Compters, R., Stratmann, R.F., Yazyev, O., Austin, J.A., Cammal, R., Pompili, C., O'thereski, J.W., Agla, Y., Mrokuma, K., Voth, G.A., Salvador, P., Dannenberg, J.J., Zakrzewski, V.G., Dapprich, S., Daniels, A.D., Strain, M.C., Karkas, O., Makk, K., Abdo, A.D., Rabbavachat, K., Foresman, D., Ortiz, V., Coul, O., Baboul, C., Clifford, S., Goloslovski, J., Stefanov, B.B., Liu, C., Haslenko, A., Piskorz, P., Komarimi, L., Martin, H., Fox, D.J., Keith, T.A., Hall-A., Meng, C.Y., Annayakkara, A., Challacombe, M., Gill, M.W., Johnson, B., Chen, W., Wong, M.W., Gonzalez, C., Poole, A., 2003. Gaussian O, Revision B.O.4, Gaussian Inc., Pittsburgh, PA.
* Galo et al. (2007) Galo, M.E., Guimaraes, D.O., Momose, I.S., Pupo, M.T., 2007. Natural products from endophytic fungi. In: Saikai, R., Bezbaru, R.L., Bora, T.C. (Eds.), Microbial Biotechnology. New India Publishing Agency. New Delhi, pp. 139-168.
* Gallo et al. (2008) Gallo, M.R., Chagas, F.O., Almeida, M.O., Macedo, C., Cavalcanti, R.C., Barros, F.W.A., Moraes, M.O., Costa-Lotuffo, L.V., Pessoa, C.O., Bastos, J.K., Pupo, M.T., 2008. Endophytic fungi found in association with _Smulfonamide synodiffins_ (Netracace) as exosuperful products of cytotoxic bioactive natural products. J. Basic Microbiol. 49, 142-151.
* Gardiner et al. (2005) Gardiner, D.M., Warning, P., Howlett, B., 2005. The epipolytothiadioxopiperazine (ETP) class of fungal toxins. distribution, mode of action, functions and biosynthesis. J. Microbiol. 151, 1021-1032.
* Guimaraes et al. (2008) Guimaraes, D.O., Borges, W.S., Kawano, C.Y., Ribeiro, P.H., Goldman, G.H., Nomizo, A., Thiemann, O.H., Oliva, G., Lopes, N.P., Pupo, M.T., 2008. Biological activities from extracts of endophytic fungi isolated from _Toyiarian enerra and Trithonia diversifolia_. FGRS (Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 52, 344-144.
* Gunatilaka (2006) Gunatilaka, A.A.A., 2006. Natural products from plant-associated microorganisms: distribution, structural diversity, bioactivity, and implications of their occurrence. J. Nat. Food. 65, 509-526.
* Guo et al. (2008) Guo, B., Wang, Y., Sun, X., Tang, K., 2008. Bioactive natural products from endophytes: a review. Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 44, 136-142.
* Hehre (2003) Hehre, W.J., 2003. A Guide to Molecular Mechanics and Quantum Chemical Calculations. Waterfunction, Inc., Irvine, CA.
* Jackson et al. (1993) Jackson, M., Karwoszik, J.P., Humphrey, P.E., Kohl, W.L., Barlow, G.J., Tanaka, S.K., 1993. Calibrins, novel antifungal agents produced by Penicillium restriction. J. Antibiol. 46, 34-38.
* Jacquin et al. (2009) Jacquin, D., Warthelet, V., Perpete, E.A., Adamo, C., 2009. Extensive TD-DFT benchmark: singlet-excited states of organic molecules. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 2420-2435.
* Kawahara et al. (1987) Kawahara, N., Nozawa, K., Nakajima, S., Kawai, K., 1987. Studies on fungal products. 13. Isolation and structures of dithiolisation and silvathine, novel dioxygenase derivatives from Aspergillus sulfoxins. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 9, 2009-2101.
* Kirby et al. (1980) Kirby, C.W., Robins, D.J., Sefton, M.A., Takekar, R.R., 1980. Biosynthesis of bisbistothins(methithio gliotoxin, a new metabolite of _diicolatum deliquescens_. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 119-121.
* Kozlovsky et al. (2000) Kozlovsky, A., Civonov, N.G., Ghatin, V.M., 2000. Diketopiperazine alkaloids from the fungus _Penicillium nigerium_ swelling. Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 36, 271-275.
* Kusari et al. (2008) Kusari, S., Jamshoft, M., Zahlke, S., Spiteller, M., 2008. An endophytic fungus from _Hypertcium perforatum_ that produces hyperic. J. Nat. Prot. 71, 159-162.
* Laws (1958) Laws, L., Mantle, P.G., 1958. Nigrritritome, a diketopiperazine metabolite of _Penicillium migrisms_. Phytochemistry 24, 1395-1397.
* Leach (2001) Leach, A.R., 2001. Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, second ed. Pearson Education EMA, England.
* Li et al. (2006) Li, X., Kim, X.W., Kang, J.S., Choi, H.D., Son, B.W., 2006. A new antibacterial diketopiperazine alkaloid related to gliotoxin from a marine isolate of the fungus _Penicallallestredien_. J. Antibiol. 59, 248-250.
* Momeso et al. (1997) Momeso, I.



## Page 7

* Pupo et al. (2006) Pupo, M.T., Guimarales, D.O., Furtado, N.A.J.C., Borges, W.S., 2006. Microbial natural products: a promising source of bioactive compounds. In: Taft, C.A. (Ed.). Modern Biotechnology in Medicinal Chemistry and Industry. Research Signpost, Kerala, pp. 51-78.
* Puri et al. (2005) Puri, S.C., Verma, V., Anna, T., Qazi, G.N., Spiteller, M., 2005. An endophytic fungus from _Nothabroydes foedia_ that produces camptothein. J. Nat. Prod. 68, 1717-1719.
* Puri et al. (2006) Puri, S.C., Nazir, A., Chawla, R., Arora, R., Riyaz-ul-Hasan, S., Amma, T., Ahmed, B., Verma, V., Singh, S., Sagar, R., Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Sharma, R.K., Qazi, G.N., 2006. The endophytic fungus _Tiruses in axons_ as a novel alternative source of podophyllotoxin and related aryl tetralin Igransa. J. Biotechnol. 122, 494-510.
* Schultz et al. (2008) Schultz, A.W., O.D., C.-A., Camey, J.R., Williamson, R.T., Urdavary, D.W., Jensen, P.R., Gould, S.J., Fenical, W., Moore, B.S., 2008. Biosynthesis and structures of cyclomolarins and cyclomolarazines, prenylated cyclic peptides of marine actinobacterial origin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 4507-4516.
* Schulz and Boyle (2005) Schulz, B., Boyle, C., 2005. The endophytic continuum. J.ocl. Res. 109, 661-686.
* Spartan (06 full v.1.1.2, 2006. Tutorial and User's Guide. Wavefunction Inc., Irvine, CA.
* Stierle et al. (1993) Stierle, A., Strobel, G., Stierle, D., 1993. Taxol and taxane production by Taxomyces _andrene_, and endophytic fungus of Pacific Yew. Science 260, 214-216.
* Stierle et al. (1995) Stierle, A., Strobel, G., Stierle, D., Grothaus, P., Biganni, C., 1995. The search for a taxol-producing microorganism among the endophytic fungi of the Pacific Yew. _Toxins_ brevitydia. J. Nat. Prod. 58, 1315-1324.
* Strobel et al. (1996) Strobel, G.A., Hess, W.M., Ford, E., Sidhu, R.S., Yang, X., 1996. Taxol from fungal endophytes and the tissue of biodiversity. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biot. 17, 417-423.
* Strobel et al. (2004) Strobel, G.A., Daisy, B., Castillo, U., Harper, J., 2004. Natural products from endophytic microorganisms. J. Nat. Prod. 67, 257-268.
* Umezawa et al. (1999) Umezawa, Y., Tsuboyama, S., Takahashi, H., Uzawa, J. Nishio, M., 1999. GI/rl interaction in the conformation of peptides. A database study. Bioorg. Med. Chem. J. 2021-2026.
* Usami et al. (2002) Usami, Y., Aoki, S., Hara, T., Numata, A., 2002. New dioxopiperazine metabolites from a _Fuxarum_ species separated from a marine alga. J. Antibid. 55, 655-659.
* Verza et al. (2009) Verza, M., Arakawa, N.S., Lopes, N.P., Kato, M.S., Pupo, M.T., Said, S., Carvalho, I., 2009. Biotransformation of a tetrahydrofuran ligand by the endophytic fungus _Phomopsis_ sp., J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 20, 195-200.
* Wang et al. (1998) Wang, G.Y.S., Apetil, L.M., Aveler, A., Borgeson, B.M., Crews, F., 1998. New hirsurea based sesquiterpenes from sat water cultures of a marine sponge-derived fungus and the terrestrial fungus _Criolus consors_. Tetrahedron 54, 7335-7342.
* Wang et al. (2008) Wang, F., Fang, Y., Zhu, T., Zhang, M., Lin, A., Gu, Q., Zhu, W., 2008. Seven new premylated indole diketopiperazine alkaloids from hiodbutrian-derived fungus _Apergillus fumigatus_, Tetrahedron 64, 7986-7991.
* Wendling (1941) Wendling, R., 1941. Experimental consideration of the mold toxins of _Glocidatum_ and _Trichomeron_. Phytopathology 31, 991-1003.
* Wendling and Emerson (1936) Wendling, R., Emerson, O.H., 1936. The isolation of a toxic substance from the culture filtrate of _Trichodermon_. Phytopathology 26, 1068-1070.
* Yang et al. (2004) Yang, X., Zhang, L., Guo, B., Guo, S., 2004. Preliminary study of vincristine-producing endophytic fungus isolated from _Catharanthus roseus_. Zhongcaoyao 35, 79-81.



