# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89654-5.pdf

## Page 1



# An OLEANANDE ACID FROM _ALIBERTA EDULIS_

Claudia B. Brochini, Dirceu Martins, Nidia F. Roque

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.

Vanderlan Da S. Bolzani

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05507 Sao Paulo, S.P., Brazil; 1Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, A.Araquara, S.P., Brazil

###### Abstract

A new oleanane, 3\(b\),19x,23,24-tetrahydroxy-12-oleanen-28-oic acid, was isolated together with nine known triterpene compounds from the leaves of _Alibertia edulis_, Rubiaceae.

## INTRODUCTION

The species of the Rubiaceae family contain many iridoids, alkaloids and triterpenes, notably ursane and oleanane derivatives, and their occurrence in species growing in the Brazilian 'Cerrado' has been reported [1-3]. _Alibertia edulis_ A. Rich, commonly known as'marmelao' is a small tree widely spread in the Goias, Mato Grosso and Sao Paulo states, in which its ripe fruits are greatly appreciated by their delicious sweet taste. Recently, other _Alibertia_ species have been investigated yielding iridoids [4] and triterpenes [3]. This paper describes the occurrence of a new oleanane derivative from _A. edulis_ leaves in addition to nine known triterpenes.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The crude ethanol extract from _Alibertia edulis_ leaves was partitioned between hexane, chloroform and _n_-butanol. The hexane extract was fractionated by usual chromatographic procedures to afford _a_-amyrin (1) and _b_-amyrin (2). The chloroform fraction chromatographed on a silica gel column afforded complex mixtures of alcoholic and acidic triterpenes. The acidic fractions were treated with diazomethane and a mixture of uvaol (3) [5] and erythroid (4) [6], and a mixture of uscole (5) and oleanolic (6) acid methyl esters was isolated by preparative TLC. The remaining fractions were combined and submitted to preparative TLC furnishing a mixture of 23-hydroxyursoxic acid methyl ester (7) and 23-hydroxyoleanoic acid methyl ester (methyl-hederaginin, 8) and another mixture of 9 and 10. This mixture after acetylation and preparative reversed-phase HPLC gave 9a and 10a, a derivative of a new triterpene.

Compound 9a was characterized by its physical and spectral data. This compound was first isolated from _Clethra barbinereis_, a Clethracae species [7].

The 1H NMR spectrum of 10a (Table I) when compared with the data of 9a showed very similar spectral features: two multiplet signals at \(d\)5.00 and 5.42 due to H-3 and H-12, respectively; the AB doublets attributed to CH2-23 and CH2-24 were observed at \(d\)4.06 (1H), 4.17 (2H) and 4.26 (1H). The lowfield region of the spectrum of 10a showed, besides the above signals, two more at \(d\)3.34 and 3.15. These signals corresponded to two coupled protons as shown by a 1H-1H COSY spectrum. The lower field proton was further coupled with another

## Page 2

proton with a signal at \(\delta\)1.65. The H-18 of oleanolic acid occurs approximately at \(\delta\)3.0, so the signal at \(\delta\)3.15 was attributed to this proton and the one at \(\delta\)3.34 to H-19. The hydroxyl at C-19 can be assigned only to an axial position to justify both the small coupling observed between H-18 and H-19, and the long range coupling of H-19 with H-21 (equatorial). The hindered C-19 hydroxyl is in agreement with the acetylation of only three hydroxyl groups in **10a**.

The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **10a** also showed a close structural resemblance to **9a** when the carbons of the A and B rings were analysed. The assignments of the remaining chemical shifts were achieved by comparison with the data of oleanolic acid methyl ester [8]. In fact, a \(\beta\)-deshielding effect was observed for C-18, C-20 and for C-12 and C-16, due to C-19 hydroxyl \(\delta\)-effects. A strong \(\gamma\)-shielding effect was observed for C-29, C-21 and C-13 (Table 1). The molecular formula, C3,H56O9 for **10a** was supported by the mass spectral data.

The presence of oleanolic and unsolic triterpenes in the extracts of leaves of _A. edulis_ is in agreement with the placement of _Alibertia_ in the Gardenieae tribe of the Rubiaceae family [9].

## Experimental

_Plant material. Alibertia edulis_ A. Rich was collected in Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil in August 1990. A voucher specimen (number 10) has been deposited in the herbarium of the Departamento de Quimica da Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul.

_Extraction and isolation of the constituents._ Dried and powdered leaves (1.5 kg) of _A. edulis_ were successively extracted with hexane, EtOH and EtOH \(\cdot\) H2O (6:4). The crude hexane extract (13.5 g) was fractionated by silica gel column chromatography yielding _a_- and _b_-amyrin (120 mg), _cis_- and _trans_-phystol (80 mg) and fatty material. The crude ethanolic extract (110 g) was solubilized in EtOH \(\cdot\) H2O (9:1) and partitioned into hexane (12 g), CITCl3 (17.0 g) and _n_-BuOII (36.5 g). The CITCl3-soluble part was submitted to CC on silica gel eluted with CH2Cl3 with increasing amounts of MeOH. After TLC, some frs were combined and methylated with CH2N2. Further CC on silica gel and prep. TLC eluted with CH2Cl2. AcOEt (85:15) and CHCl3-MeOH (98:2) gave 4 mixts of triterpenes: 3 and 4 (72 mg), 5 and 6 (100 mg), 7 and 8 (32 mg), 9 and 10 (61 mg). The mixt. 9 and 10 was acetylated with pyridine-Ac2O at room temp. giving **9a** and **10a**. The mixt. was submitted to reversed-phase HPLC, using McOH H2O (8:2) as eluent, affording **9a** (22 mg) and **10a** (6 mg).

_Computational_**10a**. Crystals, mp 181 183 (McOH), C3,H56O9; IR \(v_{\max}\) cm \({}^{1 \cdot 3510}\), 2948, 1747, 1703, 1645, 1453, 1370, 1236, 1033. EI-MS (70 eV) _m_/_z_ (rel. int.) 644 (MJ \({}^{1}\) (1.3), 626 [M \(-\) H2O]\({}^{\cdot 1}\) (1.1), 584 [M \(-\) AcOH]\({}^{\cdot 1}\) (3.6), 507 [584 \(-\) AcO]\({}^{\cdot 1}\) (10), 278 [RDA] (89.5), 260 [278 \(-\) H2O]\({}^{\cdot 1}\) (55.6), 201 [260 \(-\) AcO]\({}^{\cdot 1}\) (100), Analyt. Caled for C3,H56O9: C, 68:91; H, 9:75, [_x_]\({D}^{\times 5}\) = \(-\) 40.0 (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.164). 1H and 13C NMR: Table 1.

###### Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo for financial support, to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvi

## Page 3

mento Cientifico e Tecnologico for fellowships and to Dr Walmir da S. Garcez for the plant material provision.

## References

* [1] Sousa, M. P., Matos, M. E. O., Machado, M. I. L., Braz Filho, R., Vencato, I. and Mascarenhas, P. (1984) _Phytochemistry_**23**, 2589.
* [2] Matos, M. E. O., Sousa, M. P., Machado, M. I. L. and Braz Filho, R. (1986) _Phytochemistry_**25**, 1419.
* [3] Bolzani, V. da S., Trevisan, L. M. V. and Young, M. C. M. (1991) _Phytochemistry_**30**, 2089.
* [4] Young, M. C. M., Braga, M. R., Dietrich, S. M. C., Gottlieb, H. E., Trevisan, L. M. V. and Bolzani, V. da S. (1992) _Phytochemistry_**31**, 3433.
* [5] Siddiqui, S., Haffez, F., Begum, S. and Siddiqui, B. S. (1986) _J. Nat. Prod._**49**, 1086.
* [6] Nes, W. D., Benson, M. and Heftmann, E. (1981) _Phytochemistry_**20**, 2299.
* [7] Takahashi, K. and Takani, M. (1978) _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**26**, 2689.
* [8] Carpenter, R. C., Sotheeswaran, S., Sultanbawa, M. U. S. and Ternai, B. (1980) _Org. Magn. Res._**14**, 462.
* [9] Roblrecht, E. (1988) _Tropical Woody Rubiaceae_, Opera Bot. Belg. 1, Meise, National Plantintuen van Belgie.



