# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89350-4.pdf

## Page 1



# DIHYDROISOCOUMARINS AND PHCHARIDE FROM WOOD SAMPLES INFESTED BY FUNGI+
Footnote †: Sponsored by Minnsterio do Planejamento (FINEP, CNPq) and by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo.

Marden A. de Alvarenga, Raimundo Braz Fo., Otto R. Gottlieb, Joao P. de P. Dias, Aderbal F. Magalikes, Eva G. Magalikes, Gouvan C. de Maqalikes, Mauro T. Magalikes, Jose G. S. Maia, Raquel Marques, Anita J. Marsaiotis, Antonio A. L. Misoouta, Anselmo A. De Moorest, Alalde B. de Oliveira, George G. De Oliveira, Genti P. Oberbera, Sebastiao A. Pereira, Sonibles L. V. Philot, Antonio E. G. Sant'aat, Celira C. Santoos

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP, + Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, Itagui, RJ; + Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG; $ Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, SP, + Centro de Tecnologia Agricola e Alimentar, Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria, Rio de Janeiro, RJ; + Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, Manaus, AM; Brasil

###### Abstract

Wood samples, infested by fungi during storage, were shown to contain, besides the known 5-methyl-mellein, additional (3_R_)-8-hydroxy-3-methyl-3,4-dihydroisocoumarins substituted by 7-methyl, 5-formyl, 5-carboxyl, 5-methoxy, 5-methoxy, 6-methoxy-5-methyl and 6,7-dimethoxy-5-methyl groups, as well as 6-formyl-7-hydroxy-5-methoxy-4-methylphthalide. Several 2-methylchromanones were synthesized in order to show that this class of compounds can be distinguished from 3-methyl-3,4-dihydroisocoumarins by MS.

## Introduction

The compounds **1a-1f**, **2a**, **2b** and **3a** were isolated from 12 species belonging to 7 families of trees (Table 1). Several 3-methyl-3,4-dihydroisocoumarins and phthalides [1], as well as 5-hydroxy-2-methylchromanone [2] are typical metabolites of fungi, and, indeed, microscopic examination of wood samples 3, 11 and 12, performed by Dr. Ozorio J. M. Fonseca, revealed the presence of _Aspergillus_, _Penicillium_, _Fusarium_ and _Trichoderma_ species. Since in freshly cut samples of the same species neither polyketides, nor fungi could be detected, fungal invasion must have taken place during the drying and storage period between collection and extraction. The sites of storage, thousands of kilometers apart for samples belonging to different species (Table 1), did not affect the nature of the compounds, which all belong to the same biogenetic group. The introduction of an oxygen function at C-5 presumably through gradual oxidative transformation of Me (cf. **1a** via CHO **1c**, **CO2H** **1d**) to OH **(**1e** and **OMe** **(**1f**), though unexceptional, is interesting.

Small amounts of shikimate-acetate derived compounds were found to co-occur in the extracts of _Rheedia gardneriana_[3]: 1,5-dihydroxyxanthone, 1,7-dihydroxyxanthone, 1,6-dihydroxy-5-methoxyxanthone: _Virola cauclifolia_[4]: Tronomenotin, biochanifA, virolanol; and _Virola enosa_[5]: 3-hydroxy-5-methoxy-stilbene and virolanol. While the remaining 9 extracts were found to be void of detectable quantities of shikimate-acetate derived phenolics, fatty acids (**4**) and esters (**5**) as well as sitosterol and stigmasterol (**6**) and sitostenone (**7**) were isolated in considerable quantities from all 12 samples (Table 1). Since several hundred wood samples, examined by us over the same period, were kept in the same storage facilities, lack of antibiotic phenolics, accumulation of fatty or steroidal material or both seem to justify fungal invasion.

## RESULTS

Expansions of the molecular formulae, based on PMR spectra, reveal the compounds to be trisubstituted (**1a-1f**), tetrasubstituted (**2a**) and pentasubstituted (**2b**, **3a**) benzoyl derivatives. The spectra show additionally that the aromatic protons in all trisubstituted derivatives are vicinal and that the hydroxyls in all derivatives are chelated (t _ca_ -1). This fact is confirmed by UV AlCl3-shifts. The OCH. Me. CH2 units of **1a-1f**, **2a**, **2b** and the OCH2 unit of **3a** could, _a priori_, be part of two pairs of fundamental skeletal, respectively **8** or **9** and **10** or **11**. While the phthalide skeleton (**10**) can be adopted for **3a** (_v_max 1742 cm-1) in preference to the coumaranone alternative (**11**) which should give rise to a carbonyl band at considerably lower frequency [6], discrimination of chelated dihydroisocoumarins (**8**) and chromanones (**9**) is difficult (for both _v_max 1660-1670 cm-1). It was necessary to measure the carbonyl frequency of the methyl ethers **1g** and **1h** (_v_max _ca_ 1725 cm-1) in order to obtain evidence that these compound are esters (**8**) and not ketones (**9**). It was considered that a more reliable distinction between structural types **8** and **9** may be possible by PMR. Clearly, splitting of the OCHCH2 proton bands will be highly sensitive to conformation of

## Page 2

the heterocyclic, and this must be different for both systems.

The synthesis of model chromatones was accomplished by Friedel-Crafts reactions of carotene anhydride [2] on three substrates: 2,4-dihydroxytoluene (**12a**), 2,4-di-hydroxybenzaldehyde (**12b**) and 2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde (**12c**). Several previously unreported compounds were thus obtained. In the 60 MHz PMR spectra of the 2-methylchromanones **13a**, **13b**, **13c**, **14** and **15** the protons at C-2 were uniformly represented by an apparent sextet (_J_ = 7 Hz) and the protons at C-3 were represented by a doublet (_J_ = 7 Hz). (Slight secondary splitting of peaks, observed in some cases, is not taken into consideration).

By this criterion, **1b** could be a 2-methylchromanone. Its methyl ether **1h**, however, shows the very different OCHCH2 PMR pattern, typical of the methyl either **1g** and of the natural compounds **1a**, **1c**-**1f**, **2a**, **2b**. Here the oxymethine is represented by a multiplet and the vicinal methylene by two double doublets. Thus, although two types of spectra are indeed obtained, conformational effects for derivatives of an identical skeleton (**1b** vs **1h**) may obscure the issue.

A further phenomenon which can be attributed to conformation concerns the considerable diamagnetic effect exerted on H-5 (_t_ 3.60) of **1b**. This, possibly hyperconjugative, effect can be cancelled by modification of the geometry of the heterocyclic through interruption of the chelate bridge. Thus, after methylation to **1h**, the H-5 signal appears at the normal frequency (_t_ 3.04) expected for aromatic protons _para_ or _ortho_ related to one oxygen function.

Less subject to conformational than to constitutional causes, MS should solve the problem at hand. Through retro-Diels-Alder cleavages, the isocumarins (**8**) are expected to loose acetaldehyde, whereas the chromanones are expected to loose propene. Indeed, while loss of 42 mass units leads to the major and often the base peak of the MS of all synthetic chromatones (**13-15**) the molecular ion, which gives the base peak in the spectra of most natural compounds of series **1** and **2**, 10oses 44 mass units. The structural type **8**, to which consequently all these natural compounds belong, is characterized by loss of 18 mass units (Table 3) which is ar additional distinctive MS feature in comparison with type **9**.

The 3-methyl-3,4-dihydroisocumarin structure for **1a** was confirmed by NaBH4 reduction of its methyl ether **1g** to **16a**, which was characterized by PMR and MS of its diacetate **16b**. Mps, UV, IR, PMR [7] and MS, as well as the negative rotations [8] of **1a** and **1g**, identified **1a** with the known (_3R_)-8-hydroxy-3,5-dimethyl-3,4-dihydroisocumarin (5-methylmeltein). The evidence concerning the vicinality of its two aromatic protons thus leads to the 7-methylmeltein structure for **1b**.

Placement of the substituents at C-5, rather than at C-7, in the formulae for **1c**-**1f** and **2a** followed three sets of observations: (1) exchange of the Me of **1a** by the CHO of **1c** causes a 1 ppm paramagnetic shift of the **1b**-**4** PMR signal, and air oxidation of **1c** gives **1d**; (2) is not a catechol and methylation of **1e** gives **1f**; (3) the PMR of **2a** shows a -0.3 ppm pyridine induced solvent shift [9] for the ArH signal, revealing OH/H vicinality, and a 3.0:2.5 height ratio for the OMe/Me peaks, revealing Me/CH2 interaction. Placement of the Me rather than other substituents at C-5 in the formulae of **2b** and **3a** was based on the PMR spectrum of **2b** in which the 3.0:2.3 height ratio for the OMe/Me peaks was shifted to 3.0:3.3 by double irradiation at the CH2 frequency and the PMR spectrum of **3a** in which the 1.1:3.0:2.0 height ratio for the CH2/OMe/Me peaks was shifted to 2.0:3.0 for CH2/OMe by double irradiaton at the Me frequency.



## Page 3



## Page 4



## Discussion

The recent literature reports the occurrences of three further dihydroisocoumarins **2c** (6-methoxyemilein), **2d** and **2e** in _Kigelia pimata_ DC (Bignoniaceae) [8] and of the phthalide **3b** (djalonensin) in _Antholecista djalonensis_ A. Chev. (Loganiaceae) [10]. The stem bark of the latter species is also reported to contain lichenanthone. We have isolated lichenanthone accompanied by physician twice from higher plants. In the first case [11] the presence of both compounds was subsequently proved to be due to contamination of the plant material (_Licaria pucubramajor_ (Mart.) Kosterm., Lauraceae) by the lichen _Graphinia confluens_ Fee (GraphPadi dianonesis by Dr. Mason E. Hale Jr. In the second case [3] we were not able, _a posteriori_, to secure a fresh sample of the extracted plant material (_Caraipa costata_ Spruce _ex_ Benth., Gutiferae). This was also true for the wood samples 1, 2, 4-10 (Table 1) described in the present paper. The point to be emphasized, nevertheless, is that all plant material must be thoroughly examined for contaminating organisms prior to extraction, if it is desired to avoid uncertainty concerning the origin of the isolated compounds.

## Experimental

_Isolation of the compounds._ The C3H4 extracts of trunk wood samples of the indicated species (Table 1) were submitted to Si gel column chromatography The fractions were purified by TLC on Si gel.

\(\left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left\{ \left.} \left\

## Page 5

(3R)-5,8-_Dihydroxy-3-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyisocomuarin_ (16). Mp 198-200F (C6H3) [Found: C, 61.70; H, 51.0 C6,H3O4 requires: C, 61.85; H, 51.9%]. UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}^{\rm max}\) nm: 222, 250, 350 (log \(r\) 4.28, 3.78, 3.65); \(\lambda_{\rm max}^{\rm max}\) nm: 222, 252, 352 (log \(r\) 4.29, 3.84, 3.60); no H3O4 + NaOa shift. IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm max}\) nm: 3400, 1645, 1590, 1480, 1050, 830. Acetate, oil, IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm max}\) nm: 1760, 1720, 1610, 1480, 1260, 830. PMR (CDCl3, 60 MHz, 2). 275 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-6), 2.96 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-7), 5.2-5.56 (_m_, H-3). 71-7.5 (_m_, 2H-4), 7.67 (_s_, 2OACs), 8.56 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.0 Hz, M-3).

(3R)-3-_Hydroxy-3-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyisocomuarin_ (16). Mp 71-725 (C6-OACs+H4), \(\lambda_{\rm max}^{\rm max}\): \(-116^{\circ}\) (CHCl3) [Found: C, 63.55; H, 5.75 C11H2O4 requires: C, 63.45; H, 5.81%]. UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}^{\rm max}\) nm: 240 ini, 348 (log _s_

## Page 6

* [11] Gottlieb, O. R. and Laux, D. O. (1974) unpublished results; Laux, D O. (1974) M.Sc. thesis, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro.
* [12] Wirth, M. and Hale Jr., M. E. (1963) _Bull. United States Museum_**36**, 74
* [13] Gabriel S. J., Gottlieb, O. R., Luna, R. A. de and Mesquita, A A L. (1977) _Acta Amazonica_**7**, 289.
* [14] Myano, M. and Matsui, M. (1968) _Chem. Ber._**91**, 2044.



