# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2006.06.004.pdf

## Page 1

Cadinane sesquiterpenoids of _Phomopsis cassiae_, an endophytic fungus associated with _Cassia spectabilis (Leguminosae)_

Geraldo Humberto Silva

Harvard University, Department of Mathematics, 1

## Page 2



## 2 Results and discussion

Compound **1** was isolated as a white amorphous powder and its HRESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C15H22O3 ([M + Na]\({}^{+}\) at _m_/_z_ 273.1486). Their IR spectra revealed the presence of hydroxyl (3410 cm-1) and phenolic groups (1466, 1690 cm-1). The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** (Table 1) showed two aromatic signals, one at \(\delta\) 6.87 (1H, _s_) and the other at \(\delta\) 6.43 (1H, _s_), suggesting a tetra-substituted aromatic spin-system with a _para_ configuration. A series of complex signals at \(\delta\) 3.76 (1H, _m_) 3.35 (4H, _m_); \(\delta\) 3.04 (1H, _m_) and \(\delta\) 2.30 (1H, _m_) were indicative of two carbonic and two benzyl hydrogens, respectively. Further signals at \(\delta\) 0.51 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.0 Hz), \(\delta\) 1.03 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.0 Hz), \(\delta\) 2.05 (3H, _s_) revealed the presence of two aliphatic and one aromatic methyl groups in the molecule.

The 13C NMR chemical shifts for **1** along with the information obtained from a DEPT-135 experiment (Table 1), indicated a total of 15 signals, suggesting a sesquiterpene: six aromatic carbons at \(\delta\) 152.9 (_s_), 141.1 (_s_), 128.1 (_d_), 127.4 (_s_), 121.9 (_s_) and 114.7 (_d_), confirming the tetra-substitution for the aromatic moiety and the _para_ hydrogen system; two carbonic signals: a methine at \(\delta\) 67.8 and a methylene at \(\delta\) 64.4; three signals for methines at \(\delta\) 40.1, 38.4 and 36.5; one aliphatic methylene at \(\delta\) 24.6 and three signals for methyl groups: \(\delta\) 16.7, 15.9 and 10.8. The above data suggested a caldinane skeleton (Zhang et al., 1998; Nagashima et al., 1996). The total attribution for the observed signals was accomplished based on gHMQC correlations.

Additional gHMBC correlations of H-5 (\(\delta\) 6.87) with C-15 and C-7 (\(\delta\) 15.9 and \(\delta\) 36.5, respectively) and H-2 (\(\delta\) 6.43) with C-10 and C-4 (\(\delta\) 40.1 and \(\delta\) 121.9) allowed us to fully determine the aromatic moiety. The phenolic function linked at C-3, was supported by the correlations between H-15 (\(\delta\) 2.05) and C-3/C-5 (\(\delta\) 152.9 and \(\delta\) 128.1, respectively). The linkage of the _p_-methane moiety was determined through the correlations shown by C-1 (\(\delta\) 141.1) with H-14/H-9 (\(\delta\) 1.03/\(\delta\) 3.76) and C-6 (\(\delta\) 127.4) with, H-11/H-8\(\delta\) (\(\delta\) 2.70/\(\delta\) 1.52). Observed correlations between C-12 \(\rightarrow\) H-7 (\(\delta\) 64.4/3.04) and H-13 \(\rightarrow\) C-7 (\(\delta\) 0.51/36.5) allowed us to fully determine the calamenene skeleton (Nagashima et al., 1996).

_g_NOESY was useful to establish the relative configuration of the stereocenters for **1**. A correlations between Me-14 and Me-13 confirmed a _cis_-calamenene, according to reported literature (Croft et al., 1978; Anderson et al., 1972; Nabeta et al., 1993). Further observed correlations between H-9a and H-7 allowed us to confirm a (_cis_)-1,3-_pseudo_-diaxial relationship between these centers (Nabeta et al., 1993). We were not able to determine the configuration of the stereocenter at C-11, due to free rotation of this center with C-7-C-11 bond. Compound **1** was thus identified as the rel. (\(-\))-(7S,9S,10S)-3,9,12-trihydroxycalamenene.

Compound **2** was isolated as a white amorphous powder and its HRESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C15H22O3 ([M + H-H2O]\({}^{+}\)) at _m_/_z_ 233.1542. The obtained mass and similarities observed in the 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Table 1) indicated that **2** was a diastereoisomer of **1**. The main spectroscopic differences observed for this molecule were elucidated by using gNOESY. A correlation between Me-14 and Me-13 indicated that both groups remained in a _cis_ conformation. The appearance of a strong correlation of Me-14 and H-9 indicated that H-7 and H-9 were in a _trans_ conformation. Further comparisons with reported data (Croft et al., 1978; Anderson

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c} No. & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & **5** & \\ \hline \(\delta\)H & \(\delta\)C & \(\delta\)H & \(\delta\)C & \(\delta\)H & \(\delta\)C & \(\delta\)H & \(\delta\)C & \(\delta\)H & \(\delta\)C \\ \hline
1 & & 141.1 & & 139.0 & & 142.1 & & 134.7 & & 1

## Page 3

et al., 1972; Nabeta et al., 1993) allowed us to provisionally deduce identify **2** as rel. (+)-(75,9\(R\), 10S) the C-9 diastereo-isomer of **1.**

Compound **3** was isolated as a white amorphous powder. HRESI mass data allowed us to propose the molecular formula C15H22O2 ([M + H]+ at _m/z_ 235.1777). The absence of an oxygen atom in this molecule allowed us to provisionally deduce that a reduction occurred at position C-9. This reduction was confirmed by 13C NMR and DEPT-135 (Table 1) due to the presence of the signal at \(d\) 28.5 and the lack of the carboxymethine signal at \(d\) 67.8/69.1 present in **1** and **2**, respectively.

A correlation between Me-14 and Me-13 was observed in the _g_NOESY experiment thus concluding that **3** has a _cis_ calamenene relative stereochemistry. Observed correlations between H-9a and H-8a and H-7 defined their relative configuration also as _cis_. Further observed correlations between H-8b and H-9b, confirmed the relative configuration established for the _p_-menthane moiety. Compound **3** was hence identified as the rel. (+)-(75,10S) 3,12-dihydroxycalamenene.

Compound **4** was isolated as a white amorphous powder. A molecular formula C15H18O2 ([M + H]+ at _m/z_ 231.1405) was obtained after HRESI mass data analysis. The 1H NMR data (Table 1) showed a new aromatic hydrogen spin system at \(d\) 7.03 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz) and \(d\) 6.93 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz) with an _ortho_ configuration. The downfield shift observed for Me-14 (_t_  1.3) was indicative of an aromatization of the _p_-menthane moiety (Nabeta et al., 1994). 13C NMR and DEPT-135 (Table 1) data showed 10 aromatic carbons, three methyls: two benzylic _g_HMQC, _g_HMBC, and compared with reported data for cadalene analogues (Kubo et al., 1996; Nabeta et al., 1994; Stipanovic et al., 1975).

Further correlations observed in the _g_HMBC experiment, particularly the ones of H-8 (_d_ 6.93) with C-6/C-11 and H-9 (_d_ 7.03) with C-1/C-14 allowed us to fully determine the substitution pattern of the B ring for the naphthalene moiety. Compound **4** was identified as 3,12-dihydroxycadalene.

Compound **5** was isolated as a white amorphous powder and its HRESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C15H18O3 ([M + Na]+ at _m/z_ 269.1179). The appearance of a hydroxyl group in **5** was corroborated by the loss of the signal assigned to H-11 (_d_ 3.59) in **4** thus suggesting that oxidation had occurred at this position. 13C NMR and DEPT-135 spectroscopic data corroborated this assumption showing a signal at \(d\) 75.3 (_s_) which exhibited a correlation showed in the _g_HMBC experiment with H-8 (_d_ 7.21) indicating that the new oxidized position was at C-11. Other correlations were determined using _g_COSY, _g_HMQC, and compared with reported data for analogues (Kubo et al., 1996; Nabeta et al., 1994; Stipanovic et al., 1975). Compound **5** was identified as the new 3,11,12-trihydroxycadalene.

The antifungal activity of compounds **1**-**5** against the phytopathogenic fungi _C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ was evaluated by bioautography (Rahalison et al., 1991). The compound 3,12-dihydroxycadalene (**2**) exhibited potent activity against two fungi. The detection limit for the compound **5** was found to be 1.0 mg, comparable with the same amount of the standard nystatin.

Cytotoxicity of the compounds **1**-**5** against human cervical tumor cell line (HeLa) were tested using the MTT assay (Mosmann, 1983). Compound **4** exhibited

## Page 4

cytotoxicity against cell line (IC\({}_{50}\) 20 \(\mu\)mol L\({}^{-1}\)), and **3** and **5** a weak cytotoxicity (IC\({}_{50}\) 100 and 110 \(\mu\)mol L\({}^{-1}\), respectively). Cisplatin, a cytotoxic agent, was used as positive control with IC\({}_{50}\) 5 \(\mu\)mol L\({}^{-1}\).

## 3 Experimental

### General experimental procedure

Optical rotations were determined at room temperature using Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter. IR and UV spectra were recorded on Perkin-Elmer 1710 spectrometer and Perkin-Elmer UV-Vis 14P spectrometer. Melting points were measured on Microquimica MQAPF-301. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra; _g_HMBC and _g_HMQC, _g_COSY and TOCSY experiments were recorded on a Varian Unity 500 NMR, with TMS as internal standard. Electrospray mass and tandem mass spectra in both positive and negative ion modes were recorded on a Q-Tof (Micromass) mass spectrometer with a quadrupole (Qq) and high-resolution orthogonal time of flight (o-TOF) configuration. The sample introduction was performed using a syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus, Pump 11) set to 10 \(\mu\)ml/min pumped through an uncoated fused-silica capillary. All samples were dissolved in MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O (1:1). The HRESI-MS mass spectra were acquired using a ESI capillary voltage of 3 kV and a cone voltage of 10 V. ESI-MS/ MS spectra of mass selected ions were acquired using 10-20 eV collisions with argon. For preparative HPLC separations, Varian Star Dynamax model SD-1 pump, and a Phenyl-hexyl Luna Phenomenex column, (250 x 21.20 mm, 5 \(\mu\)m), were used in this study. Peaks were detected using Varian model 320-chromato-integrator connected to a UV detector.

TLC analysis was carried out on precoated silica gel 60 F254 plates (Merck). Spots were visualized spraying anisal-dehyde 5% in H\({}_{2}\)SO\({}_{4}\) followed by heating.

### Plant material

Authenticated _C. spectabilis_ plant material was collected in the Chemistry Institute UNESP - Aranaquara, SP, Brazil in June 17, 2001 by G.H. Silva. The botanical identification was made by Professor Maria Claudia Marx Young and a voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Brazil (Voucher No SILVA - 193).

### Isolation of the endophytic fungus

The fungal strain _P. cassiae_ was an endophyte isolated from leaves of _C. spectabilis_. The leaves were washed in running H\({}_{2}\)O and surface sterilized by successive soaking in NaOCl 1% for 5 min, 70% EtOH for 1 min and then rinsed twice with water. Aseptically the leaves were cut open and 1 x 1 cm\({}^{2}\) pieces of the leaves were placed on water agar in Petri plates. After incubation at 25 degC for seven days, individual hyphal tips of the emerging fungi were removed and placed on potato dextrose agar (PDA) (Maier et al., 1997). During the first three weeks of incubation, the cultures were periodically checked for purity and successively subcultured by hyphal tipping method until pure culture was obtained. Cultures were maintained on potato dextrose agar. The taxonomic identification as _P. cassiae_ was performed based on fungal morphology by Ludwig H. Pfenning and deposited Cole-cao Micologica de Lavras, Universidade Federal de Lavras fungal herbarium and assigned as CML 292.

### Growth of P. cassiae and production of the EtOAc extract

The fungus was cultivated on a small scale in 2 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL), each containing 0.8 g of potato extract, 4.0 g dextrose and 200 mL distilled water (PDB) which were autoclaved at 125 degC for 15 min. Approximately 10 small pieces (1 x 1 cm) of PDA medium, from the Petri dish containing biomass of the _P. cassiae_ isolated were inoculated into each flask and the flasks were sealed with cotton to permit aerobic growth. After incubation for 28 days at 25 degC on rotary shakers at 150 rpm, the mycelia biomass accumulated in the flasks was separated from the aqueous medium by filtration. The culture broth was extracted with EtOAc (3 x 2,0 L). The EtOAc extracts were combined, filtered, and evaporated _in vacuo_ to give a yellow oil (277.12 mg).

### Antifungal assay

The microorganisms _C. cladosporioides_ (Fresen) de Vries SPC 140 and _C. sphareospermum_ (Perzig) SPC 491 were used in the antifungal assay. They have been maintained at the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. Compounds **1**-**5** were applied on a precoated Si-gel TLC plates using a solution (10 \(\mu\)L) containing 100, 50, 25, 10, 5 and 1 \(\mu\)g. After eluting with CHCl\({}_{3}\):CH\({}_{3}\)OH (9:1) they were sprayed with the fungi (Rahalison et al., 1991). Nystatin was employed as positive control.

### Cytotoxicity bioassays

The human cervical cancer cell line (HeLa) assay was performed as previously described (Mosmann, 1983). Cisplatin was used as positive control (IC\({}_{50}\) 5.0 mmol L\({}^{-1}\)).

### Extraction and isolation

The extract was subjected to C18 column chromatography employing gradient elution from H\({}_{2}\)O to MeOH, to yield 7 fractions (H\({}_{2}\)O:MeOH, 85:15, 65:35, 60:40, 55:45, 45:55, 35:65, 00:100 each 150 mL). \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectroscopic analyses identified fractions 3, 4 and 5 as promising 

## Page 5

for further fractionation. The fraction 3 (23.0 mg) was purified by reversed-phase HPLC [Luna Phenyl-hexyl, 10 mm, Phenomenex 21.20 x 250 mm; using CH3CN:H2O (19:81) as the solvent, flow rate 10 mL/min; UV detection at 248 nm] to afford sesquiterpene **1** (3.5 mg). Fraction 4 (15.0 mg) was purified by reversed-phase HPLC [Luna Phenyl-hexyl, 10 mm, Phenomenex 21.20 x 250 mm; using CH3CN:H2O (22:78) as the solvent, flow rate 10 mL/min, UV detection at 248 nm] to afford sesquiterpenes **2** (2.5 mg) and **4** (4.0 mg). Fraction 5 (30.0 mg) was purified by reversed-phase HPLC [Luna Phenyl-hexyl, 10 mm, Phenomenex 21.20 x 250 mm] using CH3CN:H2O (29:71) as the solvent, flow rate 10 mL/min; UV detection at 248 nm] to afford sesquiterpenes **3** (4.0 mg) and **5** (4.8 mg).

#### 3.7.1 Rel. (75, 95, 10S)-3,9,12-trihydroxycalamenene (1)

Amorphous powder (3.5 mg); \([\alpha]_{\rm D}^{25}\)\(-\)54.8 (_c_ 0.30, CHCl3); IR (KBr) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3416, 1618, 1466. For \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR see Table 1; HRTOF-ESIMS: \(m/z\) 273.1486 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\) Calcd. for C15H23O3Na, 273.1467.

#### 3.7.2 Rel. (75, 9R, 10S)-3,9,12-trihydroxycalamenene (2)

Amorphous powder (2.5 mg); \([\alpha]_{\rm D}^{25}\)\(+\)33 (_c_ 0.15, CHCl3); IR (KBr) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3419, 1623, 1448. For \({}^{1}\)H and see Table 1; HRTOF-ESIMS: \(m/z\) 233.1542 [M + H - H2O]\({}^{+}\) Calcd. for C15H23O2, 233.1541.

#### 3.7.3 Rel. (75, 10S)-3,12-dihydroxycalamenene (3)

Amorphous powder (4.0 mg); \([\alpha]_{\rm D}^{25}\)\(+\)18.1 (_c_ 0.46, CHCl3); IR (KBr) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3427, 1622, 1454. For \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR see Table 1; HRTOF-ESIMS: \(m/z\) 231.1405 [M + H ]\({}^{+}\) Calcd. for C15H19O2, 231.1385.

#### 3.7.4 3.12-Dihydroxycalalene (4)

Amorphous powder (4.8 mg); \([\alpha]_{\rm D}^{25}\)\(-\)58.2 (_c_ 0.14, CHCl3); IR (KBr) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3419, 1623, 1448. For \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR see Table 1; HRTOF-ESIMS: \(m/z\) 231.1405 [M + H ]\({}^{+}\) Calcd. for C15H19O3Na, 269.1155.

#### 3.7.5 3.11,12-Trihydroxycatalene (5)

Amorphous powder (4.0 mg); \([\alpha]_{\rm D}^{25}\)\(-\)18.4 (_c_ 0.50, CHCl3); IR (KBr) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3420, 1606. For \({}^{1}\)H and NMR see Table 1; HRTOF-ESIMS: \(m/z\) 269.1179 [M + Na]\({}^{+}\) Calcd. for C15H18O3Na, 269.1155.

###### Acknowledgements.

 This work was funded by grants from the Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biot-FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br); Grant # 03/02176-7 awarded to Dr. Bolzani, principal investigator. H.L.T. and G.H.S. acknowledge CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Ensino Superior) and CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico) for Ph.D. fellowships.

## References

* Anderson et al. (1972) Anderson, N.H., Syrdal, D.D., Graham, C., 1972. The absolute stereo-chemistry of the calamenenes. Tetrahedron Lett. 10, 905-908.
* Andrews and Hirano (1991) Andrews, J.H., Hirano, S.S. (Eds.), 1991. Microbial Ecology of Leaves. Springer, New York.
* Azevedo et al. (2000) Azevedo, J.L., Macheroni, W., Araujo, W.L., Pereira, J.O., 2000. Endophytic microorganisms: a review on insect control and recent advances on tropical plants. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 3, 40-65.
* Azevedo et al. (2004) Azevedo, J.L., Peixoto Neto, P.A.S., Caetano, L.C., 2004. Microorganisms on endificos em plantas: estatus atual e perspectivas. Boletin Latinoamericano y Del Caribe de Plantas Medicinales y Aromaticas 3, 69-72.
* Cafeu et al. (2005) Cafeu, M.C., Silva, G.H., Teles, H.L., Bolzani, V.S., Araujo, A.R., Young, M.C.M., Pfenning, L.H., 2005. Substancias antifugicas de _Xylaria_ sp., un fungedifico isolado de _Palcourae marcgravi_ (Rubiaceae). Quimica Nova 28, 991-995.
* crystal-structure of 7-hydroxycalamenene. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1267-1270.
* Dreyfuss and Chapela (1994) Dreyfuss, M.M., Chapela, I.H., 1994. Potential of fungi in the discovery of novel low-molecular weight pharmaceuticals. In: Gullo, V.P. (Ed.), The Discovery of Natural Products with Therapeutic Potential, vol. 3. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, pp. 49-80.
* Kubo et al. (1996) Kubo, I., Chaudhuri, S.K., Kubo, Y., Sanchez, Y., Ogura, T., Saito, T., Ishikawa, H., Haraguchi, H., 1996. Cytotoxic and antioxidative sesquiterpenoids from _Heterotheca unloides_. Planta Med. 62, 427-430.
* Maier et al. (1997) Maier, W., Hammer, U., Dammann, U., Schulz, B., Strack, D., 1997. Accumulation of sesquiterpenoid cyclohexenone derivatives induced by an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus in members of the Poaceae. Planta 202, 36-42.
* Mosmann (1983) Mosmann, T., 1983. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. J. Immunol. Meth. 65, 55-63.
* Nabeta et al. (1993) Nabeta, K., Katayama, K., Nakagawa, S., Katoh, K., 1993. Sesquiterpenes of calanine type from cultured cells of the liverwort, _Heteroscyplus plants_. Phytochemistry 32, 117-122.
* incorporation of H-2-labeled and C-13-labeled mevalonates by cultured-cells of _Heteroscyplus-planus_. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 3277-3280.
* Nagashima et al. (1996) Nagashima, F., Momosaki, S., Watanabe, Y., Takaoka, S., Huneck, S., Asakawa, Y., 1996. Sesquiterpenoids from the liverworts _Bazzania tribobata_ and _Porella canariensis_. Phytochemistry 42, 1361-1366.
* Rahalison et al. (1991) Rahalison, L., Hamburger, M., Hostettmann, K., Monod, M., Frenk, E., 1991. A bioautographic agar overlay method for the detection of antifungal compounds from higher-plants. Phytochem. Anal. 2, 199-203.
* Silva et al. (2005) Silva, G.H., Teles, H.L., Trevisan, H.C., Bolzani, V.D., Young, M.C.M., Pfenning, L.H., Eberlin, M.N., Haddad, R., Costa-Neto, C.M., Araujo, A.R., 2005. New bioactive metabolites produced by _Phomopsis assiae_, an endophytic fungus in _Cassia spectabilis_. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 16, 1463-1466.
* Stpanovic et al. (1975) Stpanovic, R.D., Bell, A.A., Mace, M.E., Howell, C.R., 1975. Antimicrobial terpenoids of _Gossypium_: 6-methoxygossypol and 6,6'-dimethoxygossypol. Phytochemistry 14, 1077-1081.
* Strobel et al. (2004) Strobel, G.A., Daisy, B., Castillo, U., Harper, J., 2004. Natural products from endophytic microorganisms. J. Nat. Prod. 67, 257-268.



## Page 6

Tan, R.T., Zou, W.X., 2001. Endophytes: a rich source of functional metabolites. Nat. Prod. Rep. 18, 448-459.
* Teles et al. (2005) Teles, H.L., Silva, G.H., Castro-Gamboa, I., Bolzani, V.S., Pereira, J.O., Costa-Neto, C.M., Haddad, R., Eberlin, M.N., Young, M.M.Y., Araujo, A.R., 2005. Benzopyrans from _Curvalaria_ sp., an endophytic fungus associated with _Ocoteacorymbasa_(Lauraceae). Phytochemistry 16, 1431-1438.
* Zhang et al. (1998) Zhang, H.L., Nagatsu, A., Okuyama, H., Mizukami, H., Sakakibara, J., 1998. Sesquiterpene glycosides from cotton oil cake. Phytochemistry 48, 665-668.



