# 10.1365@s10337-009-1338-y.pdf

## Page 1

An LC-DAD Fingerprinting Method for Alkaloids, Flavonoids and Styrylpyrones from _Cryptocarya mandioccana_

Karin F. Bandeira, Alberto Jose Cavalleiro

# Abstract

An LC-DAD method has been developed in order to evaluate qualitatively and quantitatively quaternary aporphine alkaloids, flavonoid glycosides andyrylpyrones, which are the main secondary metabolites of leaves from _C. mandioccana_. The chromatographic method was validated considering both internal and external standard quantification methods and showed good performances in terms of selectivity, linearity, precision (repeatability and intermediate precision), limit of detection, limit of quantification, accuracy and stability.

## Introduction

_Cryptocarya mandioccana_ Meisner, the Brazilian-nutmeg (noz-moscada-do-brasil), is a tree species up to 30 m high that is widely distributed predominantly along the coastal Atlantic rain forest of southeastern Brazil. Its fruits are distinct due to its aroma and pungent flavor, being arminative, and with stomachic properties. Its bark, bitter and scented, is also considered to be stomachic and helpful in fighting colic and diarrhea. The tea made from its seeds is used against stomachache, and its crushed leaves, against aches and colic. Still, the fruits are widely consumed by primate populations (brown howler monkeys (_Alouatta fisca_), brown capuchins (_Cebus apella_), and woolly spider monkeys or "muriquis" (_Brachylces arachnoides_)), and creacids (_Pipile jacutinga_, and _Penelope obscura_) [1].

Phylochemical studies on _C. mandioccana_ have shown that this species is rich in alkaloids, flavonoids and styrylpyrones and has received special attention due to its potential usage for pharmacological purposes [2]. The qualitative and quantitative intraspecific variability of flavonoids and styrylpyrones has been determined in its leaves [1, 3-5] and this was related to the occurrence of two chemotypes in a _C. mandioccana_ population characterized by significant differences in the contents of styrylpyrones. The Chemotype F was characterized by predominance of flavonoids. The chemotype Fs was characterized by the presence of flavonoids and styrylpyrones, but with predominance of the last.

Analytical methods are necessary to evaluate these metabolites (alkaloids, flavonoids and styrylpyrones) in inter and intra specific variability studies, in enzymatic studies and for extract standardization to direct the usage of herbal medicines. A chromatographic method to qualitative evaluation of flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones was developed for Nehme and co-workers [3]. However, under these conditions some peaks were not well resolved, such as, peaks attributed to quaternary aporphine alkaloids. In addition, the method was not validated at that moment in time.

In this paper, a fingerprint was developed to simultaneously evaluate the main 

## Page 2

secondary metabolites from leaves from _C. mandioccana_ (quaternary aporphine alkaloids, flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones) using LC-DAD. Three types of reversed phase columns were evaluated, and the proposed fingerprint conditions were validated in terms of selectivity, linearity, precision (repeatability and intermediate precision), limit of detection, limit of quantification, accuracy and stability [6, 7], in order to produce a robust chromatographic method.

## Experimental

### Reagents and Materials

Leaves of _C. mandioccana_, chemotype FS, were collected in the Carlos Botelho State Park (Sao Miguel Arcanjo, Sao Paulo, Brazil). The specimen was identified by Dr. Pedro L.R. Moraes. A voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo (IBSP) with reference number CAVALHEIRO CB 353. The collected leaves were oven dried at 40 degC for 24 h, finely ground and stored at 25 degC until required for the experiments. The solvents used for extraction (hexane and methanol) were analytical grade (Synth, Diadema, Sao Paulo, Brazil), whilst those used in the LC analysis (acetonitrile and methanol) were of LC grade (J.T. Baker, Xalostoc, Mexico). To extract and prepare buffers, acetic acid and H3PO4 were purchased from Synth (Diadema, Sao Paulo, Brazil) and TEA (triethylamine) from Vetec (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). Water was purified with a Milli Q plus system (Millipore, Sao Paulo, Brazil) immediately prior to use. The standards of alkaloids (mensiperine and xantholanine), of flavonoids (quercetin-3-O-galactopyranoside, quercetin-3-O-glucopyranoside, quercetin-3-O-xylopyranoside, quercetin-3-O-arabiopryanoside, quercetin-3-O-allopyranoside and quercetin-3-O-fhamnopyranoside) and of styrylpyrones (cryptomoscatone E3, cryptomoscatone D1, cryptomoscatone F1, deacetylcryptocaryalactone and cryptomoscatone E1) were obtained from the extracts of the bark and the leaves of _C. mandioccana_[2]. The internal standard, goniothalamin, was obtained from the extracts of leaves from _C. moschata_. All standards were identified by UV and NMR data.

### Apparatus

The chromatographic system consisted of a Varian ProStar 240 Solvent Delivery Module coupled to a Varian ProStar 330 Diode Array Detector (DAD) and a Varian ProStar 410 Autosampler (Palo Alto, CA, USA). Instrumental control and data processing were accomplished using a Varian Star Chromatography Workstation 5.52.

### Chromatographic Method Development

The optimization of the fingerprint was performed in two steps. In the first step,

Chromatographia **2009**, 70, November (No. 9/10) Full Short Communication

Fig. 1: Response surfaces employed to optimization the TEA and H3PO4 buffer concentrations to analysis of secondary metabolites from _C. mandioccana_ at: **(a)** LC8 chromatographic column, **(b)** LC18 chromatographic column and **(c)** phenyl-hexyl chromatographic column 

## Page 3

response surfaces were constructed using the Statistica 5.1 G software (StatSoft, 1997, Tulsa, OK, USA).

In the second step, experiments were conducted in order to optimize the selectivity of the mobile phase considering as variables the proportions of its constituents (buffer, methanol and acetonitrile) and the gradient time in an experimental design using the column and buffer concentration determined in the first step.

## Standard Solution Preparation

An initial stock solution of menisperine, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone (400 mg mL-1) was prepared by dissolving 2.0 mg of each compound in 5.0 mL of methanol: acetic acid 10% 1:1 (_v_/_v_). Another stock solution of goniothalamin (400 mg mL-1), the internal standard, was prepared by dissolving 2.0 mg of analyte in 5.0 mL of methanol: acetic acid 10% 1:1 (_v_/_v_). Working standard solutions (10, 15, 20, 30, 50, 75, 150 and 300 mg mL-1) of menispering, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone were prepared by appropriate dilutions of the initial stock solution. To these solutions 75 mg mL-1 of goniothalamin were added by appropriate dilution of the initial stock solution.

## Sample Preparation

Milled leaves (100 mg) were weighed into a centrifuge tube and extracted with 4.0 mL of hexane by sonication for 30 min, followed by the addition of 4.0 mL of methanol:acetic acid 10% 1:1 (_v_/_v_) and sonication for another 30 min. The resulting mixture was stirred and centrifuged at 1,200g for 10 min and an aliquot (1.5 mL) taken from the hydroalcoholic phase was filtered through a 0.45 mm Millipore membrane and submitted to LC analysis [4].

## Method Validation

The strategy applied to the validation of the fingerprint was based on the approach proposed by ANVISA [9]. A validation protocol was established and accepted values were defined for the following parameters: selectivity, linearity, precision (repeatability and intermediate precision), limit of detection, limit of quantification, accuracy, and stability [6, 7].

### Selectivity

The peak purity of the menisperine, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone was evaluated by comparison of the UV spectra obtained at three points of each peak, using the PolyView 2000 5.5 software (Varian, 2000, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Peaks were considered pure when their UV spectra similarity (230 to 400 nm) was greater than 95%.

#### Linearity

The linearity was determined by the correlation coefficient of the analytical curves obtained to menispering, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone. Analytical curves were constructed for internal and external standard methods using seven concentration levels (15, 20, 30, 50, 75, 150 x 300 mg mL-1) to each compound, and were analyzed in triplicate.

Fig. 2: LC chromatogram obtained from hydroalcoholic extract of leaves from _C. mandiocana,_ using the optimized gradient conditions

## Page 4



#### Precision

For the internal and external standard methods, the precision was estimated by the evaluation of repeatability and intermediate precision at the three concentration levels (15, 50 and 300 mg mL-1) for each analysis. To determine the repeatability (intra-day precision), samples were analyzed in triplicate on the same day and to measure the intermediate precision (inter-day precision), samples were analyzed in triplicate on three different days. The precision was expressed as the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the concentration of the menisperine, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone.

### Limits of Detection and Quantification

The limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) were estimated by the method based on the parameters of the analytical curve.

## Accuracy

The accuracy was determined by the standard addition method. For the internal and external standard methods, the extracts of _C. mandiocana_ were analyzed in triplicate with and without fortification with menisperine, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside, and deacetylcryptocaryalactone at three concentration levels (15, 50 and 300 mg mL-1). The accuracy was expressed as a percentage ratio between the experimental average concentrations and the real concentration.

### Stability

For the internal and external standard methods, a sample stability test was performed at three concentration levels (15, 50 and 300 mg mL-1) at regular intervals of 0, 24 and 48 h. The solution was stored at 4 degC during this period.

## Results and Discussion

### Chromatographic Method Development

The chromatographic method previously established by Nehme and co-workers [4] was optimized and validated in order to simultaneously evaluate quaternary aporphine alkaloids, flavonoid glycosides-_O_-xylopyranoside and styrylpyrones in leaves from _C. mandiocana_. The optimization of the method was performed in two steps. Firstly, the quadratic response surfaces were plotted using global chromatographic resolution (_R_s_G) in function of the TEA and H3PO4 concentrations to each chromatographic column. The global chromatographic resolution (_R_s_G) was greatly influenced by the type of the chromatographic column utilized (Fig. 2). For LC18 column a sela point was obtained at the stationary point, which corresponds to 11.6 mM of TEA, 19.5 mM of H3PO4 and _R_s_G of 0.63. A minimum point was obtained at the stationary point for the phenyl-hexyl column, that correspond to 6.5 mM of TEA, 13.9 mM of H3PO4 and _R_s_G of 0.94, with the LC8 column. The _R_s_G experimental value obtained in these optimum conditions was found to be within 99% of the confidence level. In the second step, the experiments were conducted in order to optimize the selectivity of the mobile phase considering the proportions of its constituents (buffer, methanol, acetonitrile) as variables, in an experimental design using an LC8 column and the buffer concentration found in the first step. A multistep gradient condition (Table 1) was selected to provide a fingerprint analysis of secondary metabolites from _C. mandiocana_.

Peaks were identified by comparison with the retention times and UV spectra of the compounds previously obtained by phytochemical studies of _Cryptocarya_ species [2-5]. According to Fig. 2, peaks **1** to **13** were identified, respectively, as menisperine, xanthoplanine, quercetin-3-_O_-galactopyranoside, quercetin-3-_O_-xylopyranoside, quercetin-3-_O_-xylopyranoside, quercetin-3-_O_-arabinopyranoside, quercetin-3-_O_-andiopyranoside, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside, cryptomosactone E3, cryptomosactone T1, deacetylcryptocaryalactone and cryptomosactone E1. These chromatographic conditions enabled the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the main secondary metabolites from leaves of _C. mandiocana_, including alkaloids, flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones.

## Method Validation

The validation was done based on the specific parameters given by the National Agency of Sanitary Vigilance of Brazil (ANVISA) [7].

### Selectivity

The peak purity of the menisperine, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone in the extract was confirmed by the PolyView-2000, a diode array spectral processing software. Selectivity was assessed by analyzing the UV spectrum of each compound in three different regions of

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Time & \% Buffera & \% MeOH & \% ACN \\
0 & 83 & 06 & 11 \\
10 & 77 & 08 & 15 \\
20 & 67 & 19 & 14 \\
30 & 61 & 22 & 17 \\
40 & 59 & 14 & 27 \\
45 & 50 & 50 & 0 \\
60 & 50 & 50 & 0 \\
63 & 83 & 06 & 11 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Final multistep ternary gradient program

## Page 5

its chromatographic peak and no interference was observed.

#### Linearity

#### Internal standard method

Analytical curves were constructed with seven concentrations levels ranging from 15 to 300 mg mL-1 to each compound, with 75 mg mL-1 of goniothalamin (IS). The equations were calculated by linear regression to menispering (_y_ = -0.02563 + 0.00394x, \(r\)2 = 0.9964, RSD <= 3.0%), to quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside (_y_ = -0.01953 + 0.00714x, \(r\)2 = 0.9999, RSD <= 1.7%) and to deacetylcryptocarylactone (_y_ = -0.01466 + 0.00624x, \(r\)2 = 0.9998, RSD <= 1.3%). All correlation coefficients were according to accepted values (_r_ >= 0.99).

#### External standard method

Analytical curves were constructed with seven concentrations levels ranging from 15 to 300 mg mL-1 to each compound. The equations were found by linear regression to menispering (_y_ = -0.27 + 0.06081x, \(r\)2 = 0.9967, RSD <= 4.0%), to quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside (_y_ = -0.02356 + 0.1099x, \(r\)2 = 0.9999, RSD <= 3.6%) and to deacetylcryptocarylactone (_y_ = -0.03459 + 0.09607x, \(r\)2 = 0.9999, RSD <= 4.4%). All correlation coefficients were according to accepted values (_r_ >= 0.99).

#### Precision

#### Internal standard method

The RSD to repeatability did not exceed 1.58% at the three concentration levels. To intermediate precision, the RSD did not exceed 3.74% when it was considered for two days (_n_ = 6), and 4.53% when it was considered for three days (_n_ = 9), again, for the three compounds at three concentration levels. These precision values are in accordance with the accepted values by ANVISA (RSD <= 5%) [6].

#### External standard method

The RSD to repeatability did not exceed 4.42%, but to intermediate precisions for three days (_n_ = 9) the RSD for menispering and deacetylcryptocaryalactone were found to exceed 5%, which were in disadvantage with the accepted values (RSD <= 5%). However, when they were considered for only two days (_n_ = 6), the RSD did not exceed 3.98% for the three compounds at three concentration levels.

#### Limits of Detection and Quantification

The LOD and LOQ obtained for menispering were 14.4 and 48.0 mg mL-1; for quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside were 0.9 and 3.0 mg mL-1; and for deacetylcryptocaryalactone were 2.7 and 9.0 mg mL-1, respectively.

#### Accuracy

Accuracy for determination of menispering, quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocaryalactone using internal or external standard methods were in the range of 80-120% considering the three concentration levels, except for quercetin-3-_O_-rhamnopyranoside at 15.0 mg mL-1 in the internal standard method (Table 2).

#### Stability

The sample stability tests performed at three concentration levels showed no significant differences in the concentration values of menispering, quercetin-3-O-rhamnopyranoside and deacetylcryptocarylactone after 24 h of the sample preparation, mainly when the quantification was made by internal standard method. However, some important alterations were observed at the concentration level of 300 mg mL-1 when the samples were analyzed by the external standard method 48 h after preparation.

## Conclusion

A chromatographic method was developed to simultaneously evaluate quaternary aporphine alkaloids, flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones, which are the main secondary metabolites of leaves from _C. mandioccana_, using HPLC-DAD. The chromatographic conditions proposed include a Phenomenex Luna(r) LC8 column and a multi step linear ternary gradient elution program. The validation procedure showed that the internal standard method should be preferred to quantitative analysis and that all parameter evaluated are in accordance with ANVISA [6].

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c c c}  & Repetibility (_n_ = 3) & Intermediate precision & Accuracy (_n_ = 3) \\  & & & (_n_ = 6) & & (_n_ = 9) & & & & & \\ Internal standard method & & & & & & & & & & \\ Conc. (μg mL−1) & 300 & 50 & 15 & 300 & 50 & 15 & 300 & 50 & 15 & 300 & 50 & 15 \\ ME & 0.28 & 0.46 & 0.48 & 0.98 & 1.92 & 3.74 & 1.74 & 3.45 & 3.83 & 115.



## Page 6

The proposed method can be used to obtain a fingerprint of secondary metabolites from _Cryptocarya_ species, and can be applied in ecophysiological studies and in the standardization of phytotherapic preparations using this plant species.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Biota-FA-PESP for financial support, and to CNPq for the Ph.D. scholarship granted to Karin Fabiana Bandeira. We would also like to acknowledge the Instituto Florestal de Sao Paulo for authorizing the collection of _C. mandiocana_ samples at the Carlos Botelho State Park.

## References

* (1) Moraes PLR, Nehme CJ, Alves MC, Derbyshire MTVC, Cavalleiro AJ (2007) Biochem Syst Ecol 35:233-244. doi:10.1016/j.jbse.2006.10.013
* (2) Cavalleiro AJ, Yoshida M (2000) Phytochemistry 53:811-819. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(99)00532-4

