# 10.1021@np020547m.pdf

## Page 1



# Turbinatine, a Potential Key Intermediate in the Biosynthesis of Corynanthean-Type Indole Alkaloids

Carmen L. L. C. Cardoso, D. H. Elena Siqueira Silva, D. Maniela Maria Tomazela, Hugo Verili, Maria Claudia Marx Young, M. Maysa Furlan, M. M. Nogueira Eberlin, V. Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

# Abstract

Extraction of the leaves of Chimarrhis turbinata has led to the isolation of turbinatine (1), a new corynanthean-type indole alkalioid, besides four known indole alkaloids, stridosidine, 5a-carboxystrosticosidine, vallesiachotamine, and isovallesiachotamine. The structural determination of 1 was based on 1D and 2D spectroscopic data. An evaluation of the DNA-damaging activities of the isolates was performed by means of a bioassay using mutant strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which indicated these compounds were weakly active.

Chimarrhis turbinata (DC) Prodr. (Rubiaceae) belongs to the subfamily Cinchonoideae and the tribe Condaminae.1,2 This tree is distributed from Central America and the Caribbean Islands through tropical South America, especially in the Amazon region. Its light and resistant wood is used for making tools, including pawls, which is the reason for its popular name "bau-de-remo" in the Amazon.3 The present work describes the first study on a plant in the genus Chimarrhis, which has resulted in the isolation and characterization of a new indole monterpeneid glucosalkaid, turbinate (1), along with the known compounds stridosidine, 5a-carboxystrosidine, vallesiachotamine, and isovallesiachotamine. In addition, the potential chemotaxonomic significance of these alkaloids and evidence for turbinate (1) as a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of corynanthean-type alkaloids are briefly discussed.

## Introduction

Theoretical studies of the structure of the 1D and 2D spectroscopic data have been performed by the study of the structure of the 1D and 2D spectroscopic data. The analysis of the structure of the 1D and 2D spectroscopic data has been performed by the study of the structure of the 1D and 2D spectroscopic data.



## Page 2

aminohydroxymethine H-21 signal. Subsequent correlations of H-15 to signals at \(\delta\) 2.20 and 2.40 (H-14\({}_{\rm{ac}}\) and H-14\({}_{\rm{ax}}\)) and of H-14 to the broad doublet at \(\delta\) 4.60 (H-3), as well as the correlations between signals at \(\delta\) 3.26 (H-6) and 3.00 (H-6), led to the complete assignment of the glycan aliphatic hydrogens of turbulatinate (1). The TOCSY spectrum gave additional support to these assignments by showing correlations of signals of H-3, H-14, H-15, H-20, H-21, H-19, and H-18, and TOCSY-1D experiments allowed the assignments of the sugar moiety hydrogens (Table 1). The H-MBC spectrum of 1 showed correlations from C-22 (\(\delta\) 171.1) to the methoxyl group (\(\delta\) 3.79) and to H-17 (\(\delta\) 7.80). Additionally, correlations of C-15 (\(\delta\) 32.4) and C-16 (\(\delta\) 108.1) to H-17 confirmed the presence of the \(\beta\)-hydroxy-\(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated carboxymethoxy system, as well as its attachment to C-15. The relative configurations of the asymmetric centers C-3, C-15, C-20, and C-21 were established by coupling constant measurements and NOESY experiments as well as through comparison with \({}^{13}\)C NMR data of model compounds [9, 10].



## Page 3

the initial degluosylation by the specific stratosidine _b_-glucosidase to give a highly unstable hemiketal aglycon (2), which has its secologanir ring then opened to afford the reactive dialdehyde 311,12 (Scheme 1). The proposed biogenic pathway for corynanthene-type alkaloids requires the subsequent rotation of the C-15-C-20 bond followed by the nucleophilic attack of N-4 on the electrolytic C-21, leading to intermediate 4. This carbonlamine has been proposed as a putative intermediate in the biosynthesis of several oxynanthene-type indole alkaloids, among these being 4,21-dehydrogisossokinizine and cathenamine,15,16 Despite the large number of known indole alkaloids, the detection or isolation of carbinolamine 4 has not yet been reported probably due to its high unstability and rapid dehydration to the minium aldehyde 4,21-dehydrooxygenanthene (5). Subsequent reduction steps could lead to cathanamine (6) and further to cryynanthene, through dehydration followed by reduction steps, as well as to other oxynanthene-type alkaloids.13-16 Alternatively, stabilization of carbinolamine 4 could be achieved through HO-21 glucosylation, leading to turbinate (1). Therefore, the isolation of turbinate (1) from the leaves of Chimarrhis turbinate may represent additional support for a biogenetic proposal for cryynanthene-type alkaloids in which carbinolamine 4 could be involved.

Recent taxonomic studies on Rubiaceae21 have included a series of other distinctive char actors such as placentation, fruit and seed morphology, anatomy, and their combinations and tendencies, leading to its organization into four subfamilies: Ixorodeae, Cinchonodeae, Antrinferideae, and Rubiideae. The definitions of these subfamilies and the limits of some tribes remain problematic, mostly due to the lack of morphanatomical characters of many taxa and detailed chemical studies. The presence of indole alkaloids in Chimarrhis emphasizes the importance of chartaxonomic data to help better understand the morphanatomical classification of this complex plant family.

Although the initial crude extract from C. turbinata showed weak DNA-damaging activity,22 to the best of our knowledge none of the known indole alkaloids isolated have been reported to show any effect on DNA. Compound 1 and the five known compounds isolated exhibited weak but selective activity with 1C12 values around >250 and 100 _m_g/mL or higher, in the mutant yeast strains RS 188N (RAD+) and RS 322YK (rad 52Y), respectively.

### Experimental Section

General Experimental Procedures. Optical rotation measurements were conducted on a Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter using a quartz cuvette (length 1 cm). IR spectra were measured on a Perkin-Elmer 1600 or Niodet EMACT-40 FTIR spectrometer. NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker AC 200, a Varian INOVA 300, or a Varian INOVA 500 NMR spectrometer operating at 200, 300, and 500 MHz for 1H, respectively, and at 50, 75, and 125 MHz for 13C, respectively. TMS was used as internal standard. Mass spectra were recorded at high resolution on a Micromass-OTF spectrometer. For chromatographic procedures, silica gel PF254, silica gel (230-400 mesh or 60-230 mesh) (Merck), Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia Biotech), and Amberlite resin XAD-16 (Sigma) were used. HPLC separations were performed on a Water's Prep L C 400 System, and Cts Luna (Phenomen) columns and precolumns were used. All solvents (Merck or Mallinckrodt) were of analytical or HPLC grade. The theoretical study was done using the semiempirical PMS and AM1 methods on SCF-MO-MOPAC-2000 and BiofACAChea software.

Plant Material. Chimarrhis turbinate was collected in Reserva do Viro, Belm, PA, Brazil, in October 1996 and identified by Dr. Marina Thereza V. do A. Campos. A voucher specimen is deposited in the herbarium of the Botanic Garden, Sao Paulo, and catalogued as Lopes-51.

Figure 1: Selected HMBC (C – H) and NOESY (H × H) correlations for turbinate (1).

Figure 2: Structure of conformation 1a. With the exception of hydrogen atoms attached to carbon atoms C-3, C-15, C-20, and C-21 the nonpolar hydrogen atoms were omitted in order to clarify the image.



## Page 4

Extraction and Isolation. Dried and powdered leaves of C. turbinate (1.0 kg) were extracted with CHCl3-MeOH and EtOH, successively, and afforded extracts A and B, respectively, after solvent evaporation under reduced pressure. Extract B was dissolved in MeOH-H2O (8:2) and partitioned with hexane. The hydro alcoholic fraction was partially evaporated to MeOH-H2O (6:4) and then partitioned successively with CH2Cl2, EtOHac, and n-BuOH. The n-BuOH fraction (0.5 g, after solvent evaporation) was dissolved into MeOH (5 mL) and submitted to gel filtration over Sephadex LH-20 eluted with MeOH. The subfractions obtained were compared by TLC analysis and pooled into fractions A-H. Fractions B (27 mg), C (34 mg), and D (39 mg) were purified by HPLC (Phenomenore C18.25: 2C > 21.2 cm, 10 mg; eluent: MeOH-H2O (1:4); 12 mL/min; U/d reaction at 237 nm) and afford compound 1 (7 mg) (retention time 28.7 min). Extract A was submitted to the same partition procedures, and the resulting n-BuOH fraction (1.53) was chromatographed by column chromatography over silica gel [CHCl3-MeOH-H2O (70:28:2) and CHCl3-MeOH-H2O (65:30:5)], affording 29 subfractions, which were pooled into five fractions (A-E) after comparison by TLC analysis. Gel filtration over Sephadex LH-20 of fraction B (209 mg) led to the purification of stridosidine (79 mg) and a mixture of valesiachatamine (6 mg) and isvalesiachatamine (60 mg). The separation of this mixture was subsequently under taken by passage over Sephadex LH-20 and afforded pure valesiachatamine (6 mg) and a further mixture of valesiachatamine and isvalesiachatamine (24 mg). Gel filtration over Sephadex LH-20 of fraction D (160 mg) led to the purification of 5a-carboxytridosidine (39 mg).

Bioassay. Identical to those reported in ref 22.

Turbinate (11): amorphous yellow powder; [a]270 -8.5deg (c 0.04, MeOH); UV (MeOH) _i_max 236 nm; [c]875], IR (KBr) 3496 (OH), 3370 (NH), 1710 (C=O) cm-1; 1H and 13C NMR (see Table 1); HRESIMS m/z 532.3070 [M + 2]+ (caled for C27H3N4O30, 532.2409).

Stricosilac.: colorless crystals; mp 161-165 degC; [a]270 -7.27deg (c 0.04, MeOH); UV (MeOH) _i_max 241 nm (_ε_ 6025) and 474 nm (_ε_ 11 800); IR (KBr) 3450 (OH), 1720 (C=O) cm-1; the 1H and 13C NMR (_ε_ 14 200) and 1760 (C=O) cm-1; the 1H and 13C NMR and EIMS were comparable with literature values.8

### Acknodgment.

This work was supported by the State of Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the B1GTA/FAPESP (Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program) (www.bio.at.org/br), CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Teaandgica, Brazil). C.L.C. thanks FAPESP for a scholarship, and M.C.M.Y., M.F., and V.S.B. thank CNPq for research fellowships. We thank Prof. Dr. Jorge Guimaraes (Centro de Bioteanologia-UFRGS) for the use of BioMedCAche software.

## References

- 1 (1) Rebrecht, E. Op. Bot. Bâg. 1988 1, 1 -271 (2) Delpreta, G. P. Brittonia 1996 48, 35 -44 (3) Boron, B. M.; Campos, M. T. V. A. Bol. Mus. Paranes Emilio Gooli 1991 7, 223 -472 (4) Shamma, M.; Hindenlang, D. M. In Carboni 13-NMR Shift Assignments of Amines and Alkaloids; Shamma, M., Hindenlang, D. M., Eds.: Plenum Press: New York 1979; pp 499 -616 (5) De Silva, K. T. D.; Smith, G. N.; Warren, K. E. H. Chem. Commun. 1971 905 -907 (6) Pathy-Auskas, A.; Karofyhazy, L.; Szabo, L. F.; Podanyi, B. J. Nat. Prot. 1997 609 69 75 -

## Page 5

* [7] De Silva, K. T. D.; King, D.; Smith, G. N. Chem. Commun. 1971, 908-909.
* [8] Watterman, P. G.; Zhong, S. Planta Med. 1982, 45, 28-30.
* [9] Wenkert, E.; Chang, C.-J.; Chawla, H. P. S.; Cochran, D. W.; Hagmann, E. W.; King, J. C.; Orito K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1976, 98, 3645-3655.
* [10] Trager, W. F.; Lee, C. M.; Phillipson J. D.; Beckett, A. H. Tetrahedron 1987, 23, 1043-1047.
* [11] Kutchan, T. M. In The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Biology; Cordell, G. A., Ed.; Academic Press: London, 1998; pp 259-267.
* [12] Verporteo, R.; van der Heijden, R.; Moreno, P. R. H. In The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Biology; Cordell, G. A., Ed.; Academic; London, 1997; pp 221-299.
* [13] Leonard, J. Nat. Prod. Rep. 1999, 16, 319-338.
* [14] Stevens, L. H. Formation and Conversion of Stratosidine in the Biosynthesis of Monterpenoid Indge and Quindline Alkaloids. Ph.D. Thesis, Leiden University, 1994, p 121.
* [15] Ruffer, M.; Kan-Fan, C.; Husson, H. P.; Stockigt, J.; Zenk, M. H. J. Chem Soc., Chem. Commun. 1979, 1016-1018.
* [16] Hemscheidt, T.; Zenk, M. H. Plant Cell Rep. 1985, 24, 216-219.
* [17] Stewart, J. J. P. MOPAC 2000; Fujitsu Limited: Tokyo, Japan, 1999.
* [18] (a) Pepanha, E. P.; Veril, H.; Rodrigues, C. R.; Barreiro, E. J.; Fraga, C. A. M. Tetrahedron Lett. 2002, 43, 1607-1611. (b) Due to layout characteristics we take the relative permittivity value of methanol as \(\epsilon=32.6\) and the effective VDW radius of the solvent molecule as 2.52. A.
* [19] (a) Blood/CAChe 5.0; Fujitsu Ltd. and Oxford Modular Ltd., 2001. (b) The dihedral angles of C-1-C-1-C-16-C-17-C-15-C-20-C-19-C-18. C-20-C-21-C-22-C-1, and C-221-C-22- were independently searched between 0deg and 360deg in 30deg steps. (c) The conformations of ring D were evaluated as chair or twist-boxt conformations, and the N-4 atom lone pair was evaluated to be above or below the plane of ring D.
* [20] Hessian matrix analyses were employed to unequivocally characterize them as true potential energy surface minima.
* [21] Rohberdt, E.; Puff, C.; Smets E. Op. Bot. Bdg. 1996, 7, 1-10.
* [22] Guntalika, A. A. L.; Samaranayake, G.; Kingston, D. G. I. J. Nat. Prod. 1992, 56, 1648-1654.



