# 10.1590@S0103-50532006000300017.pdf

## Page 1



# Limonoids from Andiroba Oil and _Cedrela fissilis_ and their Insecticidal Activity

Alessandra R. P. Ambrozin

paulo@dq.ufscar.br

Ana C. Leite

Fabiana C. Bueno

Paulo C. Vieira

Joao B. Fernandes

Odair C. Bueno

M. Fatima das G. Fernandes da Silva

Fernando C. Pagnocca

M. Jose A. Hebling

Mauricio Bacci Jr.

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil Centro de Estudos de Insetos Sociais, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 199, 13506-900 Rio Claro - SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Nove limonoides form isolados de _Carapa guianensis_ e _Cedrela fissilis_. Entre eles, a 1,2-diidro-3B-hidroxi-7-desacetoxi-7-oxogedunina e uma substancia inedita. Alem disso, alguns deslocamentos quimicos da kilocensina k foram corrigidos e os dados de RMN \({}^{1}\)Ha 7-desacetyledonina sao descritos pela primeira vez na literatura. Seis dos limonoides isolados foram submettios a ensaios com fornigas _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ e apresentaram attividade insecticide moderada.

Nine limonoides were isolated from _Carapa guianensis_ and _Cedrela fissilis_. Among them, 1,2-dihydro-3B-hydroxy-7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin is a new compound. Moreover, the assignments of some chemical shifts of xyloccensin k have been corrected and \({}^{1}\)H NMR data of 7-deacetyledonin have been assigned for the first time. These isolated limonoids were assayed on _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ workers showing moderate insecticidal activities.

## Introduction

The family Meliaceae includes many plants that are sources of valuable timber and many that have wide-ranging uses in ethnomedicine. The family is distinguished by the occurrence of characteristic substances called limonoids.[1] These substances have wide spectrum of biological activities,[2] particularly insecticidal action.[3]

The leaf-cutting ants of the genera _Atta_ and _Acromymex_ use mostly fresh plant fragments to raise their symbiotic fungi[4, 5] and are the cause of considerable economic damage, due to defoliation that they cause.[6] Control of this pest is still problematic, presenting only temporary effects and is sometimes, harmful to the environment, to man and other animals.[6, 7] Consequently, an extensive search for alternate methods to control these insects has been made in an attempt to substitute traditional agrochemicals with agents that yield faster decay, higher specificity and, therefore, less damaging to the environment. In this context, plants are considered a promising source for less toxic compounds that could be used as a soft control method.

As a part of our search for new natural insecticides against leaf-cutting ants[8] and because of the fact that limonoids have displayed biological activity towards a variety of insects, we decided to investigate the effect of limonoids isolated from two species of Meliaceae family, _Carapa guianensis_ Aubl. and _Cedrela fissilis_ Vell. on _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.

_Carapa guianensis_ is a tall tree that grows wild throughout South America, West India and South Africa. In Brazil, it can be found prevalently in areas of the Amazon rainforest, that are rich in soils and swamps. From the nuts of this plant is extracted an oil, called andiroba oil, which has a long history of traditional use in South America, such as analgesic, anti-inflammatory, insecticide, antibacterial, anti-parasitic and as an anti-cancer remedy.[9, 10, 11, 12]

Andiroba oil is rich in fatty acids such as oleic, palmitic, stearic and linoleic acids, together with 2-5% of unsaponificable material. In addition, from several parts of _Carapa guianensis_ have been isolated limonoids, triterpenes, steroids, coumarins, flavonoids and diglycerides.[13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]

_C. fissilis_ tree, known as "cedro" (cedar), is a valuable source of timber. In Brazil, it can be found from the Amazon forest as far south as Espirito Santo State. Previous investigation of fruits and seeds from this species

## Page 2

afforded the limonoids fissionide, mexicanolide and 3b-hydroxyisomexicanolide.19

Extracts and fractions from _C. fissilis_ and one commercial _C. guianensis_ oil showed to have activity against _A. sexdens rubropilosa_ workers.20,21 In the herein study we report the insecticidal activities towards _A. sexdens rubropilosa_ of six gedunin derivatives limonoids obtained from these active fractions besides spectroscopic data for 1,2-dihydro-3b-hydroxy-7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**5**), 7-deacetylgedunin (**6**) and xyloccensin k (**9**).

## Results and Discussion

The chemical investigation of one commercial andiroba oil sample afforded seven limonoids: 17b-hydroxyazadiradione (**1**), gedunin (**2**), 6a-acetoxy-gedunin (**3**), 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**4**), 1,2-dihydro-3b-hydroxy-7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**5**), methyl angolensate (**8**) and xyloccensin k (**9**). Moreover, from roots and leaves of _C. fissilis_ were isolated 7-deacetylgedunin (**6**) and photogedunin (**7**) along with limonoids **2**, **3**, **4** and **5**.

Compounds **1**, **2** and **9** have been isolated for the first time from _C. guianensis_ and all the limonoids isolated from _C. fissilis_ are new for this species. Compound **5** is new to the literature.

Limonoids **1**,22**,23 **3**,13 **4**,15 **7**,24 and **825 were identified by comparison of their NMR spectral data to those previously reported in the literature. The 1H NMR data of compound **6** (Table 1) supplement and expand some hydrogen and carbon chemical shifts reported by Ekong and Olagbemi.26

Compound **5** was isolated as a white powder from _C. fissilis_ leaves and from andiroba oil and identified by spectroscopic methods. It is a new compound, whose 3-OH epimer was obtained from _Guarea thompsonii_.27

The 1H and 13C NMR spectra of **5** exhibited signals at: d_H 7.40 (m), 7.36 (m), 6.36 (s) and d_C 143.0, 141.0, 120.4, 109.9 of a b-furanyl ring; d_H 1.13 (s), 1.12 (s), 1.08 (s), 0.98 (s), 0.84 (s) and d_C 27.4, 20.9, 17.1, 16.9, 14.8 related to five _tert_-methyl groups; d_H 5.45 (s), 3.83 (s) and d_C 167.3, 65.7, 53.6, 78.1 corresponding to a lactone D-ring with an epoxide between C-14 and C-15. These features are characteristics of compounds classified in the gedunin group of limonoids. However, the NMR spectra of compound **5** lacked signals related to the A-ring a,b-unsaturated ketone. In contrast, signals were observed at d_H 3.26 (dd, 11.0 and 5.0 Hz) and d_C 78.2. These signals indicated an equatorial hydroxyl group at C-3. Thus, limonoid **5** was identified as 1,2-dihydro-3b-hydroxy-7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin and its spectral data allocations (Table 1) were established unequivocally through 1D and 2D NMR experiments.

Compound **9** was isolated as a white powder from andiroba oil. It is classified as belonging to the mexicanolide group of limonoids and contains a tetrahydrofuran sub-unit with an oxygen bridge linking from C-3 to C-8. It was also isolated from the seed of _Xylocarpus granatum_.28 However, we found through 2D NMR spectra analysis that some chemical shifts were incorrectly determined by Kokpol _et al._,28 among them H-17, H-28, H-29, C-8, C-17, C-18 and C-29.

The chemical shift of C-17 was deduced from 1\(J\) correlation between H-17 (d 6.28, s) and one carbon at d 76.5. H-18 (d 1.00, s) was assigned through 3\(J\) correlation between the methyl hydrogens and carbonicl carbon at d 76.5 (C-17). Furthermore, H-28 (d 1.12) and H-29 (d 0.67) were determined through 3\(J\) correlation to C-3 (d 91.4). Finally, the 2_J_-_J_ correlations among H-30 (d 2.52, dd, 12.4 and 6.1 Hz), H-2 (d 2.98, br t, 6.1 Hz) and a quaternary carbon at d 85.2 established C-8.

Some of the limonoids isolated from _C. guianensis_ and _C. fissilis_ were evaluated for their effects on _A. sexdens rubropilosa_ ants. The results (Table 3) showed that control and limonoid-treated groups had on average the same

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} H / C & d_H_ of **5** * & d_C_ of **5** * & d_H_ of **6** * \\
1 & & 38.3 & 7.11 d (_J_ 10.2 Hz) \\
2 & 1.75 m & 26.9 & 5.85 d (_J_ 10.2 Hz) \\
3 & 3.26 dd (_J_ 11.0; 5.0 Hz) & 78.2 & \\
4 & & 39.5 & \\
5 & 1.29 dd (_J_ 14.1; 3.1 Hz) & 56.8 & 2.



## Page 3

survival medium time. Compound **3** showed significant difference to the control according to the log-rank test (p < 0.05), which takes into account the whole test period. The gedunin type limonoids do not seem to be highly active against these ants. Indeed, _C-seco_ limonoids, such as azadirachtin, are more active insecticidal compound, possessing both antifeedant and growth-regulating activities.2,29 The toxicity for the ants observed for the _C. fissilis_ and _C. guianensis_ extracts seems not to be related only to the presence of the limonoids. Perhaps the limonoids act in synergism between them or with other compounds in the extracts.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

The 1H NMR, 13C NMR and 2D correlation spectra were obtained in CDCl3 using Bruker DRX-200 and ARX-400 NMR spectrometers, and using tetramethylsilane (TMS) as internal standard. HPLC was carried out using a preparative LC-8A Shimadzu system with SPD-6AV Shimadzu UV detector.

### Plant material

The roots and leaves of _Cedrela fissilis_ Vell. were collected in Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil in June 01, 2001 and identified by Dr. Maria Ines Salgueiro Lima from the Department of Botany, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, where a voucher specimen (6701) was deposited. The commercial andiroba oil sample was purchased in Belem city (Para, Brazil), in 1996.

### Isolation of the limonoids from Carapa guianensis

A portion of andiroba oil sample (21.0 g) was submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC) on silica gel (70-230 mesh) using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, to yield the four corresponding fractions (H, D, Ac, Me). The fraction Ac (2.6 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 267 x 38 mm i.d., stepwise with a hexane-MeOH gradient) to give three fractions. The second fraction (Ac2; 2.3 g) was chromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 264 x 45 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c}  & HSQC & & HMBC \\ \cline{2-5} Carbon & \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) & \(\delta_{\text{H}}\)(\({}^{J}\)Ca) & \({}^{2}\)J\({}_{\text{C,H}}\) & \({}^{3}\)J\({}_{\text{C,H}}\) \\
1 & 214.9 & & & \\
2 & 49.0 & 2.98 br (_J_ 6.1 Hz) & 214.9 & 85.2 \\
3 & 91.4 & 4.23 d (_J_ 6.1 Hz) & & 43.0

## Page 4

(hexane-MeOH) yielding five fractions. Limonoid **5** (Ac2,4,2; 17.7 mg) was isolated from fraction four (Ac2,4; 458.2 mg) using column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 444 x 24 mm i.d., stepwise with a hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH gradient). The fifth fraction (Ac2,4,5; 409.0 mg) of this last step was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 475 x 24 mm i.d., stepwise with a hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH gradient) to give seven fractions. Fraction three (Ac2,4,5,3; 19.8 mg) was subjected to preparative HPLC (Hypersil 5\(m\) column, 290 x 10 mm i.d., eluted with hexane:isopropanol (9:1), flow rate: 3 mL min-1, detector UV at 240 nm) and the limonoid **9** (Ac2,4,5,3,4; 2.7 mg) was isolated.

Another portion of the antiroba oil sample (150.0 g) was submitted to VLC on silica gel (70-230 mesh) using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, to yield four fractions (FH, FD, FA, FM). Fraction FA (19.0 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 309 x 38 mm i.d., stepwise with a hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH gradient) to give nine fractions. Several chromatographies of fractions five, seven and eight (FA5, FA7 and FA8) afforded limonoids **1**, **2**, **3**, **4**, **8**, as described below.

The fifth fraction (FA5; 1.1 g) was chromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 269 x 32 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH) to afford nine fractions. The limonoids **2** (FA5,6,4; 4.5 mg) and **3** (FA5,6,3; 1.5 mg) were isolated from fraction six (FA5,6; 30.1 mg) by preparative HPLC (Asahipak GS-310 2G polymeric column, 500 x 22 mm i.d., eluted with MeOH (100%), flow rate: 5 mL min-1, detector UV at 220 nm).

Fraction seven (FA7; 338.4 mg) was chromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 466 x 24 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH) to afford seven fractions. The fourth fraction (FA7,4; 164.0 mg) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 420 x 24 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH) to yield five fractions. Through preparative HPLC (Asahipak GS-310 2G polymeric column, 500 x 22 mm i.d., eluted with MeOH (100%), flow rate: 5 mL min-1, detector UV at 220 nm) of fraction two (FA7,4,2; 38.9 mg) were isolated the limonoids **4** (FA7,4,2,3; 5.8 mg) and **8** (FA7,4,2,4; 17.4 mg).

Fraction eight (FA8; 342.9 mg) was chromatographed on a silica gel column (230-400 mesh, 342 x 24 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (hexane:CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH) to afford six fractions. The fourth fraction (FA8,4; 195.4 mg) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (230-400 mesh, 473 x 24 mm i.d.) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (CH2Cl2;acetone-MeOH) to yield nine fractions. Limonoid **1** (FA8,4,6,2; 6.6 mg) was isolated from fraction six (FA8,4,6; 15.3 mg) through preparative HPLC (Hypersil 5\(m\) column, 290 x 10 mm i.d., eluted with hexane:isopropanol (9:1), flow rate: 3 mL min-1, detector UV at 240 nm).

### Isolation of the limonoids from Cedrela fissilis

The powdered air-dried roots from _C. fissilis_ were extracted by maceration for three times (72 h) with hexane, dichloromethane and and/or methanol at room temperature. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure by rotary evaporation. A portion of the hexane extract (3.5 g) from roots of _C. fissilis_ (RH) was submitted to VLC on silica gel (70-230 mesh) using a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient. The ethyl acetate-soluble fraction (704 mg) was chromatographed on silica gel (230-400 mesh), and eluted with hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (6:3:1) to give 5 fractions (**A->E**). Fraction **E** was twice chromatographed as above to give four fractions. Fraction **E-4** was submitted to HPLC [Asahipak GS-310 2G polymeric column, 500 x 22 mm i.d., eluted with MeOH (100%), at a flow rate of 5 mL min-1, detector UV at 254 nm] affording **2** (13.1 mg) and **3** (2.5 mg).

The powdered air-dried leaves from _C. fissilis_ were extracted by maceration as described above. The CH2Cl2 extract (29.0 g) from leaves of _C. fissilis_ (LH) was submitted to VLC as described to the hexane extract from roots (RH). The CH2Cl2-soluble fraction (6.0 g) was chromatographed on silica gel (70-230 mesh)-florisil (1:1), with a hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient to afford 9 fractions (A->I). Fraction **D** was three times chromatographed with hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (6:3.5:0.5) to give **4** (8.3 mg) and **6** (5.1 mg). Fraction **I** was also chromatographed three times over silica gel (230-400 mesh), eluted with hexane-CH2Cl2-acetone (7:2:1) yielding 9 fractions. Fraction **I-3** was purified by HPLC [Hypersil 5 \(m\) column, 290 x 10 mm i.d., eluted with hexane:isopropanol (8:2), flow rate: 2.5 mL min-1,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} Limonoid & Survival median (S5) / days \\
**2** & 8 \\
**3** & 8* \\
**4** & 11 \\
**5** & 9 \\
**6** & 9 \\
**7** & 9 \\ control & 10 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Activities of gedunin limonoids on _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ workers at 100 μg mL−1

## Page 5

detector UV at 240 nm] to give **5** (1.2 mg). Fraction **I-8** was chromatographed on Sephadex LH-20, with MeOH (100%) to afford **7** (10.3 mg).

### 1,2-dihydro-3b-hydroxy-7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (5)

White powder; [a]o = - 72.8deg (_c_ 0.32, CH2Cl2); UV (CH2Cl2)lmax/nm: 236; IR (film) \(\nu_{\max}\)/cm-1: 3054, 2986, 1741, 1709, 1265, 1029; 'H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): Table 1; 13C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): Table 1.

### Bioassays

The _A. sexdens rubropilosa_ workers used in the assays were randomly removed from laboratory nests. They had a combined body mass of 20-25 mg. Before assaying the nests were supplied daily with leaves of _Eucalyptus_ sp., out seeds and occasionally with leaves of other plants such as _Hibiscus_ sp., _Ligustrum_ sp. or rose petals. Fifty ants were randomly removed from the nests and distributed to five Petri dishes (ten ants each) for each treatment. During the assays the ants were maintained on an artificial diet consisting of glucose (50 g L-1), bacto-peptone (10 g L-1), yeast extract (1.0 g L-1) and agar (15 g L -1) in distilled water (100 mL).30 The diets (0.4-0.5 g per dish) with the addition of limonoids (experiment) or without (control) were supplemented daily in small plastic caps. The control was prepared with the diet and the solvent. The compounds were poured into the hot diet immediately after it was autoclaved. The final concentration of the limonoids added to the diet was 100 mg mL-1. To ensure that undetectable remaining amounts of the solvent did not affect the ants, a comparison was made with another set of dishes in which water was used instead of solvent. As expected, the same survival rates were obtained with both systems (data not shown). During the assays the material was maintained in an incubator at a temperature of 25 (+-1) degC and relative humidity ranging between 70-80%. The maximum length of observation was 25 days and the number of dead ants was recorded daily.

The survival average 50% (S50) was calculated and survival curves were compared by the computer-assisted software Graph-Pad(tm) using the log-rank test.

Figure 1: Limonoids isolated from _Carapa guianensis_ and _Cedrela fissilis_.



## Page 6



## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Dr. Maria Ines Salgueiro Lima for collecting and identifying the _C. fissilis_ specimen and to the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support.

## Supplementary Information

Supplementary data are available free of charge as PDF file at [http://jbcs.sbaq.org.br](http://jbcs.sbaq.org.br)

## References

* [1] Da Silva, M. F. das G. F.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Dreyer, D. L.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1984**, _12_, 299.
* [2] Champagne, D. E.; Koul, O.; Isman, M. B.; Scudder, G. G. E.; Towers, G. H. N.; _Photochemistry_**1992**, _31_, 337.
* [3] Champagne, D. E.; Isman, M. B.; Towers, G. H. N. In _Insecticides of Plant Origin_; Amason, J.T.; Philosgene, B. J. R.; Morand, P., eds.; The American Chemical Society: Washington, 1989, pp. 95-109.
* [4] Holldobler, B.; Wilson, E.O.; _The Ants_, Harvard University Press: Massachusetts, 1990.
* [5] Weber, N. A.; _Gardening Ants, the Attines_, The American Philosophical Society: Philadelphia, 1972.
* [6] Della-Lucia, T. M. C.; Fowler, H.G. In _As Formigas Cortadeius_; Della-Lucia, T. M. C., ed.; Folha de Vicosa: Vicosa, 1993, pp. 1-3.
* [7] Williams, D. F. In _Applied Myrmecology: A World Perspective_; Vander-Meer, R. K.; Jaffe, K.; Cedeno, A., eds., Westview Press: San Francisco, 1990, pp. 493-495.
* [8] Accacio-Bigi, M. F. M.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Silva, O. A.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; _Rev. Bras. Entomol._**1998**, _41_, 239; Monteiro, M. R.; Torkomian, V. L. V.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Da Silva, M. F. das G. F.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**1998**, _70_, 733; Pagnocca, F. C.; Ribeiro, S. B.; Torkomian, V. L. V.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Silva, O. A.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Ferreira, A. G.; _J. Chem. Ecol._**1996**, _22_, 1325; Ribeiro, S. B.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Victor, S. R.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bacci-Jonior, M.; Silva, O. A.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; _An. Soc. Entomol. Brasil_**1998**, _27_, 421; Rodrigues-Gamboa, T. P.; Victor, S. R.; Fernandes, J. B.; Rodrigues-Filho, E.; Da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Castro, O. C.; _Pytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 837; Leite, A. C.; Bueno, F. C.; Oliveira, C. G.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Da Silva, M. F.das G. F.; Bueno, O. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bacci-Jonior, M.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2005**, _16_, 1391.
* [9] Bickii, J.; Nifutie, N.; Foyere, J. A.; Basco, L. K.; Ringwald, P.; _J. Ethnopharmacol._**2000**, _69_, 27.
* [10] Gilbert, B.; Teixeira, D. F.; Carvalho, E. S.; Paula, A. E. S.; Pereira, J. F. G.; Ferreira, J. L. P.; Almeida, M. B. S.; Machado, R. S.; Cascon, V.; _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**1999**, _71_, 265.
* [11] MacKinnon, S.; Durst, T.; Arnason, J. T.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1997**, _60_, 336.
* [12] Moura, M. D.; Souza-Silva, J.; De Oliveira, R. A. G.; Diniz, M. F. F. M.; Barbosa-Filho, J. M.; _Acta Farm. Bonaerense_**2002**, _27_, 61.
* [13] Lavie, D.; Levy, E. C.; Zelnik, R.; _Bloorg. Chem._**1972**, \(2\), 59.
* [14] Marcelle, B. G.; Moto, B. S.; _Pytochemistry_**1975**, _14_, 2717.
* [15] Ollis, W. D.; Ward, A. D.; De Oliveira, H. M.; Zelnik, R.; _Tetrahedron_**1970**, _26_, 1637.
* [16] Ollis, W. D.; Ward, A. D.; Zelnik, R.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1964**, _37_, 2607.
* [17] Qi, S. H.; Wu, D. G.; Ma, Y. B.; Luo, X. D.; _Acta Bot. Sin._**2003**, _45_, 1129; Qi, S. H.; Wu, D. G.; Zhang, S.; Luo, X. D.; _Pharmacie_**2004**, _59_, 488.
* [18] Trindade, M. B.; _Msc. Dissertation_, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Brazil, 2000.
* [19] Zelnik, R.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1966**, _52_, 6441; Zelnik, R.; _Pytochemistry_**1970**, _10_, 1955.
* [20] Ambrozin, A. R. P.; _Msc. Dissertation_, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Brazil, 2000.
* [21] Bueno, F. C.; Godoy, M.P.; Leite, A. C.; Bueno, O. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Fernandes, J.B.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bacci Jr, M.; _J. Appl. Ent._, submitted.
* [22] Kraus, W.; Cramer, R.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1978**, _27_, 2395.
* [23] Sierra, M. G.; Khalid, S. A.; Duddeck, H.; _Fiotergia_**1989**, _60_, 99; Khalid, S. A.; Duddeck, H.; Sierra, M. G.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1989**, _52_, 922.
* [24] Cespedes, C. L.; Calderon, J. S.; King-Diaz, B. E.; Lotin-Hennsen, B.; _J. Agric. Food Chem._**1998**, _46_, 2810.
* [25] Banergi, B.; Nigam, S.K.; _Fiotergia_**1984**, _55_, 3.
* [26] Ekong, D. E. U.; Olagbemi, E. O.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1967**, _36_, 3525.
* [27] Housley, J. R.; King, F. E.; King, T. J.; Taylor, P. R.; _J. Chem. Soc., C_**1962**, 5095.
* [28] Kokpol, U.; Chavasiri, W.; Tip-Pyang, S.; Veerachato, G.; Zhao, F.; Simpson, J.; Weavers, R. T.; _Photochemistry_**1996**, _41_, 903.
* [29] Govindachari, T. R.; Narasimhan, N. S.; Suresh, G.; Partho, P. D.; Gopalakrishnan, G.; Kumari, G. N. K.; _J. Chem. Ecol._**1995**, _21_, 1585.
* [30] Bueno, O. C.; Morini, M. S. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Silva, O. A.; _An. Soc. Entomol. Bras._**1997**, _26_, 107.



## Page 7

_J. Braz. Chem. Soc.,_ Vol. 17, No. 3, 1-9, 2006.

Printed in Brazil - 62006 Societable Brasileira de Quimica

0103 - 5053 56.00+0.00

**Limonoids from Andiroba Oil and _Cedrela fissilis_ and their Insecticidal Activity

_Alessandra R. P. Ambrozin,\({}^{a}\) Ana C. Leite,\({}^{a}\) Fabiana C. Bueno,\({}^{b}\) Paulo C. Vieira,\({}^{\lx@sectionsign,a}\)_

_Joao B. Fernandes,\({}^{a}\) Odair C. Bueno,\({}^{b}\) M. Fatima das G. Fernandes da Silva,\({}^{a}\)_

_Fernando C. Pagnocca,\({}^{b}\) M. Jose A. Hebling\({}^{b}\) and Mauricio Bacci Jr.\({}^{b}\)_

\({}^{a}\)_Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil_

\({}^{b}\)_Centro de Estudos de Insetos Sociais, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 199, 13506-900 Rio Claro - SP, Brazil_

## Page 8



## Page 9

Figure S4: COSY \({}^{1}\)H\(-\)H 45\({}^{\circ}\) spectra of **5** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) B.



## Page 10



**Figure S6.** Correlation map HMBC of **5** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{\rm J}\)) A.



## Page 11

Figure S8: NMR \({}^{1}\)H spectra of **6** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)).



## Page 12

Figure S10. NMR \({}^{1}\)H spectra of **9** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)).



## Page 13

Figure S12: COSY \({}^{1}\)H\({}^{-1}\)H 45\({}^{\circ}\) spectra of **9** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)). A.



## Page 14



**Figure S14.** Correlation map HSQC of **9** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) A.



## Page 15

Figure S16: Correlation map HMBC of **9** (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) A.



