# 10.1016@0031-9422(73)85034-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Natural Occurrence of Erdman's Dehydrodiisoeugenol+
Footnote †: Part XXII in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Lauraceae”. For Part XXI see Ref. 1.

C. J. Aiba

R. G. Campos Correa

Present address: Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Fortaleza, Ceara.

Otto Richard Gottlieb

Laboratorio de Produtos Naturais da Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo; and Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, Amazonas, Brasil

10 October 1972. _Accepted_ 13 November 1972

###### Abstract

The wood of _Licaria aritu_ Ducke (Lauraceae) contains the neoligans licarin-A, (2\(S\),3_S_)-2,3-dihydro-2-(4'-hydroxy-3'-methoxyphenyl)-7-methoxy-3-methyl-5-_trans_-propenylbenzofuran; (2\(S\),3_S_)-2,3-dihydro-7-methoxy-3-methyl-2-piperonyl-5-_trans_-propenylbenzofuran.

Licaria arituDucke is an arboreous Lauraceae species which occurs along the Manaus-Itacoatiara road, Amazonas State. Its trunk wood contains two related neoligans,2 licarin-A, C18H15O.OH (OMe)2, and licarin-B, C18H15O.OMe.O2CH2. The hydroxyl, methylenedioxy functions in these formulae were assigned after inspection of the PMR spectra; no additional features were noticeable in these spectra. Both revealed the association of the, by now, easily recognizable1,3-5_trans_-2-aryl-3-methyl-2,3-dihydro-benzofuran unit (_t_ 4:9, \(d\), \(J\) 9 Hz, H-2; \(t\) 6:5, _dq_, \(J\) 9 and 7 Hz, H-3; \(t\) 8:7, \(d\), \(J\) 7 Hz, CH3-3) with a _trans_-propenyl group. In the dihydro derivatives, the PMR-signals due to the propenyl groups give way to Ar-propyl signals. The 60 MHz spectra show that the aromatic substitution patterns of both licarins are identical. These are defined as shown in Ia for licarin-A and in Ib for licarin-B through analysis of the 220 MHz spectrum obtained for the latter compound. The absolute stereochemistry shown in the formulae was deduced from the ORD curves, which are both comparable to the analogous curves5 of (2\(S\),3_S_)-2-aryl-3-methyl-2,3-dihydrobenzofurans, rather than to the antipodal curves of (2\(R\),3_R_)-derivatives. The MS of the licarins are compatible with the proposed constituents if, as in previous cases,1,5 1,4-hydrogen shifts are evoked to rationalize the fragmentation pathways.

Footnote 1: Aiba, C. J., Braz Filho, R. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1973) _Phytochem._**12,** 413.

Footnote 2: Gottlieb, O. R. (1972) _Phytochem._**11,** 1537.

Footnote 3: Gregson, M., Ollis, W. D., Redman, B. T., Sutherland, I. O. and Dietrichs, H. H. (1968) _Chem. Commun._ 1394.

Footnote 4: Donnelly, B. J., Donnelly, D. M. X., O’Sullivan, A. M. and Pendergast, J. P. (1969) _Tetrahedron_**25,** 4409.

Footnote 5: Araujo Lima, O., Gottlieb, O. R. and Taveria Magalhaes, M. (1972) _Phytochem._**11,** 2031.

Except for its optical activity, licarin-A is identical with dehydrodiisoeugenol,6 a fact which was ascertained by direct comparison of PMR-spectra and co-TLC. The constitution

## Page 2

of dehydrodiisoeugenol was elucidated in 1933 by Erdtman,7,8 who immediately grasped that one 'konnte die Moglichkeit ins Auge fassen, dass das Lignin durch oxydative Polymerisation eines in der Seitenkette oxyderten Propylguajakos entsteht'. This view is, of course, today widely accepted, and although, as far as we know, dehydrodiisoeugenol has not previously been found in nature, it has been considered a lignin model compound9 ever since.

## EXPERIMENTAL

For experimental techniques see Ref. 5.

_Isolation of the constituents of_ Licaria aritu. Ground trunk wood (2:3 kg) was extracted with benzene in a Soxhlet. The concentrated C6H6 solution deposited crystals of Ib (5 g) which were separated by filtration. The residual extract (93 g) was chromatographed on silica yielding an additional quantity of Ib (3 g) upon elution with C6H6 and Ia (2 g) upon elution with C6H6-CHCl3 (1:1).

_Licarin-A_ (Ia). Colourless crystals, m.p. 114-116deg (hexane) [lit.7 m.p. for (+-)-dehydrodiisoeugenol 133-134deg (EtOH)]. (Found: C, 739: H, 6-6. C20H22O4 requires: C, 73-6; H, 6.7%) \(\lambda_{\max }^{\text{McOH}}\) (nm): 220, 273 (e 33 500, 26 700). \(\nu_{\max }^{\text{KBr}}\) (cm-1): 337

