# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89841-6.pdf

## Page 1



# Distribution of Coumarins in Amazonian _Brosimum_ Species*
Footnote *: Part IV in the series “Plant Chemosystematics and Phylogeny”. For Part III see Ref. 1.

O. R. Gottlieb, M. Leao da Silva and J. G. Soares Maia

Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, Brasil 20 June 1972. _Accepted_ 17 _July_ 1972

###### Abstract

Fourteen _Brosimum_ species (Moraceae) contain either pyranocounarins or furocoumarins, besides \(\mathcal{O}\)-prenyltrosiparin which gives rise to brosiprenin by a Claisen type rearrangement.

_Brosimum_ species have so far been examined photochemically: _B. gaudichaudli_ Trecul whose roots were reported to contain psoralen (Ia)\({}^{2}\) and bergapten (Ib),\({}^{2,3}\) and _B. rubescens_ Taubert whose trunk wood contains xanthyletin (IIa), luvangetin (IIb), 7-demethylsuberosin (IIIa), brosiparin (IIIb) and brosiprenin (IIIc).\({}^{4}\) It was considered that\({}^{\bullet}\)the biosynthesis of IIIc might involve a Claisen type rearrangement, in spite of the fact that \(\mathcal{O}\)-prenyltrosiparin (IIId) had not been detected in the extract of _B. rubescens.\({}^{4}\)_ The hypothesis, however, seemed so attractive that a search for the putative precursor IIId was undertaken in wood samples of 13 Amazonian _Brosimum_ species. As far as TLC comparisons of extracts obtained from preserved voucher specimens merit confidence, the analysis of the results (Table 1) leads to the following comments.

Phystochemistry, 1972, Vol. 11, pp. 3479 to 3480. _Pergamon Press._ Printed in England.



## Page 2

exceptional amounts of prosiparin (IIIb) and prosiprenin (IIIc), and is ubiquitous in the furocoumarin section where its transformation into prosiparin (IIIb) and prosiprenin (IIIc) seems to be blocked. The biosynthetic association of IIIb and IIIc with _O_-prenylbrosiparin is thus a reasonable postulate. Indeed, both in nature and in the laboratory through pyrolysis of _O_-prenylbrosiparin (IIId),4 brosiparin (IIIb) and prosiprenin (IIIc) are formed in substantially equal amounts.

Visualization of spots Nos. 1 (\(R_{f}\) 0*24): blue fluorescence in UV, 2 (\(R_{f}\) 0*30): blue fl. in UV, 3 (\(R_{f}\) 0*42): green fl. in UV, 4 (\(R_{f}\) 0*48): brown colour with I2-vapour, 5 (\(R_{f}\) 0*49): green fl. in UV, 6 (\(R_{f}\) 0*50): blue fl. in UV, 7 (\(R_{f}\) 0*58): green fl. in UV, 8 (\(R_{f}\) 0*90): brown col. with I2-vapour. Spots Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were formed by mixtures of two compounds each. The approximate relative proportion of the constituents were determined for spot No. 4 (IIIb-IIIc, 1*1) with all samples using CHCl3 for their separation by TLC (the \(R_{f}\) value for IIIc is slightly higher than for IIIb); and for spots Nos. 5 (Ia-Ib, 8*1) and 6 (IIa-IIb, 20*1) only for \(B\). _gaudichaudii_3 and for \(B\). _rubescensa_4 through their isolation by column chromatography. INPA--Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Manaus, IPEAN--Instituto de Pesquisas Agropecuarias do Norte, Belem. Nos. of voucher specimens: wood collection/herbarium.

We were not able to locate a wood sample of \(B\). _oleanum_ Kruk. Results on all other recognized Amazonian _Brosimum_ species, however, are listed in Table 1. This records identical chromatograms for 5 pairs of extracts, a fact which suggests that a revision of the genus, already announced by Berg,5 is necessary.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c}  & & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & 7 & 8 \\ Species & Collection site & & IIIa & & IIIb & Ia & IIa & IIId \\ IIIc & Ib & IIb & IIb & IIb & IIb & IIb & IIb \\ _B. parinaroides_ Ducke & Ducke Reserve, & & & & & & & & \\ INPA 3876/21178 & Manaus & & & & & & & & \\ _B. quizentes_ Ducke & Navio Mt., & & & & & & & & \\ INPA 1311/10350 & Amapa & & & & & & & & \\ _B. potolidite_ Ducke & Cachoeira & 10 & 20 & 0 & 80 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 50 \\ INPA 1200/- & Aita, Manaus & & & & & & & & \\ _B. rubescensa_ Taubert & Ducke Reserve, & 15 & 15 & 0 & 20 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 10 \\ _B. paramente_ Ducke & Ducke Reserve, & & 15 & 15 & 0 & 20 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 10 \\ _B. preispedeundiantum_ Ducke & Ducke Reserve, & & 10 & 10 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 50 \\ INPA 551/5086 & Manaus & & & & & & & & & \\ _B. laceryla_ Ducke & Ducke Reserve, & 10 & 20 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 50 \\ INPA 3886/- & Manaus & & & & & & & & & \\ _B. lecentric_ Ducke & Ducke Reserve, & 10 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 10 \\ INPA 2057/14252 & Manaus & & & & & & & & & \\ _B. uttle_ (H.B.K.) Pitter & Rio Preto, & 10 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 10 \\ INPA 186/10728 & Manaus & & & & & & & & & \\ _B. ntelanopontacium_ Berg & Rio Negro, & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 2 & 0 \\ IPEAN E-002682/115165 & Amazoras & & & & & & & & & \\ _B. ecutrollium_ Huber & Manaus- & & & & & & & & \\ INPA 3619/- & & & & & & & & & \\ _B. amplicoma_ Ducke & Belem-Brasilia & 20 & 15 & 50 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 5 & 0 \\ IPEAN F-34936/106008 & Road, km 145 & & & & & & & & \\ _B. krukotif_ Standl, & Humaita & & 20 & 15 & 50 & 0 & 100 & 0 & 5 & 0 \\ IPEAN 6656/39012 & Rio Madeira & & & & & & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: CHCl3-EXTRACTS OF THE WOOD OF Amazonian _Brosimum_ species: relative area of TLC (SiO2, brinzene-acetone, 8:2) spots

