# 10.1007@s00253-007-1171-x.pdf

## Page 1



# Endophytic fungi as models for the stereoselective biotransformation of thioridazine

Keyller Bastos Borges, Warley De Souza Borges, Monica Tallarico Pupo, Pierina Sueli Bonato

# Abstract

The stereoselective kinetic biotransformation of thioridazine, a phenothiazine neuroleptic drug, by endophytic fungi was investigated. In general, the sulfur of lateral chain (position 2) or the sulfur of phenothiazinic ring (position 5) were oxidated yielding the major human metabolites thioridazine-2-sulfoxide and thioridazine-5-sulfoxide. The quantity of metabolites biosynthesized varied among the 12 endophytic fungi evaluated. However, mono-2-sulfoxidation occurred in higher ratio and frequency. Among the 12 fungi evaluated, 4 of them deserve prominence for presenting an evidenced stereoselective biotransformation: _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2), _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1), _Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4), and _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12). Both enantiomers of thioridazine were consumed by the fungi; however, the 2-sulfoxidation yielded preferentially the R configuration at the sulfur atom.

## Introduction

Biotransformation can be defined as the use of biological systems to produce chemical changes on compounds that are not their natural substrates. Biotransformations have many advantages when compared to the corresponding chemical methods. The conditions for such processes are mild and usually do not require the protection of other functional groups. In many cases, biotransformations are stereoselective, allowing the production of enantiomerically pure compounds. Thus, the features governing their regiospecificity differ from those controlling chemical specificity, and indeed, it is possible to obtain biotransformations at centers that are chemically unreactive. Some bitotransformations are cheaper and more direct than their chemical analogues. In addition, the reactions normally occur under ecologically acceptable conditions (Aleu and Collado 2001). Isolated enzyme systems or intact whole organisms (fungi, bacteria, and yeasts) may be used for biotransformations (Aleu and Collado 2001; Garcia-Granados et al. 2004). The use of microorganisms is advantageous because they present fast growth and easy formation of the multienzymatic system. Further, in many cases, the biological transformations are enantioselective, allowing the production of chiral compounds from racemic mixtures.

One crucial aspect to be considered for a successful microbial biotransformation is the selection of the natural source to be studied. Endophytic fungi are an unexplored or at least under-explored source for microbial biotransformation. The term endophytic fungus has been employed to describe those fungi that can be detected at a particular moment within the tissues of apparently healthy plant host. The colonization can be inter- or intracellular, localized or systemic (Schulz and Boyle 2005). Therefore, we are involved in a project to study the stereoselective biotrans

## Page 2

formation of drugs by endophytic fungi. The results presented in this paper were obtained using thioridazine (THD) as drug model.

THD, a phenothiazine neuroleptic drug used for the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders, is commercially available and also administered as a racemic mixture of the enantiomers (-)-(S) and (+)-(R). Its stereochemistry is important because it is believed that the antipsychotic effect of racemic THD is mainly associated with (R)-THD (Eap et al. 1995). Through S-oxidation in the position 2, THD is transformed to thiordidazine-2-sulfoxide (THD-2-SO), which undergoes subsequent oxidation to sulfone (thiordazine-2-sulfone, THD-2-SO2; Axelsson 1977; Bylund 1981; Richelson and Nelson 1984). THD-2-SO and THD-2-SO2 are metabolites considered pharmacologically active. Another metabolite, thiordidazine-5-sulfoxide (THD-5-SO), formed by S-oxidation in the thiazine ring position 5, contributes to the cardiotoxicity of the drug (Gottschalk et al. 1978; Hale and Poklis 1986).

The aim of this study was to study the stereoselective kinetic biotransformation of THD by some endophytic fungi.

## Materials and methods

### Endophytic fungi

The microorganisms used in this study were previously isolated as endophytes from the plants _Tithonia diversifolia_, _Viguera arenaria_, and _Viguera robusta_ (Asteraceae). The selected strains were _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2) and _Cercospora kikuchi_ (TD4), both isolated from _Tithonia diversifolia_; _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1), _Colletotrichum glooesporioides_ (VA2), _Phomopsis anmygdali_ (VA14), _Guignardia mangifera_ (VA15), _Phomopsis longicolla_ (VA19), _Penicillium ochrochloron_ (VA20), isolated from _Viguera arenaria_; _Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4), _Penicillium breviocompactum_ (VR5), _Pestalotiopsis foodans_ (VR8) and _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12) isolated from _Viguera robusta_. All the fungi were identified by rDNA sequence (data not shown). Cultures of endophytes have been maintained on potato dextrose agar slants and stored at 4degC. The strains have been deposited in the Academic Laboratory of Industrial Enzimology of Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirao Preto (University de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil).

### Biotransformation reactions, extraction procedure, and chromatographic analysis

The fungi were cultured using a two-step process. First, mycelial suspension was aseptically inoculated into 125 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 25 ml of seed medium (Jackson et al. 1993). The flasks were incubated for 48 h at 30degC on a rotary shaker (New Brunswick Scientific, model Innova (tm) 4300, New Jersey, USA) operating at 120 rpm (preculture). Second, the resulting mycelia were harvested, rinsed, and transferred into 125 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 50 ml of Czapek medium (Alviano et al. 1992) adjusted to pH 5.0. THD (1 mg dissolved in 100 ml of \(N\),_N_-dimethylformamide) was added to each flask. Control flasks consisted of culture broth without THD and fungi, only sterile medium with \(N\),_N_-dimethylformamide, sterile medium with \(N\),_N_-dimethylformamide and THD, sterile medium with \(N\),_N_-dimethylformamide, and endophytic fungal mycelium (each endophytic fungus studied). Biotransformation experiments were carried out at 30degC, with shaking at 120 rpm for 144 h in light absence. The aliquots of filtrate (1 ml) were collected, each 24 h, and alkalinized with 200 ml of 4 mol l-1 sodium hydroxide solution and extracted with 3 mL diethyl ether. The tubes were capped and submitted to vortex mixing for 2 min and then centrifuged at 1,800x_g_ for 5 min. The upper organic phases (2 ml) were transferred to conical tubes and evaporated under nitrogen. The residues were dissolved in 100 ml of the mobile phase, and 50 ml were analyzed by a validated chiral high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method (Borges et al. 2007).

Briefly, the analyses were carried out using a Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) HPLC system, consisting of a LC 10 AS model solvent pump, a Rheodyne model 7125 injector with a 50 ml loop, a SPD-10 A UV-Vis detector operating at 262 nm, and a CR6-A model integrator. The simultaneous resolution of THD-2-SO and THD-5-SO stereoisomers was performed on a CHIRALPAK(r) AS column (250x4.6 mm, ID, 10 mm particle size, Chiral Technologies, Exton, USA), protected with a 4x4 mm RP-8 endcapped guard column (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), using a mobile phase consisting of hexane/ethanol/methanol (92:6.2, _v_/_v_/_v_) and 0.5% diethylamine at a flow rate of 1.4 ml min-1. The analyses were carried out in an acclimatized room with the temperature set at 23 (+-)degC. Elution order of THD-2-SO stereoisomers was based on Choi et al. (2004). THD-5-SO exists as two diastereoisomeric pairs, referred to fast-eluting (FE) THD-5-SO and slow-eluting (SE) THD-5-SO based on their chromatography properties (Eap et al. 1995; Eap et al. 1996). The absolute configuration at the S center of THD-5-SO is under evaluation by our group.

## Results and discussion

The culture and biotransformation conditions used in this work were defined in preliminary studies (Borges et al. 2007). These conditions were maintained to study the 

## Page 3

stereoselective biotransformation potential of the endophytic fungi. Under the described conditions, within 144 h of incubation of all endophytic fungi selected, the THD metabolites were detected in the medium culture of 11 fungi; only the fungus _Guignardia mangferae_ (VA15) was not effective for the biotransformation of THD. Among the fungi able to biotransformation THD, four of them deserve prominence for presenting an evidenced stereoselective biotransformation: _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2), _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1), _Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4), and _Asppergillus fumigatus_ (VR12).

Endophytic fungi were very efficient in stereoselectively biotransformation rac-thioridazine into the major metabolites THD-2-SO and THD-5-SO. The quantity of metabolites biosynthesized varied among the 12 endophytic fungi evaluated. In general, the sulfur of the side chain (position 2) or the sulfur of phenothiazinic ring (position 5) were oxidated (Fig. 1), however, mono-2-sulfoxidation occurred in higher ratio and frequency. In humans, sulfoxide drugs and metabolites, such as thioridazine, thioridazine-2-sulfoxide, and thioridazine-5-sulfoxide, can undergo further oxidation to sulfone (thioridazine-2-sulfone and thioridazine-5-sulfone; Gruenke et al. 1975; Zehnder et al. 1962). The THD-2-SO2 was also detected in the culture media of _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1), _Colletotrichum gloeosporioides_ (VA2), _Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4), and _Penicillium brevicompacum_ (VR5).

The kinetic studies were carried out for all the fungi but the concentration-time profiles were presented only for the fungi that demonstrated higher biotransformation potential. The data are shown in Fig. 2. Further information could be seem on Table 1 that describes the maximal percentage of formed metabolites for each fungi evaluated in the study and the time required to reach this concentration. The calculations were performed assuming that THD used in the biotransformation experiments was a racemic mixture (50% of each enantiomer). (R-THD can form (R,R)-THD-2-SO or/and (R,S)-THD-2-SO metabolites and also (R)-THD-5-SO (SE) or/and (R)-THD-5-SO (FE) metabolites. In addition, (S)-THD can form (S,S)-THD-2-SO or/and (S, R)-THD-2-SO metabolites and also (S)-THD-5-SO (SE) or/ and (S)-THD-5-SO (FE) metabolites.

### Phonopsis

The fungus _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2) biotransforms stereoselectively the THD in both studied metabolites. This fungus biotransforms (S)-THD in a slightly higher little bit proportion than (R)-THD. When the fungus uses (S)-THD for biotransformation, the 2-sulfoxidation preferentially occurs (approximately four times) at R configuration of the sulfur atom to form (S,R)-THD-2-SO in a higher amount. In addition, when the fungus uses the (R)-THD, there is also a preference (approximately three times) by 2

Fig. 1: Stereoselective biotransformation of thioridazine that undergo oxidation at sulfur atom (phase I reaction)

## Page 4

Figure 2: Concentration–time profile of THD-2-SO and THD-5-SO stereoisomers in culture medium (Czaped) with a _Phomopsis_ sp. (_TD2)_; **b**_Glomerella cingulata (VA1)_; **c**_Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4)_, and **d**_Aspergillus fumigatus fumigatus_ _fimigatus_ (VR12)



## Page 5

sulfoxidation at R configuration. The (R,R)-THD-2-SO metabolite was formed in higher amount than (R,S)-THD-2-SO. Thus, the 2-sulfoxidation of THD by _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2) is preferentially done yielding the R metabolite.

The THD-5-SO metabolite was also formed from (S)- and (R)-THD (dotted line in Fig. 2a). The formation of this metabolite was shown to be similar for all stereoisomers. Among these stereoisomers, the (S)-THD-5-SO (FE) + (R)-THD-5-SO (SE) metabolites presented higher formation (13.2%) on the third day. Among all the 12 fungi studied, _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2) was the most efficient in the production of this metabolite (Table 1). Unfortunately, the absolute configuration of these metabolites has not been established yet.

#### Glomerella cingulata (VA1)

In the same way, the fungus _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1) stereoselectively bitransformed the THD into THD-2-SO and THD-5-SO metabolites. In contrast of _Phomopsis_ sp. (TD2), _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1) used the (R)-THD in higher amount in the biotransformation process. The 2-sulfoxidation of (S)- or (R)-THD also occurred resulting preferentially the R configuration of the sulfoxide metabolite.

This fungus used both the (S)-THD or (R)-THD to biotransformation THD into THD-5-SO. _Glomerella cingulata_ (VA1) presented an interesting differential because it formed high amounts of (S)-THD-5-SO (FE) + (R)-THD-5-SO (SE) metabolites. The other THD-5-SO metabolites were formed in low amount (Fig. 2b).

#### Diaporthe phaseolorum (VR4)

_Diaporthe phaseolorum_ (VR4) biotransformed (S)- and (R)-THD in proportional amounts. This fungus showed appreciable formation of THD-2-SO metabolite (approximately 80% formation of drug added). The 2-sulfoxidation occurred with higher preference resulting in the R configuration of the sulfoxide to form (S,R)-THD-2-SO and (R, R)-THD-2-SO. The sulfoxidation at position 5 in the phenothiazinic ring occurred with low intensity (Fig. 2c).

#### Aspergillus fumigatus (VR12)

The maximal formation of metabolites by _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12) was observed within 48 h of incubation. Next, the concentrations of THD-2-SO and THD-5-SO metabolites start decreasing because both metabolites were also used as substrate by the fungi. The compounds formed in this process were not detected by our analytical procedure.

This fungus used (S)- and (R)-THD to form their sulfoxide metabolites. The formation of THD-2-SO metab

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c} \hline Maximal percentage (\%)a & & & & & & & & \\ \hline Fungib code & Incubation time (hours) & THD-2-SO & & & & & & \\  & & & & & & & & \\  & (S,S) & (S,R) & (R,S) & (R,R) & (R)- (SE) + (S)- (FE) & (S)- (SE) & (R)- (FE) \\ \hline TD2 & 72 & 3.4 & 14.9 & 4.2 & 9.1 & 13.2 & 9.3c & 5.8d \\ TD4 & 120 & – & 0.8 & – & 0.7 & – & – & – \\ VA1 & 96 & 8.1 & 10.5 & 2.1 & 13.0 & 39.7e & 1.5 & 0.9 \\ VA2 & 72 & 1.2 & 7.9 & 1.1 & 6.8 & 0.4 & – & – \\ VA14 & 24 & 2.8 & 16.3 & 2.0 & 9.8 & 0.9 & 0.7 & 0.3 \\ VA15 & n. d. & n. d. & n. d. & n. d. & n. d. & n. d. & n. d. \\ VA19 & 96 & 2.2 & 2.9 & 1.4 & 2.4 & 1.3 & 1.0 & 1.2 \\ VA20 & 120 & 2.1 & 2.7 & 1.9 & 2.3 & 6.7 & 4.2 & 3.8 \\ VR4 & 48 & 18.1 & 84.4f & 13.2 & 82.5g & 1.1 & 0.8 & 0.9 \\ VR5 & 24 & 0.5 & 5.4 & 0.3 & 3.0 & 0.3 & – & – \\ VR8 & 96 & 4.1 & 6.0 & 4.0 & 5.4 & 11.8 & 3.6 & 2.4 \\ VR12 & 48 & 20.7b & 31.5 & 34.4d & 29.0 & 6.9 & 0.8 & 0.9 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Maximal percentage of formation for thioridazine metabolites by endophytic fungi 

## Page 6

olite was higher than the formation of THD-5-SO metabolite. Among all fungi evaluated, _Aspergillus fumigatus_ (VR12) showed higher formation of (S,S)-THD-2-SO and (R,R)-THD-2-SO metabolites (Table 1). The 5-sulfoxidation in the thiazine ring occurred also with low intensity (dotted trace in Fig. 2d).

In conclusion, the obtained data showed that these microorganisms biotransform THD trough sulfoxidation in position 2 of the thionethyl substituent and sulfoxidation in position 5 in the phenothiazine ring as the main oxidation pathways. In humans, THD is extensively metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes. CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 are the main enzymes responsible for 5-sulfoxidation and _N_-demethylation (34-52%), while CYP2D6 catalyzes mono-2- and di-2-sulfoxidation (49 and 64%, respectively; Wojcikowski et al. 2006). Our results showed that, by selecting the appropriate fungi species, it will be possible to mimetic CYP1A2/ CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 metabolism of THD; the specific metabolite could be produced and isolated from culture medium by semi-preparative or preparative chromatography. The ability of these microorganisms to biomimic mammalian metabolism, to perform biotransformation reactions, and to produce high amounts of drug metabolites suggest that this microbial system represents a suitable alternative for drug biotransformation studies.

## References

- Aleu J, Collado IG (2001) Biotransformations by _Botrytis_ species. J Mol Catal B Enzym 13:77-93

- Alviano CS, Farbiar SR, Travassos LR, Angluster J, Souza W (1992) Effect of environmental-factors on _Fonsccea pedrosoi_ morphogenesis with emphasis on sclerotic cells induced by propranolol. Mycopathologia 119:17-23

- Axelsson R (1977) Serum concentrations and antipsychotic effects of thioridazine, thioridazine side-chain sulfoxide and thioridazine side-chain sulfone, in chronic psychotic-patients. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp 21:587-605

- Borges KB, Borges WS, Pupo MT, Bonato PS (2007) Stereoselective analysis of thioridazine-2-sulfoxide and thioridazine-5-sulfoxide: an investigation of rac-thioridazine biotransformation by some endophytic fungi. J Pharm Biomed Anal (in press). DOI 10.1016/j.jpba.2007.05.018

- Bylund DB (1981) Interactions of neuroleptic metabolites with dopaminergic, alpha-adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 217:81-86

- Choi S, Haggar D, Toll L, Cuny GD (2004) Synthesis, receptor binding and functional studies of mesoridazine stereoisomers. Biog Med Chem Lett 14:4379-4382

- Eap CB, Koeb L, Powell K, Baumann P (1995) Determination of the enantiomers of thioridazine, thioridazine-2-sulfoxide and of the isomeric pairs of thioridazine-2-sulfoxide and thioridazine-5-sulfoxide in human plasma. J Chromatogr B 669:271-279

- Eap CB, Guentert TW, Schaublin-Loid M, Stabl M, Koeb L, Powell K, Baumann P (1996) Plasma levels of the enantiomers of thioridazine, thioridazine-2-sulfoxide, thioridazine-2-sulfoxide and thioridazine-5-sulfoxide in poor extensive metabolizers of dextromethorphan and mephenytoin. Clin Pharmacol Ther 59:322-331

- Garcia- Granados A, Fernandez A, Gutierrez MC, Martinez A, Quiros R, Rivas F, Arias JM (2004) Biotransformation of ent-13-epi-manoyl oxides dintonioxidized at C-3 and C-12 by filamentous fungi. Phytochemistry 65:107-115

- Gottschalk LA, Dinovo E, Biener R, Nandi BR (1978) Plasma concentrations of thioridazine metabolites and ECG abnormalities. J Pharm Sci 67:155-157

- Gruenke LD, Craig JC, Dinovo EC, Gottschalk LA, Noble EP, Biener R (1975) Identification of a metabolite of thioridazine and mesoridazine from human plasma. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 10:21-225

- Hale PW Jr, Polkis A (1986) Cardiotoxicity of thioridazine and two stereoisomeric forms of thioridazine 5-sulfoxide in the isolated perfused rat heart. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 86:44-55

- Jackson M, Karwowski JP, Humphrey PE, Kohl WL, Barlow GJ, Tanaka SK (1993) Calibrations, novel antifungal agents produced by _Penicillium restriction_. 1. Production, taxonomy of the producing organism and biological-activity. J Antibiotic 46:34-38

- Richelson E, Nelson A (1984) Antagonism by neuroleptics of neurotransmitter receptors of normal human brain in vitro. Eur J Pharmacol 103:197-204

- Schulz B, Boyle C (2005) The endophytic continuum. Mycol Res 109:661-686

- Wojcikowski J, Maurel P, Daniel WA (2006) Characterization of human cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the metabolism of the piperidine-type phenothiazine neuroleptic thioridazine. Drug Metab Dispos 34:471-476

- Zehnder K, Kreis W, Rutschmann J, Kalberrer F (1962) Metabolism of thioridazine (Mellaril) and one of its pyrrolidine analogues in rat. Biochem Pharmacol 11:535-550

