# 10.1590@S0103-50532007000700017.pdf

## Page 1

A New Antifungal Phenolic Glycoside Derivative, Iridoids and Lignans from _Alibertia sessillis_ (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae)

Viviane C. da Silva,a Vanderlan da S. Bolzani,a Maria C. M. Youngb and Marcia N. Lopes

###### Abstract

Um novo derivado fenolico glucosilado antifungico, 3,4,5-trimetoxifenil-1-_O_-b-d-(_S_-O_-s

## Page 2

butanol. These sub-extracts were tested against _Cladosporium sphaerospermum_ and _C. cladosporioides_ using direct bioautography showing that only the ethyl acetate fraction was active. This sub-extract was bioassay-guide fractioned to afford a new phenolic derivative **1** along with several known compounds.

Compound **1** was isolated as a brown amorphous powder. The molecular formula was determined as being C29H38O17 from the HRESIMS at _m/z_ 657.2065 [M-H]-. The UV spectrum showed an absorption maximum at 279 nm, which is compatible with a phenolic structure. The IR spectrum showed a characteristic absorption band attributable to the following groups: carbonyl (1708 cm-1), hydroxyl (3418 cm-1), and aromatic (1605 and 1509 cm-1), as well as a glycosidic linkage (1063 cm-1). The 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Table 1) revealed signals for two 1,3,4,5-tetrasubstituted symmetrical aromatic rings. The 1H NMR exhibited singlet signals corresponding to five aromatic methoxyls at dH 3.77 (6H, OCH3-3,5), 3.68 (3H, OCH3-4), and 3.87 (6H, OCH3-3'',5'') and two sets of aromatic proton signals at dH 6.41 (2H, H-2,6) and 7.34 (2H, H-2'',6'') due to a 3,4,5-trimethoxy phenyl derivative and symmetrical 3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxy-benzoyl moieties, respectively.9 This was supported by the gHMBC spectrum, which showed cross-peaks corresponding to a long-range coupling of hydrogen at dH 6.41 and carbon signals at dC 155.9 (C-1), 154.7 (C-3,5), 134.7 (C-4) and 96.5 (C-2,6) and also between hydrogen at dH 7.34 and carbon signals at dC 167.9 (C=O), 149.1 (C-3'',5''), 143.1 (C-4''), 120.6 (C-1'') and 108.5 (C-2'',6''). Others signals observed in 1H and 13C NMR spectra are consistent with glycosyl moieties. According to literature,10 the comparison of the 13C NMR data of the glycosidic moiety of various other analogous compounds, the structure of **1** seems to be composed of a glucosyl [dC 103.2 (C-1'), 74.9 (C-2'), 77.9 (C-3'), 71.5 (C-4'), 76.9 (C-5') and 68.2 (C-6')] and an apiosyl [dC 110.4 (C-1''), 78.7 (C-2''), 79.0 (C-3''), 75.0 (C-4'') and 67.9 (C-6'')] moieties. The 1H, 13C NMR and TOCSY spectra confirmed the presence of these two sugar moieties due to the presence of two anomeric signals at dH 4.79 (d, \(J\) 7.5 Hz)/dC 103.2 (CH) for glucose and dH 5.01 (d, \(J\) 2.3 Hz)/dC 110.4 (CH) for apiose. Furthermore, the coupling constants \(J\) 7.5 Hz of the anomeric proton signal of the d-glucosyl moiety as well as the chemical shift (dC 110.4) of the anomeric carbon of the d-apiosyl moiety, demonstrated that both sugar moieties have b-anomeric configurations. The _g_HMBC spectrum of **1** revealed cross-peaks corresponding to long-range couplings of hydrogens H-6' of b-glucose at dH 3.63 (d, \(J\) 10.0 Hz) and 4.06 (d, \(J\) 10.0 Hz) and carbon C-1'' of apiose at dC 110.4; in this way, the b-d-apiosyl moiety was attached to C-6' of the glucose. The chemical shift of the oxymethylene carbon C-6' (dC 68.2) was used to confirm the disaccharide linkage as apiofuranosyl-(1 ~6)-glucopyranoside.10 In addition, long-range correlations between H-5'' signals of b-d-apiose [dH 4.31 (d, \(J\) 11.4 Hz) and 4.39 (d, \(J\) 11.4 Hz)] and the syringoyl carbonyl group (dC 167.9) indicated that the 3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxy-benzoyl group was attached to C-5'' of the b-d-apiose. Finally, the proton at dH 4.79 (H-1' of glucose) was correlated with C-1 of the 3,4,5-trimethoxy phenyl group (dC 155.9), indicating that the b-d-glucosyl moiety was located at C-1. Therefore, the structure of compound **1** was established as being 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl-1-O-b-d-(5-_O_-syngoyl)-apiofuranosyl-(1 ~6)-b-d-glucopyranoside.

The known compounds **2-10** were identified by comparing their 1H and 13C NMR data with those previously published in literature.11-16

The antifungal activity of compounds **1**, **2**, **6-10** against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ was evaluated by direct bioautography on a TLC plate.17,18 Only compound **1** exhibited moderate activity (MIC of 100 mg), when compared with the standard nystatin (1.0 mg).

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

1D- (1H, 13C, TOCSY) and 2D- (gHMQC and gHMBC) NMR experiments were recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer (11.7 T) at 500 MHz (1H) and 126 MHz (13C), using adequate solvent with TMS as internal standard. Accurate-mass measurements were performed on a quadrupole-time of flight instrument (UltrOTOF-Q, Bruker Daltonics). IR spectrum was obtained on a Nicolet-730 FT-IR spectrometer using KBr discs. UV absorption was measured on a Varian ProStar 330 diode array spectrophotometer. Optical rotation was measured on a Polamat A Carl Zeiss Jena. Preparative HPLC was carried

Figure 1: Phenolic glycoside isolated from _Alibertia sessilis_.



## Page 3

out in a Varian HPLC, using a Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (\(250\times 21.20\) mm i.d. \(\times\) 10 \(\mu\)m).

### Plant material

_Alibertia \(sessilis\)_ was collected in the Estacao Ecologica e Experimental de Mogi-Guacu (Ecological and Experimental Reserve of Mogi-Guacu), Sao Paulo, Brazil in November 2003 by Dr M.C.M. Young and identified by Dr I. Cordeiro. The voucher specimen (SP 370.914) was deposited at the Botanical Institute Herbarium, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

The dried and powdered stems (50.0 g) of _A. sessilis_ were extracted exhaustively with ethanol, at room temperature, to give a crude material (4.15 g), which was partitioned in hexane, EtOAc and _n_-BuOH. After evaporation, the EtOAc extract (1.30 g) was submitted to column chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 using MeOH as eluent to give 15 fractions after TLC analysis. Fraction 1 (116.2 mg) was composed of a precipitate, which was recrystallized with H2O to give d-manitol (**10**) (63.7 mg). Fraction 2 (146.4 mg) was subjected to column chromatography on RP-18 using a gradient mixture of H2O/MeOH and MeOH/EtOAc as eluent to give 11 subfractions. Subfraction 2.1 (80.0 mg) was rechromatographed on RP-18, eluted with H2O with increasing amounts of MeOH to afford geniposidic acid (**2**) (11.8 mg). Subfraction 2.7 (29.6 mg) was also submitted to column chromatography on RP-18, using a gradient solvent system of H2O/MeOH and MeOH/EtOAc as eluent to yield 7 subfractions after TLC analysis. Subfraction 2.7.6 (18.8 mg) was chromatographed by preparative HPLC (C18 column; mobile phase: MeOH/H2O (3:7 v/v); flow rate: 10 mL min-1; UV detector: 238 nm) to separate the mixture of the diastereoisomeric lignans (+)-ly-lovingesinol 3a-O-b-d-glucopyranoside (**6**) (6.5 mg) and (-)-lyoniresinol 3a-O-b-d-glucopyranoside (**7**) (5.8 mg).19 Subtraction 2.7.7 (6.7 mg) was identified as 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl-1-O-b-d-(5-O-syringoyl)-apifuranosyl-(1-d)-b-d-glucopyranoside (**1**). Fraction 4 (274.2 mg) was fractioned on RP-18 using H2O with increasing amounts of MeOH as mobile phase to give salicylic acid (**9**) (6.4 mg). Fractions 5 and 6 (104.9 mg) were combined and submitted to column chromatography on silica gel eluting with hexane/EtOAc and EtOAc/MeOH to give 6.9 mg of chlorogenic acid (**8**).

The _n_-butanol extract (0.55 g) was submitted to column chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 using MeOH as eluent to give 7 fractions after TLC analysis. Fraction 3 (180.0 mg) was subjected to column chromatography on RP-18 using a gradient mixture of H2O/MeOH to give 9 subfractions. Subfraction 3.4 (10.2 mg) was identified as 

## Page 4

an iridoid mixture **3-5** and subfraction 3.6 (8.6 mg) as a lignan mixture **6-7**.

#### 3, 4, 5-trimethoxyphenyl-1-O-b-d-(5-O-syringoyl)-apiofuranosyl-(1-d6)-b-d-glucopyranoside (I)

Brown amorphous powder (6.7 mg, 0.16%). [a]\({}_{\text{D}}^{25}\) -2.36 (_c_ 0.021, MeOH). UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\)/nm (MeOH) 279. IR (KBr) vmax/cm1: 3418, 2931, 1708, 1605, 1509, 1461, 1427, 1338, 1228, 1125, 1063, 816, 764. HRESIMS _m/z_ 657.2065 [M - H]* (caled for C29H39O17, _m/z_ 657.2031 [M - H]*):H and 13C NMR: see Table 1.

#### Known compounds isolated

The structures of known compounds were established by 1H and 13C NMR and gHMBC data and by comparing their spectroscopy data with those reported in literature.

#### Geniposidic acid (2) (0.28%)

The 1H and 13C NMR data, in CD3OD, were in accordance with those reported in reference 11.

#### Geniposide (3): 6a-hydroxygeniposide (4); 6b-hydroxygeniposide (5) (0.24%)

The 1H and 13C NMR data of the mixture, in CD3OD, were in accordance with those reported in references 12 and 13. The compounds were identified in mixture mainly on the basis on their TOCSY spectra.

+)-Lyoniresinol-3a-O-b-d-glucopyranoside (6) (0.15%) and (-)-lyoniresinol-3a-O-b-d-glucopyranoside (7) (0.14%)

The 1H and 13C NMR data, in CD3OD, were in accordance with those reported in reference 14.

#### Chlorogenic acid (8) (0.16%)

The 1H and 13C NMR data, in DMSO-_d_, were in accordance with those reported in reference 15.

#### Salicylic acid (9) (0.15%)

The 1H and 13C NMR data, in CD3OD, were in accordance with those reported in reference 16.

#### D- mannitol (10) (1.53%)

The 1H and 13C NMR data, in D2O, were in accordance with those reported in reference 16.

#### Antifungal Assay

The microorganisms used in the antifungal assays _Cladosporium sphaerospermum_ (Penzig) SPC 491 and _C. cladosporioides_ (Fresen) SPC 140 had been kept at the Botanical Institute of Sao Paulo, Brazil. For the antifungal assay, solutions containing 100, 50, 25, 10, 5 and 1 mg of the test compound were prepared. 10.0 mL of each solution was applied to pre-coated TLC plates eluted with EtOAc/MeOH (7:3 v/v) and dried to completely remove all solvents. The chromatograms were sprayed with a spore suspension of _Cladosporium sphaerospermum_ or _C. cladosporioides_ in glucose and salt solution and incubated for 72 h in darkness in a moistened chamber at 25 degC. A clear inhibition zone appeared against a dark background indicating the minimal amount of the compound required to eliminate the fungus (detection limits - minimum amount required for the inhibition of fungal growth on TLC plates). Nystatin was used as the positive control (1 mg).17,18

## Conclusions

Lignans **6** and **7** are here described for the first time as being found in Rubiaceae and the antifungal phenolic glucoside **1** is being reported for the first time in literature. Compound **10** was previously isolated from _Alibertia mycrifolia_. Phenolics **8** and **9** are here reported for the first time as being found in genus _Alibertia_. Iridoids **2** and **3-5** are in agreement with chemosystematic correlations and botanical occurrence in the Rubiaceae family. This study will contribute significantly to improve knowledge about secondary metabolites and biological activity for one more species from the Brazilian Cerrado.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) for financial support and also to the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) for a fellowship granted to V.C.S.

## References

* [1] Bolzani, V. da S.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Cavalheiro, A. J.; Araujo, A. R.; Silva, D. H. S.; Lopes, M. N.; _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**1999**, _71_, 181.
* [2] Dietrich, S. M. C.; Bucheridge, M.; Tine, M. A. S.; Young, M. C. M.; Bolzani, V. da S.; Braga, M.; Marques, M. R.; _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**1998**, _70_, 726.



## Page 5

* 3 Young, M. C. M.; Araujo, A. R.; da Silva, C. A.; Lopes, M. N.; Trevisan, L. M. V.; Bolzani, V. da S.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1998**, _61_, 936.
* 4 Bolzani, V. da S.; Trevisan, L. M. V.; Izumisawa, C. M.; Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Kingston D. G. I.; Young, M. C. M.; _Photochemistry_**1997**, _46_, 308.
* 5 Bolzani, V. da S.; Trevisan, L. M. V.; Izumisawa, C. M.; Young, M. C. M.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**1997**, \(7\), 157.
* 6 Young, M. C. M.; Braga, M. R.; Dietrich, S. M. C.; Gottlieb, H. E.; Trevisan, L. M. V.; Bolzani, V. da S.; _Pytochemistry_**1992**, _31_, 3433.
* 7 Bolzani, V. da S.; Trevisan, L. M. V.; Young, M. C. M.; _Pytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 2089.
* 8 Luciano, J. H. S.; Lima, M. A. S.; Souza, E. B.; Silveira, E. R.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2004**, _32_, 1227.
* 9 Jung, M. J.; Kang, S. S.; Jung, Y. J.; Choi, J. S.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**2004**, _52_, 1501.
* 10 Warashina, T.; Nagatani, Y.; Noro, T. _Pytochemistry_**2004**, _65_, 2003.
* 11 Guarnaccia, R.; Madyastha, K. M.; Tegtmeyer, E.; Coscia, C. J.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1972**, _50_, 5125.
* 12 Damtoft, S.; Jensen, R. S.; Nielsen, B. J.; _Pytochemistry_**1981**, _20_, 2717.
* 13 Bianco, A. In _Studies in Natural Products Chemistry_, Atta-ur-Rahman, ed., Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1990, p. 439.
* 14 Achenbach, H.; Lowel, M.; Waibel, R.; Gupta, M.; Solis, P.; _Planta Med._**1992**, _58_, 270.
* 15 Maruta, Y.; Kawabata, J.; Niki, R.; _J. Agric. Food Chem._**1995**, _43_, 2592.
* 16 Pouchert, C. J.; Behnke, J.; _The Aldrich Library of \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H FTNMR Spectra_, Aldrich Chemical Company: Milwaukee, 1993.
* 17 Homans, A. L.; Fuchs, A.; _J. Chromatogr._**1970**, 51, 327.
* 18 Rahalison, L.; Hamburger, M.; Monod, M.; Frenk, E.; Hostettmann, K.; _Planta Med._**1994**, _60_, 41.
* 19 da Silva, V. C.; Silva, G. H.; Bolzani, V. da S.; Lopes, M. N. _Ecl. Quim._**2006**, _31_, 55.



## Page 6

A New Antifungal Phenolic Glycoside Derivative and Iridoids and Lignans from _Alibertia sessillis_ (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae)

Viviane C. da Silva, Vanderlan da S. Bolzani, Maria C. M. Young and Marcia N. Lopes

# Abstract


## Page 7

Figure S3: HRESIMS spectrum of compound **1** (negative mode).



## Page 8

Figure S5: Expansion of \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of compound **1** (CD3OD, 500 MHz).



## Page 9

Figure S7: \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of compound **1** (CD\({}_{3}\)OD, 126 MHz).



## Page 10

Figure S9: Expansions of the gHMBC spectrum of compound **1** (CD,OD, 500 MHz).



## Page 11

Figure S10. Expansions of the gHMBC spectrum of compound **1** (CD,OD, 500 MHz).



## Page 12



