# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000800029.pdf

## Page 1

New Bioactive Metabolites Produced by _Phomopsis cassiae_, an Endophytic Fungus in _Cassia spectabilis_

Geraldo H. Silvaa, Helder L. Teles, Henrique C. Trevisaa, Vanderlan da S. Bolzani a, Maria C. M. Youngb, Ludwig H. Pfenningc, Marcos N. Eberlind, Renato Haddadd, Claudio M. Costa-Netoe and Angela R. Araijo

e-mail: araujoar@iq.unesp.br _Istituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14801-970 Araraquara-SP, Brazil_

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]



## Page 2

(Table 1) and DEPT results for **1** suggested one phenyl group (five quaternaries carbons), an ester group, a -CH2CH3 moiety and two aromatic methyls. The ester moiety was in agreement with its absorption at 1633 cm-1 in IR, and the signal at dC 169.2. The DEPT results indicated two exchangeable protons, which were assigned to phenolic hydroxy1s. The FeCl3 positive reaction and the IR absorption at 3435cm-1 confirmed phenolic hydroxyl groups consistent with the singlet at dH3 6.26 (dC 99.9), indicating an aromatic hydrogen _ortho-ortho_ dihydroxy-11 dH 1.26 (t, \(J\) 7.0 Hz) and H-10 dH 4.22 (q, \(J\) 7.0 Hz) evidenced an ethyl radical, and the heteronuclear correlation 3_J_CH between dH 4.22 (H-10) and dC 169.2 (C-7) confirmed the presence of an ethyl ester.

The complete attribution of the hydrogen and carbon peaks was accomplished based on the data of 2D NMR (_g_HMQC, _g_HMBC, NOESY, _g_COSY). In the _g_HMBC spectrum of **1**, correlation of H-3 with C-1 and C-5, and H-9 with C-4 and C-6 allowed to assign the other substituents in the aromatic ring. In the NOESY spectrum of **1**, a correlation between dH 2.10 (H-8) and dH 1.95 (H-9), confirmed the proximity of these methyls. Based on these data, the structure of **1** was established. This compound was previously published as a synthetic intermediate3-5 and, to our knowledge, is being reported at first time as a natural product along with its 1D and 2D NMR data.

Compound **2** was isolated as an yellow solid and it was assigned the molecular formula C13H12O5 (eight insaturation degrees) based on HRESIMS [M + H]* at _m/z_ 249.0923], 13C NMR and DEPT data. The 'H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of **2** showed two methyl resonances at dH 1.42 (d, \(J\) 7.0 Hz, 3H) and 1.97 (s, 3H), two vinilic protons at dH 4.68 (s, 1H) and dH 4.74 (s, 1H), an aldehyde at dH 10.11(s, 1H) and one benzylic methine at 4.51 (q, \(J\) 7.0 Hz, 1H).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c}  & **1** & & **2** \\ Position & 1H & 13C & _g_HMBC (H to C) & 1H & 13C & _g_HMBC (H to C) \\
1 & & 112.2 & & & 167.8 & \\
2 & & 154.5 & & & 100.6 & \\
3 & 6.26 (s) & 99.9 &

## Page 3

_sphaerospermum_ was evaluated by bioautography11,12 and the detection limit for the compounds **1** and **2** was 1.0 _m_g, the same as for the positive control nystatin.

Citotoxicity of the compounds **1**, **2** and **3** against human cervical tumor cell line (HeLa) were tested using the MTT assay.13 Compound **2** exhibited weak cytotoxicity (IC50 200 _m_mol L-1) and **3** a strong cytotoxicity (IC50 10 _m_mol L-1). Cisplatin, a cytotoxic agent, was used as positive control with IC50 5 _m_mol L-1.

## Experimental

### _Instrumental and chromatography materials_

Optical rotations were measured in MeOH using a Perkin Elmer polarimeter with a sodium lamp at 598 nm and 25degC. IR spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer-FT-IR, using KBr pellets. The NMR spectra were recorded in CD3OD and DMSO-_d_6, on a Varian Unit 500 spectrometer at 500 and 125 MHz. Mass spectra ESI-MS were obtained on a Fisons Platform VG mass spectrometer at 20 eV. For HRESIMS a Q-TOF Autospec-Micromass equipment was used. Column chromatography (CC) was performed over reversed-phase silica gel 230-400 mesh (Merck). TLC was performed using silica gel 60 (>230 mesh) and precoated silica gel 60 PF254 (Merck). Spots on TLC were visualized under UV light and by spraying with anisaldehyde-H2SO4 reagent, followed by heating at 120 degC. Analytical HPLC was performed on a Varian Pro Star 230 using a Phenomenex C-18 column (250 mm x 4.6 mm). Preparative HPLC was performed on a Varian Prep-Star 400 system using a Phenomenex C-18 (250 mm x 21.20 mm) preparative column.

### Plant material

The leaves of _Cassia spectabilis_ were collected in June 2001 in Araraquara City. The botanical identification was made by Professor Maria Claudia Marx Young and a voucher specimen (SILVA-193) has been deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### _Fungal isolation_

_Phomopsis cassiae_ was isolated from healthy leaves of _Cassia spectabilis_ as previously reported.14,15 The fungus was identified by Dr. Ludwig H. Pfenning and deposited in the fungal herbarium of the Universidade Federal de Lavras, assigned as CML 292. The strain _Phomopsis cassiae_ was subculture in Petri plates containing Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) and incubated during seven days. After this period, it was inoculated at 25-28 degC in 28 Erlenmeyer flasks of 500 mL, each containing 200 mL of Potato Dextrose Broth (PDB). The cultures were incubated at 25 degC and aerated by agitation on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm for 28 days. Extraction of the filtered fermentation broth (_ca._ 5.6 L) with ethyl acetate (3 x 2.4 L) provided the organic phase, that was dried with MgSO4 and concentrated to yield 277.1 mg of crude extract.

### _Extraction and isolation_

The crude extract (277.1 mg) was chromatographed by CC using reverse phase silica (Merck LiChroprep(r) RP-18 25-40 mm; 3 x 15 cm) and eluted with H2O:MeOH (85:15 ) to MeOH (100%) gradient to afford 12 fractions (150 mL each, Fr-1 to Fr-12). The fraction Fr-2 (19.3 mg, H2O:MeOH - 65:35) was purified on a preparative HPLC column (RP - 18 H2O:ACN - 86:14, 10 mL min-1), yielding **3** (3.0 mg, tk = 35 min). The fractions Fr-9 (4.0 mg, H2O:MeOH - 35:65) and Fr-12 (4.6 mg, H2O:MeOH - 75:25), were analyzed by analytical HPLC [H2O:ACN (35:5) to ACN (100%) gradient, 40 min.] yielding **1** (4.0 mg, tk = 26.3 min) and **2** (4.6 mg, tk = 31.8 min).

### _Antifungal assay_

The microorganisms used in the antifungal assays _C._\(cladosporioides\) (Fresen) de Vries SPG 140 and _C._\(sphaeospermum\) (Penzig) SPC 491, have been maintained at the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, Brazil and assays were performed using direct autobiography.11,12 Nyastatin was used as positive control (detection limit 1_m_g).

### _Cytotoxicity bioassay_

The human cervical cancer cell line (HeLa) assay was performed as previously described.13 Cisplatin was used as positive control (IC50 5.0 _m_mol L-1).

### _Ethyl 2,4-dihydroxy-5,6-dimethylbenzoate (1)_

White solid, (Rt 0.75 on SiO2-TLC [CHCl3:MeOH (9:1)]; ESI-MS, +20 eV, _m_/z_ (%): 211 [M + H]* (100); IR (KBr) _ν_max/cm-1: 3435, 2928, 2864, 1633; 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Table 1).

_Phomopsislactone (2)_. Yellow solid, Rf 0.58 on SiO2-TLC [CHCl3-MeOH (9:1)]; [a]25+50 (c 0.19 CHCl3); HRESIMS: _m_/z 249.0923 (calc. for C13H2O5, 249.0763); IR (KBr) _ν_max/cm-1: 3435, 2925, 2860, 1633; 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Table 1).



## Page 4



## Acknowledgments

This work was funded by grants of the Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biot-FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br); Grant # 03/02176-7 awarded to V. da S. B., main investigator. The authors V. S. B and M. C. M. Y. acknowledge CNPq for research fellowships. H. L. T and G. H. S. acknowledge CAPES and CNPq for Ph.D. fellowships.

## References

* [1] Vilegas, C.J.; Bolzani, V.S.; Furlan, M.; Barreiro, E.; Young, M.C.M.; Tomazela, D.; Eberlin, M.N.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2004**, _67_, 908, and references therein.
* [2] Lorenzi, H.; Matos, F.J.A.; _Plantas Medicinais do Brasil Nativas e Exoticas,_ Instituto Plantarum: Nova Odessa, 2002, p. 291.
* [3] Canonica, B.; Rindone, B.; Santaniello, E.; Scolastico, C.; _Tetrahedron_**1972**, _28_, 4395.
* [4] Canonica, B.; Rindone, B.; Santaniello, E.; Scolastico, C.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1971**, _28_, 2691.
* [5] Bartlett, A.J.; Holker, J.S.E.; O' Brien, E.; _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I_**1983**, 667.
* [6] Ballester, A.; Verwey, A.; Overeem, J.C.; _Pytochemistry_**1975**, _14_, 1667.
* [7] Kitanaka, S.; Takido, M.; _Pytochemistry_**1981**, _20_, 1951.
* [8] Barber, J.; Garson, M.J.; Staunton, J.; _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I_**1981**, \(9\), 2584.
* [9] Curtis, R.F.; Hassall, C.H. ; Nazar, M.; _J. Chem. Soc. (C)_**1968**, 85.
* [10] Toroyama, T.; Kubota, T.; _J. Chem. Soc. (C)_**1971**, 2703.
* [11] Rhalison, L.; Hamburger, M.; Hostettmann, K.; Monod, M.; Frenk, E.; _Pytochem. Anal._**1991**, \(5\), 199.
* [12] Lopes, M.N.; Oliveira, A.C.; Young, M.C.M.; Bolzani, V.S.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2004**, _15_, 468.
* [13] Mosmann, T.; _J. Immunol. Methods_**1983**, _65_, 55.
* [14] Maier, W.; Hammer, K.; Dammann, U.; Schulz, B.; Strack, D.; _Planta_**1997**, _202_, 36.
* [15] Cafeu, M.C.; Silva, G.H.; Teles, H.L.; Bolzani, V.S.; Araujo, A.R.; Young, M. C.M.; Pfenning, L.H.; _Quim. Nova_, **2005**, _28_, 991.



