# 10.1590@S0103-50532009000400008.pdf

## Page 1



# Antiparasitic Activities of Acridone Alkaloids from _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) **Merr.**

Djalma A. P. dos Santos, Paulo C. Vieira, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Lauren Rattray and Simon L. Croft

e-mail: paulo@dq.ufscar.br \({}^{a}\)Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil

\({}^{b}\)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, WC1E 7HT, UK

###### Abstract

Onze alcaloides acridonicos isolados de _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) Merr. foram avaliados para suas attividades _in vitro_ contra linhagens de _Plasmodium falciparum_ sensfveis a claroquina 3D7, _Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense_ STIB9000 e _Leishmania donovanii_ L82. Ensaios com celulas KB foram tambem executados com o objetivo de se determinar o grau de toxicidade das substancias attivas contra os parasias. Nove dos compostos apresentaram IC\({}_{50}\) entre 0,3 e 11,6 uM contra _P. falciparum_. Em contraste, um pequeno numero de compostos mostrou attividade significativa contra _T. brucei rhodesiense_ e nembran apresenta utividade contra _L. donovanii_. Entre os alcaloides tre stivernam IC\({}_{50}\)\(<\) 1,0 uM contra _P. falciparum_, enquanto que com _T. b. rhodesiense_ cinco mostraram IC\({}_{50}\)\(<\) 10 uM. A caracterizacao dos alcaloides, 1,3,5-triidoxi-4-metoki-10-meti-2,8-bis(3-metilbut-2-eni)acridin-9(10\(H\))-ona (**1**), 2,3-diidro-4,9-diidroxi-2-(2-hidroxipropan-2-il)-11-metoki-10-metilfuro[3,2-b]acridin-5(10\(H\))-ona (**2**) e 3,4-diidro-3,5,8-triidroxi-6-metoki-2,2,7-trimetil-2\(H\)-pirano[2,3-a]acridin-12(7\(H\))-ona (**3**), e aqui discutida. Discute-se tambem a relacao estrutura-attividade para todos os compostos ensaiados. O isolamento e dados espectrais para os alcaloides **1**-3 estao sendo aqui descritos pela primeira vez, embora em trabalho anterior tenham sido relatadas as suas attividades citotoxicas.

Eleven acridone alkaloids isolated from _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) Merr. were examined for _in vitro_ activity against chloroquine-sensitive _Plasmodium falciparum_ 3D7, _Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense_ STIB900 and _Leishmania donovanii_ L82. An assay with KB cells was developed in order to compare _in vitro_ toxicity of alkaloids with the selective action on the parasites. Nine of the compounds had IC\({}_{50}\)values ranging from 0.3 to 11.6 uM against _P. falciparum_. In contrast, a small number of compounds showed significant activity against _T. brucei rhodesiense_ and none had activity against _L. donovanii_. Among the alkaloids three had IC\({}_{50}\)\(<\) 1.0 uM against _P. falciparum_, whereas against _T. b. rhodesiense_ five had IC\({}_{50}\)\(<\) 10 uM. The characterization of the acridone alkaloids, 1,3,5-trihydroxy-4-methoxy-10-methyl-2,8-bis(3-methylbut-2-enyl)acridin-9(10\(H\))-one (**1**), 2,3-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-2-(2-hydroxypropan-2-yl)-11-methoxy-10-methylfuro[3,2-\(b\)] acridin-5(10\(H\))-one (**2**) and 3,4-dihydro-3,5,8-trihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,2,7-trimethyl-2\(H\)-pyrano[2,3-\(a\)]acridin-12(7\(H\))-one (**3**), is discussed, as well as the structure-activity relationship of all compounds assayed. Isolation and spectral data of alkaloids **1**-**3 are described for the first time although their citotoxicities to cancer cells have been described before.

Keywords:antiparasitic acridone alkaloids, malaria, _Swinglea glutinosa_, Rutaceae

## Introduction

Parasitic protozoa are the causative agents of human and livestock diseases infecting hundreds of millions of people every year and are collectively one of most important causes of human misery.1 Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), or sleeping sickness, malaria, Chagas' disease and leishmaniasis are major health problems in many countries. HAT promoted by _Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense_ and _T. b. gambense_ is endemic in over 30 African countries threatening over 60 million people. HAT has reached epidemic proportions in some countries, such as Angola, southern Sudan, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo.2,3 Malaria has re-emerged as a major public health problem over the past three decades mainly because of the development of worldwide resistance of _Plasmodium

## Page 2

falciparum_ to chloroquine, a drug which formed the basis for cheap and effective treatment and for prophylaxis of this disease.4 Each year, approximately 300 to 500 million malaria infections lead to over one million deaths. In many endemic countries, malaria is responsible for economic stagnation, lowering the annual economic growth in some regions by up to 1.5%.5,6 Leishmaniasis is a disease caused by protozoa of the genus _Leishmania_. According to WHO 88 countries are affected, with 350 million people at risk. 90% of cases of visceral leishmaniasis occur in India, Sudan, Bangladesh and Brazil.7 Present chemotherapy for these diseases is inadequate or toxic, or becoming ineffective due to an increase in resistance.8

The family Rutaceae contains many secondary metabolites such as alkaloids, flavonoids, coumarins, limonoids and lignans with a large spectrum of biological activities.9 Studies showed that acridone alkaloids are compounds with promising activity against _P. falciparum_,10,11 and also have antiviral12 and antiproliferative effects on cancer cell lines.13,14 The Asian genera _Citrus_ and _Swinglea_ are members of the Rutaceae and are included in the subfamily Aurantioideae. _Citrus_ species have been investigated and characterized by possessing acridone alkaloids. These data stimulated an investigation of _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) Merr. in a search for lead aciden.

From the MeOH extract of the stem bark of _S. glutinosa_ three new acridone alkaloids were identified: 1,3,5-trihydroxy-4-methoxy-10-methyl-2,8-_bis_(3-methylbut-2-enyl)acridin-9(10_H_)-one (**1**), 2,3-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-2-(2-hydroxypropan-2-yl)-11-methoxy-10-methylfurot[3,2-_b_]acridin-5(10_H_)-one (**2**) and 3,4-dihydro-3,5,8-trihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,2,7-trimethyl-2_H_-pyrano[2,3-_a_]acridin-12(7_H_)-one (**3**). In addition, eight known alkaloids were characterized by the analysis of their NMR spectra and compared with reference data: 1,3,5-trihydroxy-2,8-_bis_(3-methylbut-2-enyl)-10-methyl-9-acridone (**4**),10 glycoprotein-IV (**5**),15 citrusinine-II (**6**),16 citrusinine-I(**7**),175 citirbrase (**8**),165-hydroxynoracronycine (**9**),18 pyranofoline (**10**)19 and _bis_-5-hydroxynoracronycine (**11**)20. These alkaloids were tested _in vitro_ against chloroquine-sensitive _P. falciparum_ 3D7, _T. b. rhodesiense_ STIB900, _L. donovani_ L82 and their toxicity effects were also evaluated on KB cells.



## Page 3



## Results and Discussion

Compound **1** was isolated as an amorphous powder, the molecular formula was determined as C23H23NO5 by HRESIMS, showing an [M+H]* peak at _m_/_z_ 424.2124. The UV absorptions bands at lmax/nm: 222, 265, 285, 332 and 410 nm, IR absorptions at vmax/cm1: 3500 and 1625 cm and the characteristic signal of a hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl proton at d 14.42 in the 1H NMR spectra, exchangeable with D2O, suggested the presence of a hydroxyl group. These data together with analyses of the 13C NMR spectrum, suggested that compound **1** had a 1-hydroxy-9-acridone framework.16-22

The 1H NMR spectrum of the compound **1** showed two AB type aromatic protons at d 7.17 (1 H, d, \(J\) 8.0Hz, H-6) and 6.96 (1H, d, \(J\) 8.0Hz, H-7), one _N_-methyl group at d 3.74 and one _O_-methyl group at d 3.76. Also signals of two trisubstituted double bonds at d 5.41(1H, m, H-2"), 5.31 (1H, m, H-2"), two methylene protons at d 4.01 (2H, d, \(J\) 7.0Hz, H-1"), 3.40 (2H, d, \(J\) 7.0Hz, H-1'), the former protons being deshielded by the 9-carbonyl group, and four vinyl methyl groups [d 1.80 (3H,d, \(J\) 0.9Hz, H-4' _E_), 1.65 (3H,d, \(J\) 1.0Hz, H-5' Z), 1.74 (3H,d, \(J\) 0.9Hz, H-4" _E_), 1.69 (3H,d, \(J\) 1.0Hz, H-5" _Z_)] were observed, which suggested the presence of two prenyl groups (3-methylbut-2-enyl). Their positions were confirmed at C-2 and C-8 by HMBC.

The position of a prenyl group at C-2 was confirmed by the correlation of the methylene protons at d 3.40 (H-1') with C-1 (d 158.1), C-2 (d 109.4), C-3 (d 156.1), C-2' (d 123.6) and C-3' (d 131.4) in the HMBC spectrum. In addition, the correlation of 1-OH at d 14.42 with C-1 and C-9a (d 107.6) confirmed that the first prenyl group was attached to C-2. The position of the second prenyl group was confirmed by the correlation of the deshielded methylene protons at d 4.01 (H-1") with C-7 (d 125.4), C-8 (d 135.0), C-2" (d 125.4) and C-3" (d 131.2), confirming that the second prenyl group was attached to C-8. The _N_-methyl protons showed correlation with C-4a and C-5a at d 140.2 and 139.4, respectively. The _O_-methyl protons showed correlation with C-4 at d 128.8. This value is consistent with the acridone possessing an _O_-methyl group at C-4.17,23 Based on these data, the structure of **1** was characterized as 1,3,5-trihydroxy-4-methoxy-10-methyl-2,8-_bis_(3-methylbut-2-enyl)acridin-9(10_H_)-one. Table 1 shows the data of 1H, 13C NMR and correlations observed in the HMBC experiment.

Compound **2** was isolated as an amorphous powder, the molecular formula C23H21NO6 was determined on the basis of HRESIMS, exhibiting an [M+H]* peak at _m_/_z_ 372.1447. The UV and IR spectra were identical to those of **1**, however some differences were observed in the 1H and 13C NMR. In the 1H NMR spectrum, the characteristic signal of a hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl proton at d 14.42, exchangeable with D2O suggested the presence of a hydroxyl group. These data suggested that compound **2** had a 4-hydroxy-5-acridone skeleton.16-22

The 1H NMR spectrum of **2** showed an ABX type aromatic spin system at d 7.15 (1 H, t, \(J\) 7.8Hz, H-7), 7.29 (1H, dd, \(J\) 7.8, 1.4Hz, H-8) and 7.80 (1H, dd, \(J\) 7.8, 1.4Hz, H-6), this last proton being deshielded by the 5-carbonyl group. The spectrum also showed one _N_-methyl group at d 3.85 and one _O_-methyl group at d 3.89. The presence of a hydroxyisopropyldihydrofuran moiety was suggested by an oxymethine proton at d 4.88 (1H, dd, \(J\) 9.4, 7.8Hz, H-2), methylene protons as two dd in an AB system at d 3.20 (1H, dd, \(J\) 15.5, 7.8Hz, H-3a) and 3.26 (1H, dd, \(J\) 15.5, 9.4Hz, H-3b), two methyl groups at d 1.33 (3H, s, H-2') and 1.29 (3H, s, H-3'). The signal at d 93.0 and 71.5 in the 13C NMR spectrum supported the presence of this substituent in the acridone nucleus.23

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Position & 13C \(\delta\) & 13F \(\delta\) (mult., \(J\) in Hz) & HMBCa (H-C) \\
1 & 158.1 \\
1-OH & & 14.42 (s) & C-1, C-2 \\
2 & 109.4 \\
3 & 156.1 \\
4 & 128.8 \\
4* & 140.2 \\
5 & 147.3 \\
5* & 139.4 \\
6 & 120.0 & 7.17 (d, 8.0) & C-5, C-8, C-5a \\
7 & 125.4 & 6.96 (d, 8.0) & C-8a, C-1” \\
8 & 135.0 \\
8a & 123.6 \\
9 & 185.5 \\
9a & 107.6 \\ N-CH3 & 45.3 & 3.74 (s) & C-4a, C-5a \\ O-CH3 & 59.8 & 3.76 (s) & C-4 \\
1’ & 22.4 & 3.40 (d, 7.0) & C-1, C-2, C-3, C-3’, C-2’ \\
2’ & 123.6 & 5.31 (m) & C-4’, C-5’ \\
3’ & 131.4 \\
4’ & 25.9 & 1.65 (d, 1.0) & C-2’, C-3’, C-5’ \\
5’ & 17.8 & 1.80 (d, 0.9) & C-2’, C-4’, C-3’ \\
1” & 34.3 & 4.01 (d, 7.0) & C-7, C-8, C-2”, C-3” \\
2” & 125.4 & 5.41 (m) & C-4’, C-5” \\
3” & 131.2 \\
4” & 25.9 & 1.74 (d, 0.9) & C-2”, C-3”, C-5” \\
5” & 18.0 & 1.69 (d, 1.0) & C-2”, C-3”, C-4” \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: 1H and 13C NMR and HMBC data for compound **1** (acetone-_d_)

## Page 4

The presence of a linear orientation of the hydroxyisopropyldihydrofuran moiety was confirmed by correlations of the methylene protons at d 3.20 (H-3) with C-3a (d 109.4), C-2 (d 93.0) and C-1' d 71.5 and the correlations of the 4-OH at d 14.31 with C-4a (d 108.4), C-4 and C-3a in the HMBC spectrum. The spectrum also showed the correlation of the signals of the _N_-methyl protons at d 3.85 with d 143.5 and 138.0 assigned to C-11a and C-9a, respectively. The _O_-methyl proton at d 3.89 showed correlation with C-11 at d 126.6. The correlation at H-6, H-7 and H-8 in the HMBC spectrum allowed the assignments of the carbons C-9, C-9a, C-8, C-7, C-6, C-5a and C-5. Based on the above evidence, compound **2** could be defined as 2,3-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-2-(2-hydroxypropan-2-yl)-11-methoxy-10-methylfuro[3,2-_b_] acridin-5(10_H_)-one. Table 2 shows 1H, 13C NMR data for **2** and the correlations observed in the HMBC.

Compound **3** was isolated as an amorphous powder, the molecular formula was determined as C23H23NO6 by HRESIMS, showing an [M + H]+ peak at _m/z_ 372.1447. The UV absorption band at lmax 265, 285, 332 and 410 nm, IR absorptions at vmax 3509 and 1620 cm-1 and comparison with 1H and 13C NMR data characterized an acridone nucleus.16-22 The lack of a characteristic signal of hydrogen-bonded hydroxy proton in the 1H NMR spectrum, in acetone-d_d_s and DMSO-d_s_c and the shielded value of C-12 at d 177.7 in the 13C NMR spectrum suggested that there is no intramolecularly hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl group as observed for **1** and **2**. The 1H NMR spectrum showed an ABX type aromatic spin system at d 7.04 (1H, t, \(J\) 7.8Hz, H-10), 7.15 (1H, dd, \(J\) 7.8, 1.5Hz, H-9) and 7.64 (1H, dd, \(J\) 7.8, 1.5 Hz, H-11). The spectrum also showed one _N_-methyl group at d 3.65 and one _O_-methyl group at d 3.77. The presence of a 3-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyldihydropyran moiety was suggested by an oxymethine signal at d 3.88 (1H, m, H-3), two methylene protons Ha at d 3.00 (1H, dd, \(J\) 16.8, 5.7Hz, Ha-4), Hb 2.61 (1H, dd, \(J\) 16.8, 7.8Hz, Hb-4) and two methyl groups at d 1.43 (3H, s, H-17) and 1.28 (3H, s, H-2'). The resonances at d 69.1 and 78.1 in the 13C NMR spectrum supported the presence of this substituent on the acridone nucleus.

In the HMBC spectrum of **3,** the methylene protons at d 2.61 (H-4) showed correlations with C-4a (d 103.9), C-5 (d 153.3), C-3 (d 69.1) and C-2 (d 78.1), indicating that the substituent was located at an angular position. This spectrum also showed the correlation of the _N_-methyl protons at d 3.65 with C-6a (d 143.2) and C-7a (d 137.1). The _O_-methyl protons at d 3.77 showed correlation with C-6 at d 130.4; this value is consistent with an acridone having an _O_-methyl group in this position.17,23 Correlations of H-9, H-10 and H-11 allowed the assignments of the carbons C-8, C-8a, C-9, C-10, C-11, C-11a and C-12. Therefore, compound **3** was identified as 3,4-dihydro-3,5,8-trihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,2,7-trimethyl-2_H_-pyrano[2,3-_a_] acridin-12(7_H_)-one. Table 3 shows the data of 1H, 13C NMR and the correlation observed in the HMBC.

The eleven acridone alkaloids isolated from _S. glutinosa_ were tested for _in vitro_ activity against _P. falciparum_, _T. b. rhodesiense_ and _L. donovani_. An assay with KB cells indicated _in vitro_ cytotoxicity. The results are summarized in Table 4. To facilitate the discussion, IC50 values were assigned as IC50xagainst _T. b. rhodesiense_, _P. falciparum_ and KB cells, respectively.

Nine out of the eleven acridone alkaloids showed IC50 below 10 mM, four showed IC50 below 10 mM and none displayed significant activity against _L. donovani_.

Related acridone alkaloids from _Thannosoma rodesica_ (Bak. F.), showed activity against promastigote and amastigote forms of _Leishmania major_. These

## Page 5

alkaloids have a methyl 2,3-dihydroxypropanoate chain at C-3 and C-4,23 indicating that the substitution in the acridone skeleton is important for activity in this class of compounds.

According to the data, compound **5**, with one phenyl group at C-2, was the most active against _P. falciparum_ with IC50.3 mM. Comparison of **5**, **1** (IC50.2.6 mM) and **4** (IC50.2.6 mM) indicates that the second phenyl at C-8 was responsible for reducing the activity of this series. This fact was also observed by Weniger _et al._,10 who performed the assay with four alkaloids from _S. glutinosa_ on a Nigerian chloroquine-sensitive strain of _P. falciparum_. Analysis of the results for compounds **2**, **3**, **9**, **10** and **11** suggests that the presence of a pyran ring is important for activity against _P. falciparum_ and the position of this group, angular pyrano[2,3-_c_] (**9**) or linear pyrano[3,2-_b_] (**10**), did not alter the results of IC50.

The activity against _P. falciparum_ observed for **6**, **7** and **8**, IC50. 8.9, 29.9 and 6.1 mM, respectively, shows that presence of an _O_-methyl group at C-2 improves the activity.

From the 11 alkaloids tested against _T. b. rhodesiense_, compound **9** was the most active with an IC50 1.0 mM.

Alkaloids **1-3** had their citotoxicity to cancer cells described in an earlier paper,30 however here we disclose for the first time their isolation, spectral data and structure elucidation.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compounds & \multicolumn{4}{c}{IC50 in mM} \\ _P. falciparum_ & _T. b. rhodesiense_ & _L. donovani_ & KB cell \\
**1** & 2.6 ± 0.4 & 9.6 ± 1.1 & \(>\) 70 & 19.8 ± 3.7 \\
**2** & 3.0 ± 0.2 & 4.3 ± 0.9 & \(>\) 80 & \(>\) 100 \\
**3** & 11.6 ± 1.2 & 28.5 ± 2.9 & \(>\) 80 & 80.7 ± 6.8 \\
**4** & 2.6 ± 0.6 & 14.4 ± 1.8 & \(>\) 76 & 50.2 ± 10.7 \\

## Page 6



## Experimental

### General

Optical rotations were measured using a Perkin Elmer polarimeter. IR spectra were recorded on a Bomen M-B Series spectrophotometer. UV absorptions were recorded using a Varian 500 SCAN UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. 1H and 13C NMR data were recorded on Bruker ARX-200 and Bruker DRX-400 spectrometers. Spectra were recorded in acetone-_d_6 and DMSO-_d_6 with TMS as internal standard. All 2D NMR data were recorded at 400MHz (Bruker DRX-400), HSQC \(J\) 145 Hz; HMBC \(J\) 8 Hz. HR-MS data were recorded on a Micromass Q-Tof (QqTOF) spectrometer; column chromatography was on silica gel 60 (Merck) and Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia). Preparative HPLC was performed on a Shock Asahipak GS-310 2G column. TLC was carried out using Merck aluminum-backed silica gel 60 F254.

### Plant material

Leaves, stem and root bark were collected in Campinas (SP) at the Instituto Agronomico de Campinas, and dried in the shade. The plant was identified by Prof. Dr. Maria Ines Salgado. A voucher specimen is deposited at the Herbarium of the Departamento de Botanica of the Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos (HUFSCar) as number 7110.

### Extraction and isolation

The parts of the plant were extracted separately with n-hexane at room temperature for 3 days, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure at 40 degC. This procedure was repeated 3 times to yield the crude hexane extract. The residue was extracted, as above, using MeOH to yield the crude MeOH extract. The crude MeOH extract (60 g) was fractioned by VCC over 1 kg of silica gel 60 (70-239 mesh, Merck) eluted with 1.5 L of the solvents: 100% hexane (fraction 1), 100% CH2Cl2 (fraction 2), 3:1 CH2Cl2:MeOH (fraction 3); 2:1 CH2Cl2:MeOH (fraction 4); 1:1 CH2Cl2:MeOH (fraction 5) and 100% MeOH (fraction 5). Fractions 2 and 3 were combined and chromatographed on silica gel using CH2Cl2 as mobile phase, the polarity was increased by addition of 5%, 10%, 13%, 18%, 20% and 25% of MeOH in a gradient system to yield 15 fractions. Lupeol was crystallized from fractions 1 to 3. Fraction 5 was rechromatographed on Si gel, being eluted with 1:3 n-hexane-acetone followed by Sephadex LH-20 with MeOH to give alkaloids **1** (16.3 mg), **4** (30.4 mg), **5** (3.5 mg), **8** (11.2 mg), **9** (13.4 mg), **10** (9.8 mg) and **11** (5.4 mg). Further purification of fraction 9 on Sephadex LH-20 with MeOH and HPLC using MeOH as mobile phase, UV detection at 254 and 365nm, and a flow rate of 3.0 mL min-l afforded compounds **6** (13.5 mg), **7** (11.2 mg) and **8** (7.3 mg). Fraction 10 was dissolved in MeOH and submitted to Sephadex LH-20, being eluted with MeOH to give compounds **2** (5.2 mg) and **3** (4.3 mg).

### 1,3,5-Trihydroxy-4-methoxy-10-methyl-2,8-bis(3-methylbut-2-enyl)acridin-9(10H)-one, (1)

Amorphous powder, IR (liquid film) vmax/cm-1: 3500, 2964, 1625, 1566. UV (MeOH) lmax/nm (log e) 265 (3.47), 285 (3.08), 332 (3.02) and 410 (2.57). 1H, 13C NMR and HMBC correlations see Table 1. HRESIMS m/z 424.2124 [M + H]* (calc. for C23H30NO5 424.2124).

3-Dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-2-(2-hydroxypropan-2-yl)-11-methoxy-10-methylfuro[3,2-b]acridin-5(10H)-one, (2)

Optically inactive, amorphous powder, IR (liquid film) vmax/cm-1: 3475, 2964, 1630. UV (MeOH) lmax/nm (log e): 259 (4.21), 274 (4.62), 284 (4.65). 1H, 13C NMR and HMBC correlations see Table 2. _m/z_ 372.1447 [M + H]* (calc. for C23H22NO5 372.1447).

### 3,4-Dihydro-3,5,8-trihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,2,7-trimethyl-2H-pyrano[2,3-a]acridin-12(7H)-one, (3)

[a]15D-21.4 (_c_, 0.0022 MeOH), amorphous powder, IR (liquid film) vmax/cm-1: 3509, 2978, 1620, 1572. UV (MeOH) lmax/nm (log e): 264 (3.39), 285 (3.13), 332 (2.99). 1H, 13C NMR and HMBC correlations see Table 3. HRESIMS m/z 372.1447 [M + H]* (calc. for C23H22NO5 372.1447).

### Biological assays

Stock solutions of the compounds, plus control drugs, were prepared at a concentration of 20 mg mL-1 in DMSO (Sigma, UK), and diluted to appropriate concentrations prior to assays. IC50 values were calculated with MSXLFIT (IDBS, UK).

### _P. falciparum_

Chloroquine-sensitive _P. falciparum_ strain 3D7 was maintained in human A+ erythrocytes in RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma, UK) supplemented with Albumax II at 37 degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. Asynchronous (65-75% ring stage) of _P. falciparum_ intraerythrocytic cultures were set up as above, with 1% parasitemia, 2.5% hematocrit, in triplicate in 100 mL of medium in 96 well, flat-bottomed Microtest III tissue plates. Drugs were added in a threefold dilution

## Page 7

series and cultures incubated for a total of 48 h at 37 degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. After 24 h, {3H} hypoxanthine (0.2 mCi) was added to each well.25,26 At the end of the assay, plates were rapidly freeze-thawed, harvested using a Tomtec Mach III cell harvester (Tomtec, CT) onto a 96-well format filtermat and Meltilex(tm) solid scintillant (both Wallac, Finland) added prior to reading in a Microbeta 1450 scintillation counter (Wallac, Finland) at 1 min _per_ well.

### _brucei rhodesiense_

_T. b. rhodesiense_ STIB900 bloodstream form trypomastigotes were maintained in HMI-18 medium,27 with 15% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (Harlan Sera Lab, UK) at 37 degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. Prior to drugging, trypomastigotes were washed and resuspended in fresh medium at a concentration 2 x 105 trypanosoma/mL and 100 mL of this suspension was added to the drug dilutions. The top concentration for the test compounds was 30 mg mL-1. Pentamidine was included as the standard drug. Plates were incubated for 72 h at 37 degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture.28 At 72 h AlamarBlue was added to the plates. Plates were read after 4-5 h on a Gemini fluorescent plate reader (Softmax Pro. 3.1.1, Molecular Devices, UK) at EX/EM 530/585 nm with a filter cut-off at 550 nm.

### _donovani_

_L. donovani_ L82 amastigotes were harvested from an infected hamster (_Mesocricetus auratus_) spleen and used to infect murine peritoneal exudate macrophages (PEM) at a ratio of 7:1. In brief, infected cells were exposed to drug for a total of 5 days.29 The percentage of infected cells was evaluated microscopically and the percentage inhibition in comparison with untreated controls was calculated.

### _Cytotoxicity assays_

96-well plates were seeded with KB cells at 4 x 104 mL-1 (100 mL _per_ well). Drugs at 300, 30, 3 and 0.3 mg mL-1 were added in fresh overlay after 24 h, in triplicate at each concentration. Plates were incubated for 72 h at 37 degC in a 5% CO2-air mixture. At 72 h AlamarBlue was added to the plates. Plates were read after 4-5 h on a Gemini fluorescent plate reader (Softmax Pro. 3.1.1, Molecular Devices, UK) at EX/EM 530/585 nm with a filter cut-off at 550 nm. IC50 values were calculated against the blanks and control samples.

## References

- Barrett, M. P.; Burchmore, R. J. S., Stich, A.; Lazzari J. O.; Frasch, A. C.; Cazzulo, J.; Krishnas, J.; _Lancet_**2003**, _362_, 1469.
- Hoet, S.; Opperdoes, F.; Brun R.; Quetin-Leclercq, J. Q.; _Nat. Prod. Rep._**2004**, _21_, 353.
- Legros, D.; Ollivier, G.; Gastellu-Etchegory, M.; Paquet, C.; Burri, C.; Jannin, J.; Buscher, P.; _Lancet Infect. Dis._**2002**, \(2\), 437.
- Wernsdorfer, W. H.; _Acta Tropica_**1994**, _56_, 143.
- Sachs, J.; Malaney, P.; _Nature_**2002**, _415_, 680.
- WHO; www.rbm.who.int, accessed in February 18, 2004.
- Sundar, S.; _Trop. Med. Int. Health_**2001**, \(6\), 849.
- Croft, S. L.; _Parasitology_**1997**, _114_, S3.
- Da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Ehrendorfer, F.; _Pl. Syst. Evol._**1988**, _161_, 97.
- Weniger, B.; Um, B.-H.; Valentin, A.; Estrada, A.; Lobstein, A.; Anton, R.; Maille, M.; Sauvain, M.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2001**, _64_, 1221.
- Yamamoto, N.; Furukawa, H.; Ito, Y.; Yoshida, S.; Maeno, K.; Nishiyama, Y.; _Antiviral Res._**1989**, _12_, 21.
- Kawaii, S.; Tomono, Y.; Katase, E.; Ogawa, K.; Yano, M.; Takemura, Y.; Motoharu, J.; Ito, C.; Furukawa, H.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1999**, _62_, 587.
- Chaya, N.; Terauchi, K.; Yamagata, Y.; Kinjo, J.; Okabe, H.; _Biol. Pharm. Bull._**2004**, _27_, 1312.
- Wu, T-S.; Kuoh, C-S.; Furukawa, H.; _Phytochemistry_**1983**, _22_, 1493.
- Ito, C.; Kondo, Y.; Wu, T-S.; Furukawa, H.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**2000**, _48_, 65.
- Wu, T-S.; Furukawa, H.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1983**, _31_, 901.
- Furukawa, H.; Yogo, M.; Wu, T-S.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1983**, _31_, 3084.
- Wu, T-S.; Kuoh, C-S.; Furukawa, H.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1983**, _31_, 895.
- Wu, T-S.; Furukawa, H.; Kuoh, C-S.; Hsu, K-S.; _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1_**1983**, 1681.
- Takemura, Y.; Wada, M.; Ju-ichi, M.; Ito, C.; Furukawa, H.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1998**, _46_, 693.
- Pegel, K. H.; Wright, W.G.; _J. Chem. Soc. (C)_**1969**, 2327.
- Fraser, A. W.; Lewis, J.R.; _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1_**1973**, 1173.


## Page 8

* 23 Wu, T-S.; Chen, C-M.; _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**2000**, _48_, 85.
* 24 Ahua, K. M.; Ioset. J-R.; Ransijn, A.; Mauel, J.; Mavi, S.; Hostettmann, K.; _Photochemistry_**2004**, _65_, 968.
* 25 Desjardins, R. E.; Canfield, C. J.; Haynes, J. D.; Chulay, J.D.; _Antimicrob. Agents Chemother._**1979**, _16_, 710.
* 26 O'Neill, M. J.; Bray, D. H.; Boardman, P.; Phillipson, J. D.; Warhurst, D.C.; _Planta Med._**1985**, _61_, 394.
* 27 Hirumi, H.; Hirumi, K.; _J. Parasitol._**1989**, _75_, 985.
* 28 Raz, B.; Iten, M.; Grether-Buler, Y.; Kamisky, R.; Brun, R.; _Acta Tropica_**1997**, _68_, 139.
* 29 Neal, R.A.; Croft, S.L.; _J. Antimicrob. Chemother._**1984**, _14_, 463.
* 30 Braga, P. A. C.; dos Santos, D. A. P.; da Silva, M. F. D. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Houghton, P.J.; Fang, R.; _Nat. Prod. Res._**2007**, _21_, 47.



## Page 9

_J. Braz. Chem. Soc._, Vol. 20, No. 4, S1-S8, 2009.

Printed in Brazil - 02009 Societade Brasileira de Quimica

0103 - 5053 36.00+-000

**Antiparasitic Activities of Acridone Alkaloids from _Swinglea glutinosa_ (BL) **Merr.**

_Djalma A. P. dos Santos,\({}^{*}\) Paulo C. Vieira,\({}^{*,*}\)M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva,\({}^{*}\)_

_Joao B. Fernandes,\({}^{*}\) Lauren Rattray\({}^{b}\) and Simon L. Croft\({}^{b}\)_

\({}^{*}\)_Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil_

\({}^{b}\)_Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine,_

_London, WC1E 7HT, UK_

## Page 10

Figure S2: \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of compound **1** (CDCl\({}_{3}\), 100 MHz).



## Page 11

Figure S4: HMQC spectrum of compound **1** (CDCl\({}_{3}\)).



## Page 12

Figure S6: 'H NMR of compound **2** (CDCl\({}_{3}\), 400 MHz).



## Page 13

Figure S8: HMBC spectrum of compound **2** (CDCl\({}_{1}\)).



## Page 14

Figure S10. High resolution mass spectrum of compound **2**.



## Page 15

Figure S12: \({}^{1}\)C NMR of compound **3** (CDCl\({}_{x}\), 100 MHz).



## Page 16

Figure S14: HMQC spectrum of compound **3** (CDCl\({}_{3}\)).



