# 10.1016@0031-9422(81)85112-6.pdf

## Page 1



# C-Methyl Phenolics from _Qualea_ Species+
Footnote †: Part II in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Vochysiaceae”. For Part I see ref. [1]. Based on part of the M.S. thesis submitted by L.F.B.G. to Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (1979).

Dirceu de B. Correa, Lourdes F. B. Guerra, Otto R. Gottlieb, J. Guilherme S. Maia

# Abstract

The trunk wood of _Qualea labouriauana_ contains, besides (2_R_)-5,7,4'-trihydroxy-3'-methoxy-6,8-dimethylflavanone, (2_R_)-5,7,4'-trihydroxy-8-methylflavanone, the biosynthetically interesting 2,2'-dihydroxy-4,6,4'-tetramethyloxy-3,3'-dimethylbenzophenone. From the trunk wood extract of _Q. paraensis_ the first named flavanone crystallized out directly.

## INTRODUCTION

Previous publications report the presence of ellagic acid and five derivatives and of 7,3',4'-trihydroxyflavone and three derivatives respectively in the wood of _Erinma calcaratum_ (Link) Warm, _Salvertia_ _consullariodora_ St. Hil., _Vochysia acuminata_ Bongard, _V. yrsoidea_ Pohl. [1] and in the leaves of _S. conullariodora_, _V. cinnamomea_ Pohl., _V. tucanorum_ Mart. [2]. The present communication reports the presence of the _C_-methylated flavanones **1a**, **2a**, **3a** and benzophenone **4a** in the wood of _Qualea labouriauana_ Paula [3] (2_R_)-5,7,4'-Trifhydroxy-3'-methoxy-6,8-dimethylflavanone (**1a**) was also isolated from _Q. paraensis_ Ducke [4], a further South American species of the Vochysiaceae.

## RESULTS

Compounds **1a** and **2a** are (2_R_)-flavanones as shown by ORD curves [5] and the typical NMR signals for the protons at C-2 and C-3 [6]. Due to the slight solubility of **1a** in the usual deuterated solvents the NMR spectral analysis referred to dimethyl (**1b**), diethyl (**1d**) and dibenzyl (**1e**) ethers, as well as to **di**-(**1f**) and tri**-(**1g**) acetates. Interpretation of all signals led to the formula C15H6O2(OH)3OMe. Me2 for the natural compound. The presence of hydroxyls at C-5 and C-7 was ascertained by UV shifts, respectively with AlCl3 and NaOAc. The action of AlCl3 is not instantaneous, a fact which, together with the inertness towards ethrification and even acetylation, indicates the steric hindrance of the 5-hydroxyl by the methyl group at C-6. The other methyl is located at C-8 since the three aromatic protons, forming an ABX-system, must all be located on ring B. The 270 MHz spectrum shows the X-part, at the low field end of the signal (t 2.76 for **1b**), as a doublet (_J_ = 3 Hz) which appears in the triacetate (**1g**) at slightly higher field (D_+ + 0.08 ppm). The AB-part (t _ca 3._15 for **1b**) is resolved in **1g** into a doublet (D_+ -0.20, \(J\) = 8 Hz) and a double doublet (D_+ -0.06, \(J\) = 8, 3 Hz). These facts indicate that all protons are _ortho_ or _para_ related with only one oxy-function and that it is the proton which is coupled only to an _ortho_-proton which is vicinal to the OH group in **1a**. The usual 4'-hydroxy-3'-methoxy B ring pattern thus prevails in the compound.

The 1H NMR spectra of **2a**, C15H6O2(OH)3Me, and of poriol (**2b**) [7,8], though not identical, are very similar. The mps, however, are quite distinct: **2a** 195-200', **2b** 265-270' [7]. Since both products show identical ORD curves (for **2b** see [9]), they can differ only by the location of the A ring methyl.

Compound **3a** is a (2S, 3S)-dihydroflavonol, as shown by an ORD curve [5] and the typical NMR signals for the protons at C-2 and C-3 [6]. The 4'-hydroxy pattern for ring B is evidenced by the AA'BB' signals shifted to substantially lower field upon acetylation to **3b**. The reaction gives also evidence for the hydroxyl at C-3 [D_+ -0.72 ppm (H-2), -1.33 ppm (H-3)]. Indeed, the UV AlCl3 shift is reversed upon addition of HCl, a fact which is inconsistent with the existence of a hydroxyl at C-5. The IR carbonyl maximum at 1675 cm-1 is also compatible with a 3-hydroxy-5-methoxyflavanone [10]. 3,5-Dihydroxyflavanones show that absorption at 1620-1460 cm-1 [10,11]. The remaining hydroxyl must be located at C-7 (UV NaOAc shift). This leaves only C-6 or C-8 for the methyl, the former location being preferred tentatively on account of the neatness of the aromatic singlet (t 3.83). The methoxyl protons would be expected to cause broadening of the H-6 signal [12].

The molecular formula of **4a**, C1,H2,O2,O2, determined by HRMS, was expanded to C12H2(OH)2*(OHe)4Me2CO after inspection of the 1H NMR spectrum which shows only five singlets at t 2.1 (OH), 3.9 (ArOH), 6.0 (ArOMe), 6.2 (ArOMe) and 7.98 (ArMe). The compound must thus possess a symmetrical benzophenone structure, a fact which is consistent with its UV spectrum [13]. The aromatic proton singlet at

## Page 2

relatively high field points to the existence of chloroglucinol patterns. The hydroxyls are both chelated (UV/AlCl3 shift) and highly hindered, acetylation of the compound leading only to a diacetate (**4b**) and in low yield. The sole structure **4a** which is compatible with these data is corroborated by the 1H NMR spectrum of this acetate which shows singlets at \(\tau\) 3.58 and 3.65 (2 ArH), 6.2 (4 ArOMe), 7.72 and 7.82 (2 ArOAc), 8.16 and 8.17 (2 ArMe). Chelation having ceased, repulsion of the acetoxyl groups causes the asymmetry of the rings with respect to the carbonyl which is now observed.

## Discussion

The unifying feature of the compounds from these _Qualea_ species is the substitution of the acetate derived phloroglucinol units by _C_-methyls. Specially interesting is the benzophenone in which two such units are joined by a carbonyl group. This group, however, may also have originated from a _C_-methyl, formation of the compound involving oxidative coupling of dimethylated and monomethylated phloroglucinol analogues.

## Experimental

_Isolation of the constituents from_ Qualea labouriaana. Plant material was collected in the vicinity of Parintins, Amazonas State, and identified by Dr. Jose Elias de Paula (voucher IAN, Belem, 99910). Ground trunk wood was extracted successively with C6H6, and EtOH. The C6H6 extract (10 g) was separated by Si gel (500 g) column chromatography into 3 useful fractions eluted with C6H6 - CHCl3-MeOH of respective proportions 7:3:0, 1:1:0 and 0:97:3. The 1st fraction gave, by re-chromatography and crystallization from EtOH, **4a** (10 mg). The 2nd fraction gave, by washing with MeOH and recrystallization from MeOH. distosterol (900 mg). The 3rd fraction gave, by re-chromatography (Sephadex LH-20, MeOH), **1a** (250 mg). The EtOH extract (160 g) was adsorbed on Si gel (500 g l. Washing with CHCl3-MeOH 7:3 gave a product (100 g) which was separated by Si gel (800 g) column chromatography into 2 useful fractions eluted with CHCl3-MeOH of respective proportions 99:1 and 9:1. The 1st fraction gave, by washing with Et2O and (150 mg). The 2nd fraction gave, by washing with Et2O and purification by TLC. **3a** (30 mg). All residual material stemming from the EtOH extract was united and extracted with MeOH. The extract (90 g) was separated by Si gel (600 g) column chromatography into one useful fraction eluted with CHCl3-MeOH 98:2. This gave, by repeated TLC. **2a** (50 mg). _Isolation of the constituents from_ Qualea_ materials. Plant material was collected and identified by Dr. Jose Elias de Paula. Ground trunk wood (7.3 kg) was extracted with C6H6. The solution deposited, upon concan and cooling, crystals of **1a** (2g) which were separated by filtration.

\((2R_{b}\text{+}5.2^{\prime}\text{-}7.^{\prime}\text{-}4\text{-}\text{-

## Page 3



