# 10.1016@0031-9422(75)85047-3.pdf

## Page 1



# TERPENES OF _PODOCARPUS L'ambertius_

Jayr de Paiva Campello and Sebastiao Ferreira Fonseca

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Ching-Jer Chang and Ernest Wenkert

Present address: Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77001, U.S.A. Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47401, U.S.A.

###### Abstract

Sitosterol and the following terpenic compounds have been isolated from the bark of _Podocarpus lambertius_: 3_b_-hydroxytotaro1, 4_b_-carboxynortotarol, and macrophyllic and lambertic acids. The leaves yielded sisterol, stigmastan-3\(b\),5a-diol-6-one, isopimaric acid, phylolocladene, isophylolcadene, 8,9-abieten-15-ol and 17-isopropyllocladenol.

## INTRODUCTION

_Podocarpus lambertius_, commonly known as pinheiro bravo [1], is one of two Brazilian species of the genus _Podocarpus_ and a tree widely distributed throughout southern Brazil. In continuation of our chemical studies of podocarps [2] an investigation of the terpenic constituents of _P. lambertius_ bark and leaves was undertaken.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Three bark constituents were identified as sitosterol, 4_b_-carboxynortotarol (**1**) [3-8] and macrophyllic acid (**2**) [7,9,10], while the remaining substances C20H30O2 and C20H28O3 required full structural analysis.

The IR spectrum of the compound C20H30O2 revealed an aromatic ring and hydroxy groups and the facile transformation into a diacetate confirmed the presence of two hydroxy functions. The PMR spectrum of the diol in CDCl3 showed two aromatic one-proton doublets at 6:50 and 6:96 ppm with _J_-values of 9 Hz each, which moved to 7:05 and 7:15 ppm in deuteriopyridine, indicating two vicinal aromatic hydrogens one of which was _ortho_ to a phenolic hydroxy group [11]. The presence of an isopropyl group on the benzene ring [1:31 ppm (_d_, 3, \(J\) 7 Hz, Me), 1:33 (_d_, 3, \(J\) 7 Hz, Me), 3:28 (_m_, 1, CH)] and its vicinality to the hydroxy function was indicated by the deuteriopyridine shift (1:67--Mc, 1:71--Me, 3:50--CH). These observations indicated a totaro1 skeleton or its biogenetically less likely 11-isopropyl-12-hydroxy isomer. The PMR spectrum exhibited also a one-proton doublet of doublets at 3:28 ppm (_J_ 10, 7 Hz), indicative of a _sec_-hydroxy group adjacent to a quaternary carbon center. The high-field position of the oxymethine indicated its equatorial nature [12,13]. The strong deuteriopyridine shift exerted not only on the oxymethine (3:28 - 3:50 ppm) but also on two methyl singlets (0:87 - 1:14, 1:05 - 1:32 ppm) and only a minor shift (D 011 ppm) on the remaining methyl singlet suggested a 3_b_-hydroxytotaro1 (**3**) relationship. The diol **3** had been reported as a product of borohydride reduction [14] of the naturally occurring 3-totaro-clone [15] and its MS was recorded [14]. Comparison of the highly characteristic fragmentation pat

## Page 2

tern and the other physical properties of an authentic specimen [16] with those of the C20H30O2 product showed the compound to be 3/_b_-hydroxy-totarod (**3**).

The C20H28O3 substance, herewith named lambertic acid, showed IR absorption bands characteristic of hydroxy, carboxy and arene units. Its PMR spectrum in CDCl3 solution revealed two aromatic hydrogen singlets at 6:59 and 6:79 ppm which shifted to 7:21 and 7:08 ppm in deuteriopyridine [11], indicative of a 2,4,5-trialkylated phenol moiety. The presence of an isopropyl group was shown by two methyl doublets at 1:20 (_J_ 7 Hz) and 1:22 ppm (_J_ 7 Hz) and a methine septet at 3:06 ppm (_J_ 7 Hz) and its _ortho_ relationship with the phenolic hydroxy group indicated by the deuteriopyridine shift (1:35, 1:36 and 3:64 ppm, respectively). These facts suggested that lambertic acid possessed an environment surrounding the aromatic ring reminiscent of ferruginol (**4**). Besides the methyl groups of the isopropyl function two methyl singlets (1:08 and 1:28 ppm) appeared in the PMR spectrum and were displaced to a single peak at 1:38 ppm in deuteriopyridine. On the basis of a ferruginol skeleton this implies the replacement of one of the C(4) or C(10) methyl groups by a carboxy function and, more specifically, the introduction of a carboxy group spatially proximate to both remaining methyl groups, i.e. a 4_b_-carboxy function [17]. The identity of the MS fragmentation pattern of the non-aromatic portion of lambertic acid with that of 4_b_-carboxymortquad (**1**) showed the new compound to be 13-isopropyl-podocarpic acid (=4_b_-carboxnorferruginol) (**4**) [18].

An exhaustive study of the MS fragmentation of tricyclic, aromatic diterpenes of ring A and B low oxidation level has shown that two primary fragmentation patterns involve the production of M+-43 and M+-15 ions (**5** and **6**, respectively) and that the latter undergoes further extensive fragmentation [19, 20]. MS analysis of podocarpic acid (7a), dehydroabic acid (7b), **1** and **4b** revealed that the introduction of a carboxyl group at C(4) suppresses the M-43 peak and produces alternate fragmentation modes of the M-15 ion, e.g. the formation of ion **8**. Thus the MS indicate the position of the carboxy group. The previously observed enhancement of the intensity of the M-15 peak (e.g. **6**) in the case of the _b_-hydroxybenzyl cation [19] strikingly differentiated between the aromatic substitution pattern of acids **1** and **4b**.

The constituents of the leaves of _P. lambertius_ consisted of sitosterol, phyllocladene (**9a**), isophylocladene (**9b**), isopimic acid (**10**) and substances C20H34O, C20H32O and C20H50O3. The known compounds were identified by comparison with authentic specimens, while the last three compounds necessitated structural determinations.

The IR spectrum of the C20H34O compound showed hydroxyl absorption bands and its PMR spectrum five methyl singlets at 081, 087, 089, 1:32 and 1:32 ppm and no signal downfield of 2:4 ppm. The deshielded position of two methyl signals and their deuteriopyridine shift (1:49 ppm) [11] as well as the detection of a fragment of 43:0181 mass units, corresponding to an acetyl ion, in the high-resolution MS revealed the presence of a dimethylcarbonid unit. If it be assumed that the compound is a diterpene alcohol, its molecular formula and methyl group content requires it to be tricyclic and to contain a tetrasubstituted double bond. Unfortunately the paucity of material left the analysis incomplete and in light of the above data and biogenic reasoning structure **11** is suggested.



## Page 3

The C20H32O substance showed IR absorption bands characteristic of hydroxy and olefinic units, which were confirmed by the PMR spectrum. The latter revealed an oxymethylene singlet at 4-17 ppm, which was shifted to 4-43 ppm in deuterio-pyridine [11], and an olefinic hydrogen singlet at 5-63 ppm with a deuteriopyridine shift of 5:83 ppm [11]. These facts are accommodated most readily by a 2,3-dialkylallyl alcohol moiety. Three methyl groups appeared at 0-74, 0-81 and 0-85 ppm and were unaffected by deuteriopyridine. Since the molecular formula suggested a tetracyclic configuration, the unusual shielding of one of the methyl groups (0-74 ppm) was reminiscent of the effect of the nuclear double bond of hibaene and isophyllocladene (9b) upon their angular methyl groups. Comparison of the chemical shifts of the C(4) and C(10) methyl groups of the alcohol with the methyl shifts of isophyllocladene showed them to be identical. Hence the new alcohol was 17-iso-phyllocladenol (12).

The C29H50O3 product revealed IR absorption bands for hydroxyl and acyclic or six-membered cyclic, saturated keto groups. Its PMR spectrum revealed six methyl signals whose chemical shifts and multiplicities were indicative of a stigmastane skeleton. One of the oxygens reflected a _sec_-hydroxy group in view of a 3-95 ppm oxymethine PMR multiplet which was shifted to 5-03 ppm on acetylation of the product. The remaining presence of a hydroxy absorption band in the IR spectrum of the monoacetate showed the three oxygens of the natural compound to be part of a keto group, of one _sec_-hydroxy function and of a _tert_-hydroxy unit. The ORD spectrum of the C29H50O3 compound exhibited a negative Cotton effect at 323 nm characteristic of 4-, 6-, 7- and 16-ketocholestanes [21]. Base-induced deuteration of the substance showed the presence of two hydrogens a to the carbonyl group. If it be assumed that the compound is an all-_trans_ 3-hydroxysteroid, the facts accumulated thus far supported a 3.5-dihydroxy-6-keto or 3.8-dihydroxy-7-keto structure. The 16-keto system was excluded by the carbonyl group not being part of a five-membered ring, while the 4-keto system could be dismissed by the persistence of the 3-oxymethine PMR signal even after deuteration and by the abnormally high field position and far too complex multiplicity for an a-ketooxymethine moiety. The two remaining structures could be differentiated by PMR in pyridine [11]. Comparison of the PMR spectra of the natural product in CDCl3 and pyridine revealed no solvent effect on the methyl groups but an extraordinary shift on the methine associated with the _sec_-hydroxy function. The oxymethine multiplet, whose shape (e.g. W1 2 = 16 Hz) was highly reminiscent of 3_b_-hydroxysteroids, shifted 0-73 ppm downfield in pyridine solution. This was in sharp contrast to the Dd values of 0-25, 0-24, 0-26 and 0-16 ppm for 3_b_-hydroxy-5\(b\). 3_a_-hydroxy-5\(a\) and 3_a_-hydroxy-5\(b\) steroids, respectively, and reflected the proximity of the _tert_-hydroxy group to the 3a-hydrogen and the effect of both hydroxy functions complexed by pyridine acting on this hydrogen. This structural relationship is satisfied only by a 3\(b\).5_a-dihydroxy-6-keto system.

In order to confirm the functional groups of the C29H50O3 product and their positions in the steroid framework, the spectral properties of the compound and of its monoacetate were compared with those of 3\(b\).5_a_-dihydroxy-6-cholestanone (13a) [22] and of its acetyl derivative.* The \(d\) and J 

## Page 4

values of H(3) and H(7) and of the 18-, 19-, 21-, 26- and 27-methyl groups of the natural product and its acetate were nearly identical with those of the corresponding models. This observation suggested that the new plant product is 3\(b\),52-dihydroxy-6-stigmastanone (**13**b). As a consequence, a partial systissis from b-sitosterol was undertaken. Treatment of the latter with formic acid and with hydrogen peroxide, followed by hydrolysis with aqueous base gave a triol whose oxidation with N-bromo-succinimide [22] yielded **13**b. The identity of this substance with the natural product fully established its structure.

## EXPERIMENTAL

M.ps. were determined on a Reichert micro hot stage and are uncorrected. ORD measurements were recorded using 1 cm quartz cells. PMR spectra of CDCl3 solutions unless otherwise noted with internal TMS were recorded on 60 MHz, 100 MHz and 220 MHz instruments. MS were determined using a direct inlet system. Column chromatography was performed on silica gel (0/05-02 mm) and silica gel G and on neutral, activity **1** Merck alumina and TLC on silica gel G or silica GF 254.

_Extraction and resolution. Podocarpus lambertris_ Klotosch was collected in May in the vicinity of Curitiba in the Brazilian state of Paranal. The dried, milled bark (6/9 kg) was extracted \(x\) 4 with 6 L of refluxing C,H2, each for 24 hr. The extract was evaporated and a hexane solution (1:51) of the residual, brown, viscous oil (89-4) extracted under N2 at 20 with \(x\) 4 of 250 ml of 5deg, each KOH. Drying of the hexane soln and evaporation yielded 19deg of neutral oil. The basic soln was acidified with N HCl to pH 4 and exhaustively extracted with hexane-EtO (1:1). Evaporation of the dried extract gave 35-9 g of acidic, partially solid residue.

Chromatography of the neutral oil on silica gel G and elution with hexane EtO (50:1) yielded 744 mg of solid, long-chain fatty alcohols, which were not investigated, and 1:19 g of sitosterol; m.p. 135 137 ; identical with an authentic sample. Chromatography of the acidic solid on silica gel G and elution with hexane EtO (9:1) yielded 128 mg of 3_b_-hydrocyt

## Page 5

with the same solvent mixture yielded 755 mg of macrophyllic acid (**2**); m.p. 234-236 ; identical with an authentic sample.

_P. lambertins_ leaves were collected as the bark above, dried and ground in a Wiley mill. The powder (8-9 kg) was extracted in x 7 with 6 l. of refluxing C6H6 each for 24 hr. The extract was evaporated and a hexane soln (2:5 l) of the residual, viscous brown oil (380 g) extracted under N2 at 20 with x 5 of 500 ml of 5% aq. KOH. Drying of the hexane soln and evaporation yielded 190-2 g of neutral oil. The alkaline soln was brought to pH 4 with N HCl, saturated with NaCl and exhaustively extracted with hexane-Et2O (1:1). After drying and evaporation 71deg g of a semi-solid was obtained.

Chromatography of the neutral oil on alumina and elution with hexane gave 406 mg of a solid, long-chain hydrocarbon. 140 g of a solid long-chain fatty alcohol and 147 mg of isophyl-lodlacene (**9b**) [containing a phyllodlacene (**9a**) impurity]; m.p. 102 : 104deg; identical with an authentic sample (PMR analysis revealed the presence of 12% **11a**.) Elution with hexane-Et2O (50:1) gave 26 mg of a long-chain ketone, 3-99 g of stosterol; mp 135-137; identical with an authentic specimen: and to 117 mg of an alcohol tentatively assigned structure **11**: mp. 174-176 ; [2]233 + 40deg (c 0:01, CHCl3); IR (Nujol) OH 3450-3100 (w) cm-1; PMR \(d\) 081, 087, 089 (s, 3. Me each); 1:32 (s, 6. Me2); PMR (d5-pyridine) d 080, 0.86, 089 (s, 3. Me each); 1:49 (s, 6. Me2); MS _m/e_ 290 (M+ 275 (290-Me, _m_* 260-8); 272 (290-H2O, m_* 2551), 257, 232, 217 (232-Me, _m_* 2029-4); d1 (base): _m/e_ 290:2616 (calc. for C2H6O290-2610); Elution with hexane-Et2O (4:1) afforded 34 mg of 17-isopropyllcadeloned (**12**); m.p. 125-127 ; [2]20 + 23.7deg (c 0:04, CHCl3); IR (Nujol) OH 3400-3150 (_m_). C=C 1640 (_w_) cm-1; PMR \(d\) 074, 081, 085 (s, 3. Me each); 417 (s, 2. OK12, 5.63 (s, 1, olefinic H); PMR (d5-pyridine) d 085, 0.85 (s, 3. Me each); 443 (s, 2. OCH, 5.83 (s, 1 olefinic H); MS _m/e_ 298 (M+ 288 (M+ 2 bases/238-Me, _m_* 258-8); 270 (288-H2O, m_* 2851), 257 (288-CH3OH, m_* 229-3), 255 (273-H2O, m_* 238-2), 245; _m/e_ 288-2416 (calc for C2H632O: 288-2453). Elution with Et2O gave 1:91 g of long-chain alcohols which were not investigated. Chromatography of the solid, derived from the base extraction, on silica gel and elution with hexane-Et2O (50:1) yielded 145 mg of isopimaric acid (**10**); m.p. 162-164 : identical with an authentic sample. Flution with hexane-Et2O (1:1) produced 190 mg of 3\(B\), 52-dihydro-6-stig-mastanone (13b); m.p. 246-248deg; [2]2 - 144deg (c = 001, MeOH); ORD (c = 0387, dioxane) d \(b\), 940, \(b\)326 - 4250deg; \(d\), 916 - 1990, \(b\)300, \(b\)266 + 4200deg; \(d\), 234 + 1217; \(b\), 9210 + 6200deg; CD (c 0387, dioxane) d \(b\)350 0. d_318 - 142, \(b\)308 - 190, \(b\)301 - 165, \(d\)243 - 087, \(d\)251 - 029; UV (c 0710 (s) cm-1; PMR \(d\) 04, 079 (s, 3. Me each) d 081, 082 (d, 3, 6 Hz, Me each); 087 (t, 3. J 6 Hz, Me); d 087 (t, 3. J 6 Hz, Me); d 091 (t, 3. J 73 Hz, Me); d 13 (t, 3.5 Hz, H(7b)); 2:71 (t, 1. J 13 Hz, H(7b)); 3:95 (m, 1, W1, 16 Hz, OCH); PMR (d5-pyridine) d 065, 096 (s, 3. Me each); 086,

## Page 6

* [17] For a discussion of pyridine solvent shifts of carboxylic acids see Doddrell, D. M. (1969) Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University.
* [18] For a partial synthesis of its methyl ether methyl ester see Campbell W. P. and Todd, D. (1940) _J. Amer. Chem. Soc._**62**, 1287.
* [19] Enzell, C. R. (1966) _Tetrahedron Letters_**2135.
* [20] Enzell C. R. and Ryhage, R. (1967) _Arkiv Kemicl_**26**, 425.
* [21] Djerassi, C. (1960) _Optical Rotatory Dispersion._ McGraw-Hill, New York.
* [22] Fieser L. F. and Rajagopalan, S. (1949) _J. Amer. Chem. Soc._**71**, 3938; Onda M. and Azuma A. (1971) _Chem. Pharm. Bull. Tox._**19**, 859.



