# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)88692-6.pdf

## Page 1



# DIASIN, A DIETPENE FROM _CROTON DIASIN_

Marden A. de Alvarenga, Hugo E. Gottlieb, Otto R. Gottlieb, Mauro T. Magalhaes

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, c.p. 20.780, Sao Paulo, Brazil; # Department of Organic Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel; # Centro de Tecnologia Agricola e Alimentar. Empreza Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

# Abstract

The trunkwood of _Croton diasii_ Pires (Euphorbiaceae) contains diasin, a novel rearranged labdanic diterpene which includes furan, carbomethoxy, g- and d-lactone moieties. All 13C NMR signals were assigned and used in conjunction with PMR data, for the elucidation of the relative configuration of all chiral centers. A possible biogenetic pathway to diasin is discussed.

## INTRODUCTION

_Croton diasii_ Pires. a new euphorbiaceae [2], is an arboreous species which may attain 15 m by 30 cm. The analysed specimen was collected by the botanist Joao Murca Pires at the bank of igarape Aura, on the EMBRAPA property, Belem, Para State.

## RESULTS

Fractionation of the C6H6 extract of the trunkwood led to the isolation of stistorted, ferulates of fatty alcohols and a compound designated diasin. The O atoms of its molecular formula C2H42O, determined by HRMS, were assigned to g-lactone (_y_max 1700 cm-1) _d_-lactone (_y_max 1740 cm-1) ester (_y_max 1720 cm-1) and furan (_y_max 3145, 1500, 870 cm-1) moieties. The furan is b-substituted, as indicated by PMR signals (Table 1) typical of one b (6 d2) and two a (6 f7.44) protons. The base peak of the MS (m/e 94.0416) most probably is also due to this system linked to a vinyl group (calc. _m/e_ 94.0419). In the parent compound, the C2 group linked to furan is saturated. This fact is revealed by PMR, both the methine and one of the methylene hydrogens being represented by double doublets. The methine signal is easily analysed, since it appears at characteristically low field (d 5.45). The LIS-reagent Eu(fod)3 was used at 270 MHz to shift at least one of the methylene signals towards the low field end of the band envelope around 2 ppm. These band correlations were confirmed by decoupling experiments. Partial constitution 1, which fits these data, recognizes also the fact that, with the sole exception of the furan oxygen, all oxy-functions of diasin are part of carboxy groups.

Partial constitution 1 was confirmed by catalytic hydrogenolysis to a hexahydroderivative (partial constitution 2), a reaction which was accompanied in the PMR spectrum by disappearance of the bands at d 7.44, 6.42 and 5.45, assigned to the furan and oxymethine protons. In substitution appeared a 4 proton multiplet around 3.7 and a broad band at 6.1 which could be eliminated by addition of D2O. Corresponding changes in the IR spectrum concerned the disappearance of the furan bands and the appearance of the typical broad CO2H-band around 3200 cm-1.

Siegal multiplicity (_ddd_) of a further oxymethine (d 8.86) of diasin revealed its vicinality to 3 hydrogens: one (d 3.1, _d_) on carbon a to a carbonyl and to a fully substituted position and two represented by signals included in the band envelope around 2 ppm. These correlations were again confirmed by decoupling experiments and led to partial constitution 3. Since the PMR spectrum indicates that diasin contains only one hydrogen on a carbon vicinal to a carbonyl, and this has already been accounted for, the carbons linked to the terminal carbonyl in 3, as well as in the carbomethoxy] (d 3.8, _s_) (d) of diasin must be quaternary. PMR evidence points additionally to the presence of a quaternary methyl (d 1.16, _s_) (5).

Partial constitutions 1, 3, 4 and 5 show a total of 4 carboxyls and 6 quaternary carbons and must thus share one carboxyl and 3 quaternary carbons. Indeed, according to CMR evidence (Table 1), besides the substituted furan position, only 2 quaternary carbons exist in the molecule. The sole combinations of 1, 3, 4 and 5 respecting this requirement are 6 and 7 which define relative positions of all atoms of diasin, except for 2 methines and 3 methylenes evidenced by CMR.

The constitution of a rearranged labdanic diterpene can thus be proposed for diasin. The relative configurational details shown in its formula (8a) were deduced as follows.

Alkaline hydrolysis of diasin (8a) and remethylation of the reaction product led to isodiasin (8b). The reaction was accompanied by two PMR changes: d_H-_, 4.86 (_ddd_) - 4.86 (_dd_) and d_H-_, 3.1 (_d_) - 2.55 (s). Absence of H-7 H-8 coupling in 8b requires the H-C(7)-C(8)-H dihedral angle to be close to 90deg, i.e. the _trans_-attachment of the d-lactone to the decalin system. In consequence, the BC

## Page 2

rings of diasin (8a) must be _cis_-fused. Epimerization at C-8 of diasin was accompanied furthermore by an IR shift of the d-lactone carbonyl from 1740 to 1755 cm-1, a phenomenon which is paralleled by the shift observed in the epimerization of columbin (9a) into isocolumbin (9b) [3]. The furan substituent of the d-lactone in diasin is equatorial, information derived from the coupling constant which characterizes the H-11 axial, H-12 interaction (_J_ 12 Hz) and shows also the latter hydrogen to be axial.

While the stereochemistry of the lactone is a consequence of the stated facts, configurational analysis of all other chiral centers necessitated assignment and interpretation of CMR data.

The carbon spectrum contains 3 carbonyl peaks at 177.9, 168.0 and 171.1 ppm, assigned respectively to C-19 in analogy to a similar terpenoid [4], the d-lactone [5-7] and the g-lactone by default. The 4 additional _sp_2 carbon signals can be assigned to the furan moiety, taking into consideration their multiplicity and the shielding caused on carbons 14 and 16 by the b-substituent [5, 8].

Three of the _sp_3 carbons, a methyl and 2 methines, are oxygenated. Of the last two, the signal at 71.3 ppm is assigned to C-12 by analogy to similar diterpene funcanolactones [8, 9]. The remaining tetrahedral carbons are attributed by signal multiplicity considerations to one methyl, 5 methylenes, 3 methines and 2 quaternary centers. By analogy to other 4-methyl-4-carboxy terpenes, C-4 corresponds to the singlet at 45.2 ppm [4, 10], while the other quaternary carbon, C-9 must thus be represented by the singlet at 36.2 ppm. The third carbon a to a carbonyl group is a methine which can be recognized by its larger residual splitting in the single-frequency off-resonance decoupled (sford) spectrum, with the decoupling frequency set at the high-field end of the proton range. The methylene signal at lowest field can be attributed only to C-11 in view of its sharpness in the sford spectrum (i.e. the absence of second order coupling [11]) and in analogy to a similar system [9]. The remaining 2 methine and 4 methylene signals appear very broadened in the sford spectrum and belong therefore to the strongly proton-coupled chain encompassing carbons 3,2,1,10,5 and 6. Their complete assignment is only possible through the stereochemical arguments that follow.

The configurational problems yet to be solved concern the stereochemistries of C-4 and the AB ring junction. The very high field resonance of the corresponding signal indicates the axial nature of the C-4 methyl group [10]. The chemical shift of C-3 is a good probe of the AB

## Page 3

ring junction stereochemistry. If these two rings were _trans_-fused, the C-3 resonance would appear at _ca_ 37 ppm [4, 10]. In diasin (8a), however, the lowest-field yet unassigned methylene signal appears at 29.5 ppm, indicating that ring A is axially substituted by C-6 and, therefore, that the two rings are _cis_-fused.

An examination of molecular models indicates that, in the above configuration, ring B of diasin, constrained to a boat form, is flanked by rings A and C, which most probably assume the chair conformation. This being the case, the two bridgehead methines, while having the same number of \(\beta\) effects, are exposed to a different number of \(\gamma\) interactions--one (due to one of the oxygens of the ester function) in the case of C-5, and 3 (due to C-12, C-17 and C-18) in the case of C-10. Thus, the latter carbon absorbs at a higher field. Furthermore, C-6 is axial to ring A, and is shielded by \(\gamma\) interactions with carbons 1 and 3, in addition to C-19. The only two yet unassigned signals are almost coincident and correspond to C-1 and C-2. In _cis_-decain, the former carbon absorbs at 29.8 ppm [12]. The strong shielding of C-1 in diasin relative to this model reflects the very small C(1)-C(10)-C(9)-C(20) dihedral angle. Due to the reciprocity of this \(\gamma\) effect, carbon 20 is also strongly shielded relative to a typical \(\gamma\)-lactone carbonyl [5]. Finally, the shift of C-2 is very similar in diasin and in 10-methylated di terpenes [10], in spite of the fact that two \(\gamma\) effects act upon C-2 in these models.

Since only one \(\gamma\) effect is felt by C-2 of diasin, the interaction between carbons 2 and 18 is stronger here than expected, an observation confirmed by the absorption of C-18 at an unusually high-field. In the 10-methylated _trans_-fused di terpenes [10], the action of the same number of \(\gamma\) substituents results in a C-18 shift at 16.1 ppm, as compared to 13.7 ppm in diasin. Taken together CMR data convey the impression that diasin is a highly compact molecule in which strong steric interactions prevail.

Although column (9a) is an additional example, AB _cis_-fused di terpenoids such as diasin (8a) seem to be extremely rare in nature. In the present case, this configuration can be rationalized, considering the rearranged labdanic cation **10** and the derived cyclopropane 11a and cyclopropanol 11b as biogenetic intermediates. Indeed, the Euprobiaceae are known for the presence of hydroxylated cyclopropane derivatives [12]. Opening of cyclopropanols with inversion of configuration is known to occur _in vitro_[14]. Such a reaction would lead to _cis_-fused AB rings and an oxygenated C-19, as observed in diasin (8a).

## Experimental

Ground wood of _C. diasi_ (2 kg) was extracted with C6H6 in a Soxhlet apparatus. The extract (30 g) was chromatographed on a silica column. Elution of 40 x 250 ml fractions was performed with C6H6 (6 frs), C6H6-CHC14 4:1 (frs 7-14), C6H6-CHC1, 1:1 (frs 15-28), C6H6-eG0Ac 4:1 (frs 29-36) and EtOAc (4 frs). The residue of frs 7-14 was rechromatographed to yield refutates of fatty alcohols (390 mg). The residue of frs 15-28 was washed with petrol and crystallized from MeOH to give sitosterol. The residue of frs 29-36 was rechromatographed by preparative-TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc 1:1) to give diasin (200 mg).

_Diasin_ (8a), needles, mp 158-160deg (MeOH), [a]320 + 16deg (CH2Cl) (Found: MW 388.1514. C2H2O, requires: MW 388.1522) \(\nu_{\mathrm{max}}\) (KBr, cm-1): CO bands 1770, 1740, 1720 infl.



## Page 4

furan bands 3145, 1500, 870. \(\lambda_{\max}\) (CH2Cl2, nm): 240 (_e_ 250). MS, _m/e_ (\(\zeta_{2}\)): 388 (16) M\({}^{+}\), 360 (41), 206 (63), 147 (69), 121 (44), 105 (41), 94 (100), 93 (31), 81 (41), 77 (47), 55 (65), 41 (66).

_Isadiazin_ (8b). Diasim (30 mg) in C5H3-N-H2O 1. (10 ml) containing NaOH (14.3 mg) was left at room temp, for 3 hr. The soln was concentrated _in vacuo_, diluted with CHCl3-Me2CO 1:1 and acidified with di HCl. The organic phase was dried. evaporated and the residue treated with excess CH3N1 in Et2O Evaporation of volatile material gave a residue which was purified by preparative-TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc 3:2) to crystals (22 mg), mp 162-164\({}^{\circ}\) (MeOH), \(v_{\max}\) (KBr, cm\({}^{-}\)1): CO bands 1770, 1755, 1715, furan bands 3140, 1500, 870. \(\lambda_{\max}\) (CH2Cl2, nm): 230 (_e_ 900). PMR (60 MHz, CDCl3, d1: 7.46 (_m_, H-15, 16), 6.43 (s. H-14), 5.46 (_dd_, \(J\) = 12, 4 Hz, H-12), 4.8 (_d_, \(J\) = 6 Hz, H-7), 3.8 (s. OMe), 2.65 (_s_, H-8), 2.3-1.5 (_m_, H-12,3,5, 6.10,11), 1.2 (s. Me), MS. _m/e_ (mid-1): 388 (15) M\({}^{+}\), 280 (20h, 253 (41), 145 (79), 106 (48), 94 (100), 54 (77).

_Hexahydrodiasin._ Diasim (50 mg) was hydrogenated over 10\({}^{\circ}\), Pd/C (50 mg) in dioxan (10 ml) at room temp. and pres. The mixture was filtered and evaporated. The residue was separated by preparative-TLC (Si gel, Et2O) into 2 products, tetrahydrodiasin (2 mg) and hexahydrodiasin (30 mg). \(v_{\max}\) (KBr, cm\({}^{-}\)1): 3200, hp 1700, 1735, 1710. PMR (60 MHz, CDCl3, d1: 8): 4.83 (_m_, H-7), 3.8 (s. OMe), 3.7-3.9 (_m_, 2H-15, 2H-16), 3.1 (_d_, \(J\) = 6 Hz, H-8), 2.5-1.1 (_m_, 17H), 1.03 (_s_, Mel. MS. _m/e_ (_n_,)-394 (16) M\({}^{+}\), 348 (10), 295 (13), 277 (41), 205 (23), 144 (100h, 131 (33), 119 (31), 105 (42), 91 (48).

_Acknowledgement._ The authors are indebted to Professor E. Wenkert, Rice University, Houston, Texas, U.S.A., for helpful discussions of the biogenetic aspects.

## References

* [1] Alvarenga, M. A. de, Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes, M. T. (1976) _Phytochemistry_ 15, 844.
* [2] Murea Pires, J. (1978) personal report
* [3] Overton, K. H., Wein, N. G. and Wylie, A. (1966) _J. Chem. Soc._ (C) 1842.
* [4] Herz, W. and Iyer, V. S. (1977) _J. Org. Chem._ 42, 1573
* [5] Stothers, J. B. (1972) in _Carbon-13 NMR Spectroscopy_. Academic Press, New York.
* [6] Taylor, D. A. H. (1977) _J. Chem. Res._ (S) 2.
* [7] Halsall, T. G., Wragg, K., Connolly, J. D., MacLellan, M. A., Bredell, L. D. and Taylor, D A. H. (1977) _J. Chem. Res._ (S) 154.
* [8] Chatterjee, A., Banerjee, D. and Bohlmann, F. (1977) _Tetrahedron_ 33, 2407.
* [9] Billet, D., Durgeat, M., Heitz, S. and Ahond, A. (1975) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 3825.
* [10] Wenkert, E., Buckwalter, B. L., Burfitt, I. R., Gasic, M. J., Gottlieb, P. E., Hagaman, E. W., Schell, F. M. and Wovkulch, P. M. (1976) in _Topics in Carbon-13 NMR Spectroscopy_ (Levy. G. C.. ed.), vol. 2, p. 81. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
* [11] Hagaman, E. W. (1976) _Org. Magn. Reson._ 8, 389.
* [12] Dalling, D. K., Grant, D. M. and Paul, E. G. (1973) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._ 95, 3718.
* [13] Adolf, W. and Hecker, E. (1977) _Isr. J. Chem._ 16, 75.
* [14] DePuy, C. H. (1968) _Acc. Chem. Res._ 1, 33.



