# 10.1039@c39720000514.pdf

## Page 1



# Constitutions of Rubrenolide and Rubrynolide: an Alkene-Alkyne Pair from _Nectandra rubra_

By N. C. Franca and O. R. Gottlieb

(Laboratorio de Produtos Naturais da Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brasil)

D. T. Coxon and W. D. Ollis*

(Department of Chemistry, The University, Sheffield S3 7HF)

###### Abstract

Constitutions are proposed for rubrenolide (Ia) and rubrynolide (Ib), two structurally novel natural products isolated from _Nectandra rubra_ (Lauraceae).

Tar trunk wood of the Amazonian tree, _Nectandra rubra_ (Mez) C. K. Allen1 of the Lauraceae family has yielded rubrenolide and rubrynolide which represent a novel natural product type.

Rubrenolide (Ia), C17H29O4, m.p. 100deg, [a]D + 21deg, \(\nu_{\rm 00}\) 1746 cm-1, was identified as a terminal alkene which, on the basis of i.r. and n.m.r. evidence, is associated with a -CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2 group. Rubrynolide (Ib), C17H29O4, m.p. 88deg, [a]D + 21deg, \(\nu_{\rm 00}\) 1745 cm-1, was similarly shown to be the corresponding terminal alkyne containing a -CH2-C=CH group. On catalytic hydrogenation rubrenolide and rubrynolide each gave dihydronephonic (Ic), C17H29O4, m.p. 106--107deg, [a]D + 22deg. The two hydroxygroups present in rubrenolide were shown, using trichloroacetyl isocyanate,1 to be primary and secondary, and their vicinal relationship was established by peridoate cleavage of dihydrorherochloride which gave formaldehyde and an aldehyde, C4H29O5, m.p. 50--53deg (\(\nu_{\rm 00}\) 1760 and 1720 cm-1). Intramolecular hydrogen bonding made a direct deduction of the lactone ring size in rubrenolide uncertain (\(\nu_{\rm 00}\) 1745 cm-1), but the acetonide, C49H29O4, m.p. 47--48deg, prepared from dihydrorheroolide, acetone, and anhydrous copper sulphate was clearly a y-lactone (\(\nu_{\rm 00}\) 1770 cm-1). The C17-skeleton of rubrenolide was determined by transforming dihydrorubrenolide to 4-methyl-hexadecane (III) by the sequence: (i) reduction (LiAlH4), (ii) formation of a tetramasylate, and (iii) hydrogenolysis (LiAlH4). Vigorous oxidation of rubrenolide with chromium trioxide in boiling acetic acid gave sebacic acid, HO4C[CH2]8O4H. Thus, two possible constitutions (IIa) or (IIb) could be considered for rubrenolide, and a decision between these was possible on the following evidence. Mild oxidation of rubrenolide (CrO3-HO4x; room temp.) yielded a vinylic (\(\nu_{\rm 0-}\)c 1645, 990, and 910 cm-1) lactonic acid (\(\nu_{\rm 00}\) 1760 and 1700 cm-1), C18H29O4, m.p. 95--98deg (IIc), whose n.m.r. spectrum showed an ABX system (H4 7 705, H2 7 49, H2 7, 7 40, 7 70; \(J_{\rm A}\) 17-5, \(J_{\rm A}\) 3-5, and \(J_{\rm B}\) 8-5 Hz) which had to be associated with the oxidatively generated carboxygroup (HO4C-CH2H2-

## Page 2

J.C.S. Chem. Comm., 1972

The branched chained C17-compounds, rubrenolide (Ia) and rubrynolide (Ib) from _Nectanadra rubra_ (Lauraceae) show an interesting biogenetic relation to the family of structurally related linear C17-compounds [_e.g._ (IVa) and (IVb)] recently isolated from the seed of the avocado pear, _Persea americana_ (Lauraceae).2,3 A proposed phytochemical relation4,4 between these two classes of C17-compounds isolated from Lauraceae may be extended to include some C17- and C18-compounds, (V)--(VII) from _Litesa odifera_.5 The natural products (Ia), (IIa), (IVa), (IVb and related compounds4), (V), and (VII) may all be derived as biosynthetic variants upon the acetate-malonate route to saturated fatty acids;7 the biogenetic correlation between the natural product types (I) and (IV) is indicated by numbers.

\[\begin{equation*}(Received,8thFebruary1972;Com.203.)\end{equation*}\]

C17- and C18-compounds, (V)--(VII) from _Litesa odifera_.6 The natural products (Ia), (IIa), (IVa), (IVb and related compounds4), (V), and (VII) may all be derived as biosynthetic variants upon the acetate-malonate route to saturated fatty acids;7 the biogenetic correlation between the natural product types (I) and (IV) is indicated by numbers.

\[\begin{equation*}(Received,8thFebruary1972;Com.203.)\end{equation*}\]

