# 10.1016@S0031-9422(97)00824-8.pdf

## Page 1



# BIOACTIVE SESQUITERPENE PYRIDINE ALKALOIDS FROM _MAYTENUS AQUIFOLIUM_

Joaoqium Corsino, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Ana Maria S. Pereira, Suzelei Castro Franca

and Mayas Furlan

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.Permanent address: Departamento de Morfologia, CCBS, UFMS, C.P. 649, 79070-900, Brasil. Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP. 355, 14800-900, Araraquara-SP, Brasil; Departamento de Biotecnologia, UNAERP, 14096-380, Ribeirao Preto-SP, Brasil

###### Abstract

Two new sesquiterpene evoninate alkaloids, were isolated together with the known compounds syringesinezol and 4'-_O_-methyl-(-)-epigallocatechin from the root bark of _Maytemus aquifolium_. The structures of the two alkaloids were elucidated by interpretation of their spectral data, and both exhibited very weak activity in a mechanism-based DNA-modifying yeast assay. (c) 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

## INTRODUCTION

The Celastraceae family is a rich source of sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids derived from polyester sesquiterpenes based on the dihydro-_b_-agaofuran skeleton [1]. They are characterized by a macrocyclic structure formed by two ester linkages between a sesquiterpene and various dicarboxylic acids (e.g. evoninic acid, wildfromic acid, edulinic acid, etc.) at positions 3 and 15 [2]. In our search for anticancer agents employing a mechanism-based yeast bioassay for DNA-modifying agents [3, 4] we have identified two sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids from _Maytemus aquifolium_ Martius. In this paper we report the isolation and structural elucidation of two sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids aquifoliumine E-I (**1**) and aquifolinuine E-II (**2**) from _M. aquifolium_ by application of 2D NMR spectroscopic techniques, including DOCOSY, HETCOR, HMBC, HMQC and NOESY, and their biological evaluation using the yeast bioassay system.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A CH2Cl3 soluble fraction from the methanolic extract of root bark of _M. aquifolium_ was subjected to silica gel column chromatography (CC). The fractions obtained were further separated by silica gel (CC) to give the sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids **1** and **2**.

Aquifolinuine E-I (**1**), was shown to have a molecular formula C4H4NO1s by analysis of its HRFABMS spectrum. Its IR spectrum revealed absorption bands at 3488, 1750 and 1443 cm-1 characteristic of hydroxy, ester and phenyl groups, respectively [5, 6]. The 1H and 1C NMR spectra of **1** revealed the presence of five acetyl groups (d_H_1.82, 1.88, 2.14, 2.20, 2.33) and one benzoyl group [d_H_7.43 (_m_), 7.57 (_p_), 7.92 (_o_)] (Tables 1 and 2). Proton assignments around the bicyclic skeleton were determined based on interpretation of the DOCOSY spectrum. The spin system derived from H-1a, H-2a, H-3\(b\), H-8\(b\) and H-9\(a\) was readily recognized by starting with the 1H doublet at \(d\) 5.63 assigned to H-1a (_J_1a,2 = 3.5 Hz) which showed a cross-peak with the 1H doublet of doublets at \(d\) 5.25 assigned to H-2a (_J_2a,1a = 3.5, \(J\)2a,7b = 2.5 Hz). This latter signal also showed a cross-peak with the 1H doublet at \(d\) 4.73 assigned to H-3_b_

## Page 2

(\(J_{{}_{3.28}}\) = 2.5 Hz). The 1H doublet of doublets at \(\delta\) 5.67 assigned to H-8\(\beta\) (\(J_{{}_{3.79}}\) = 3.6, \(J_{{}_{3.69}}\) = 9.9 Hz) showed cross-peaks with the 1H doublets at \(\delta\) 2.66 (H-7\(\beta\)) and \(\delta\) 5.89 (H-9\(\alpha\)). The latter proton signal was also correlated with the H-8\(\beta\).

The relative stereochemistry of the H-8\(\beta\) and H-9\(\alpha\) was deduced from NOE difference experiment, in which irradiation of the methine resonance at \(\delta\) 6.73 (H-6) caused an enhancement of the signal at \(\delta\) 5.67 (H-8\(\beta\)). The irradiation of the methyl resonance at \(\delta\) 1.81 (H-14) caused an enhancement of the signal at \(\delta\) 5.89 corroborating the axial orientation of H-9 (Fig. 1). The two sets of methylene protons consisting of two pairs of doublet of doublets at \(\delta\) 4.62, 4.82 (\(J_{{}_{118,128}}\) = 13.6 Hz) and \(\delta\) 3.63, 5.96 (\(J_{{}_{1518\oplus 18}}\) = 11.6 Hz) were assigned to H-11 and H-15, respectively. The presence of an esterified evoninic acid was indicated by two doublets at \(\delta\) 1.20 and 1.39 assigned to two secondary methyl groups (H-10\({}^{\prime}\) and H-9) which showed cross-peaks with a pair of resonances at \(\delta\) 2.58 and 4.65 assigned to H-8\({}^{\prime}\) and H-7\({}^{\prime}\), respectively (q, \(J_{{}_{3.10}}\) and \(J_{{}_{7.9}}\) = 7.0 Hz). The configuration of the methyl groups of the evoninic-type compounds were determined as 7\({}^{\prime}\)S, 8\({}^{\prime}\)S (evoninic acid: 2S, 3S) by hydrolysis [7] and X-ray analysis [8]. The 2,3-dis-substituted pyridine unit was determined by the signals at \(\delta\) 7.23 (_dd_, \(J\) = 8.0, 4.8 Hz), 8.03 (_dd_, \(J\) = 1.6, 8.0 Hz) and 8.68 (_dd_, \(J\) = 1.6, 4.6 Hz) assigned to H-5\({}^{\prime}\), H-4\({}^{\prime}\) and H-6\({}^{\prime}\), respectivity. The location of the ester groups around the basic skeleton was solved by examination of the HMBC spectrum. The four acetoxy carbonyl resonances at \(\delta\) 168.6, 169.1, 169.7, 169.8 and 170.0 were correlated with 3H singlets at \(\delta\) 2.14, 1.82, 2.20, 1.88 and 2.33, respectively, and the attachment of these acetoxy groups at C-2, C-1, C-9, C-6 and C-11 was established by defining cross-peaks between the acetoxy carbonyl resonances and proton signals at \(\delta\) 5.25 (H-2z), 5.63 (H-1a), 5.89 (H-9\(\alpha\)), 6.73 (H-6\(\beta\)) and 4.62-4.82 (H-11). The signal at \(\delta\) 164.5 was assigned to the carbonyl carbon of the benzoate moiety based upon its cross-peak with the phenyl \(o\)-protons at \(\delta\) 7.92. The signals of a carbonyl carbon at \(\delta\) 165.6 was assigned to C-2\({}^{\prime}\) based on it cross-peaks with the proton signals at \(\delta\) 2.58, 4.65 (H-8\({}^{\prime}\), H-7\({}^{\prime}\)) and \(\delta\) 1.20, 1.39 (H-10\({}^{\prime}\), H-9\({}^{\prime}\)). Further correlations between the carbon signal at \(\delta\) 174.0 (C-11\({}^{\prime}\)) and \(\delta\) 168.4 (C-12\({}^{\prime}\)) with proton signals at \(\delta\) 3.63-5.96 (H-15) and \(\delta\) 4.73 (H-3) proved the attachment of the evoninic moiety to be at C-3 and C-15.

Comparison of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR data for **1** with those of horridine [9] showed a discrepancy in the literature assignments for some carbons in the structure and

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l} H & **1** & **2** \\
1 & 5.63 \(d\) (3.5) & 5.46 \(d\) (3.7) \\
2 & 5.25 \(dd\) (3.5, 2.5) & 4.06 \(dd\) (3.5, 2.6) \\
3 & 4.73 \(d\) (2.5) & 4.73 \(d\) (2.6) \\
4-OH & 4.53 \(d\) (1.2) & 4.45 \(d\) (1.2) \\
6 & 6.73 \(s

## Page 3

these have been revised based on HETCOR and HMBC data (see Table 2).

Aquifolianine E-II (**2**) has the molecular C3H4O**NO**16 by analysis of its HRFABMS spectrum. It also was an evoninate type sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloid derivative of **1** and its sesquiterpene core contained four acetyl groups. Further oxygenated functional groups were assumed to be hydroxyl groups. The positions of these hydroxyl groups were confirmed at C-2 and C-8, where the H-2 and H-8 are methine protons (d 4.06, _dd_, \(J\)2a,1a = 3.5, \(J\)2a,3_d = 2.6 Hz and 4.30, _dd_, \(J\)8,7b = 3.5, \(J\)8,9a = 9.4 Hz) resonating at higher field than the corresponding protons of **1**. In addition, H-2a and H-8b did not show any cross-peaks with a carbonyl carbon resonance in the HMBC spectrum. Again, HETCOR analysis was used to assign the signals for all proton-bearing carbons.

The known compound _4'-O-_methyl-(-)-epigallocatechin (**3**) was earlier isolated from _M. envonyloides_[10], _M. rigida_[11] and _Ouroeta_ sp. [12], while syringaresinol (**4**) [13], a 3,7-dioxabicyclo[3.3.0]octane lignan derivative, was isolated for the first time from _Maytenus_ species.

In the bioassay utilizing genetically engineered mutants of the yeast _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ the sesquiterpene alkaloids aquifolianine E-I (**1**) and aquifolianine E-II (**2**) exhibited very weak bioactivity. Compounds **1** and **2** showed weak but selective activities with IC12 values of 164 and 266; 160 and 167; 160 and 180 _m_g/mL in the mutant yeast strains RS 321N, RS 322YK (_rad_ 52Y), and RS 167N (_rad_ 6), respectively; they were inactive (IC12 > 1000 _m_g/mL) in the "wild type" strain RS 188N (_rad_+). These results indicate these compounds might serve as the main components responsible for the slight DNA-damaging activity of _M. aquifolium_ extract.

## Experimental

### Instrumentation and chromatography materials

Silica gel (Merck, 230-400 and 70-230 mesh) were used for all column chromatography unless otherwise stated and solvents were redistilled prior to use. **H** and 13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Unity spectrometer at 400 and 100.57 MHz, respectively with TMS as a internal standard. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer. HRFABMS: at 70 EV VG 7070E-HF. Optical activities were measured on a Polamat A, Carl Zeiss Jena.

### Plant material

_M. aquifolium_ root bark was collected at Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo and classified by Dr Rita Maria de 

## Page 4

Carvalho. The voucher specimen is deposited in the Herbarium of the University of Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

#### Bioassays

The experimental method utilized in the screening procedure has been described elsewhere [3, 4]. The IC12 values refer to the concentration in _m_g/mL required to produce a zone of inhibition of 12 mm diameter around a 100 _m_l well during a 48 h incubation period at 37degC.

#### Extraction and isolation of constituents

The dried and powdered root bark of \(M\). _aquifolium_ (153.5 g) was extracted with MeOH. The resulting MeOH extract was filtered and concol _in vacuo_ to afford a brown gum (17.35 g). The CH2Cl2 soluble part of MeOH extract (1.43 g) was applied to a Si gel column (300 g), and eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc to give 68 hrs. Fr. 10 (720 mg) was applied to a Si gel column (2.0 g) 230-400 mesh, and eluted with CHCl], with increasing amounts of MeOH to give 1 (9.8 mg). Fr. 14 (22.2 mg) was subjected to Si gel CC, eluted with CHCl], containing an increasing amount of MeOH to give 4 (5.1 mg). Fr. 20 (23.6 mg) was chromatographed on silica gel (CC) eluted with CHCl] containing increasing amounts of MeOH to give 2 (2.6 mg). Fr. 30 (149.8 mg) was applied to Si gel (CC) eluted with CHCl] containing increasing amount of MeOH to give 3 (3.7 mg).

#### Aquifoliumine E-I (1)

Amorphous solid. [a]D - 3.1deg (CHCl3; c 3.2). IR\({}_{\text{max}}^{\text{6mm}}\) KBr cm\({}^{-1}\): 3488, 1750, 1570, 1443, 1380, 1100. HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 868.3010 [M + 1]\({}^{+}\) (100). 'H NMR: Table 1, 1degC NMR: Table 2.

#### Aquifoliumine E-II (2)

[a]D - 17.2deg (CHCli; c 2.9). IR\({}_{\text{max}}^{\text{6lim}}\) KBr cm\({}^{-1}\): 3490, 1755, 1572, 1443, 1383, 1100. HRFABMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 722.2668 [M + 1]\({}^{+}\) (100). 'H NMR: Table 1, 1degC NMR: Table 2.

#### Acknowledgments

This work was funded by grants from FUNDUNESP, FAPESP and CNPq, M. Furlan and V. da S. Bolzani are grateful to CNPq for the fellowships. J. Corsino thanks CAPES for providing a scholarship and the UFMS (Brazil) for a leave of absence. We thank Dr D. G. I. Kingston (Department of Chemistry, VPI & S. U.) for the yeast strains and Dr A. A. L. Gunatilaka (Bioresources Research Facility, University of Arizona) for the 2D NMR spectroscopic experiments.

## References

* [1] Bruning, R. and Wagner, H., _Phytochemistry_, 1978, **17**, 1821.
* [2] Manske, R. H. F., _The Alkaloids_, Vol. 16. Academic Press, New York, 1977, p. 215.
* [3] Gunatilaka, A. A. L., Kingston, D. G. I. and Johnson, R. K., _Pure & Appl. Chem._, 1994, **66**, 2219.
* [4] Gunatilaka, A. A. L., Samaranayake, G., Kingston, D. G. I., Hofmann, G. and Johnson, R. K., _J. Nat. Prod._, 1992, **55**, 1648
* [5] Wada, H., Shizuri, Y., Yamada, K. and Hirata, Y., _Tetrahedron Lett._, 1971, **28**, 2655.
* [6] Sugiura, K., Shizuri, Y., Wada, H., Yamada, K. and Hirata, Y., _Tetrahedron Lett._, 1971, **29**, 2733.
* [7] Pailer, M. and Libiseller, R., _Monatch. Chem._, 1962, **93**, 511.
* [8] Sasaki, K. and Hirata, Y., _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. II_, 1972, 1268.
* [9] Gonzalez, A. G., Ferro, A. E. and Ravelo, A. G., _Heterocycles_, 1986, **24**, 1295.
* [10] Furlan, M., Alvarenga, M. A. and Akizue, G., _Rev. Latinoam. Quim._, 1990, **21**, 72.
* [11] Delle Monache, F., Pomponi, M., Marinit-Bettolo, G. B., D'Albuquerque, I. L. and Goncalves de Lima, O., _Phytochemistry_, 1976, **15**, 573.
* [12] Delle Monache, F., D'Albuquerque, I. L., Ferrari, F. and Marinit-Bettolo, G. B., _Tetrahedron Lett._, 1967, **43**, 4211.
* [13] Nawwar, M. A. M., Buddrus, J. and Bauer, H., _Phytochemistry_, 1982, **21**, 1755.



