# 10.1080@14786410600907002.pdf

## Page 1



# Natural Product Research: Formerly Natural Product Letters

Publisher: Taylor & Francis

Information Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

N. A. P. D. Santos, M. F. D. G. F. Da Silva, P. C. Vieira, J. B. Fernandes, P. J. Houghton, R. Fang

# Abstract

## 1 Introduction

The purpose of this article is to study the relationship between the number of variables and the number of variables. The first is to study the relationship between the number of variables and the number of variables. The second is to study the relationship between the number of variables and the number of variables. The second is to study the relationship between the number of variables and the number of variables. The third is to study the relationship between the

## Page 2

demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.



## Page 3



[

\({}^{\dagger}\)Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil

\({}^{\ddagger}\)Pharmacognosy Research Laboratories, Department of Pharmacy King's College London, Franklin-Wilkins Building, 150 Stanford St., London SE1 9NH, UK

###### Abstract

The methanol extract from the stems and fruits of _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Rutaceae) afforded 11 known acridone alkaloids and three \(N\)-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives, glycocitrine-IV, 1,3,5-trihydroxy-4-methoxy-10-methyl-2,8-bis(3-methylbut-2-enyl)acridin-9(10_H_)-one, 1,3,5-trihydroxy-2,8-bis(3-methylbut-2-enyl)-10-methyl-9-acridone, cithyasine, citrusinine-II, citrusinine-I, 5-dihydroxyacronycine, pyranofoline, 3,4-dihydro-3,5,8-trihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,2,7-trimethy1-2_H_-pyrano[2,3-acjardicin-12(7_H_)-one, 2,3-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-2-(2-hydroxy-propan-2-yl)-11-methoxy-10-methylfurdo[3,2-b]acridin-5(10_H_)-one, bis-5-hydroxyacronycine, _N_-(2-{4-((3,7-dimethylocta-2,6-dien-1-yl)oxyphenyl)ethylbenzamide, _N_-(2-{4-((3,7-dimethyl-4-acetyl)-octa-2,6-dien-1-yl)oxyphenyl)ethyl)phenylazine, and severine acetate. All compounds isolated were examined for their activity against three cancer cell lines: human lung carcinoma (COR-L23), human breast adenocarcinoma (MCF7), human melanoma (C32), and normal human fetal lung cell line, MRC-5. The acridones tested exhibited weak cytotoxicity but the amides showed moderate nonselective cytotoxic activity.

A]In vitro cytotoxicity activity on several cancer cell lines of acridone alkaloids and \(N\)-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives from _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) Kerr.

A]P. A. C. BRAGA+, D]D. A. P. DOS SANTOS+, M]M. F. D. G. F. DA SILVA*+, P]P. C. VIEIRA+, J]J. B. FERNANDES+, P]P. J. HOUGHTON+ and R]R. FANG++

Footnote †: Corresponding author. Tel.: +55-16-3351-8093. Fax: +55-16-3351-8350. Email: dmfs@power.ufscar.br

Footnote †: thanks: Corresponding author. Tel.: +55-16-3351-8093. Fax: +55-16-3351-8350. Email: dmfs@power.ufscar.br

## 1 Introduction

Cancer is the uncontrolled growth and spread of cells that may affect almost any tissue of the body. Lung, colorectal and stomach cancer are among the most common in the world for both men and women. According to the World Health Organization cancer is responsible for 12% of the world's mortality [1]. Plants have a long history of use in treatment of cancer and they have provided some of the currently used effective anticancer agents such as vinblastine, vincristine, etoposide, teniposide, and

## Page 4

paclitaxel [2]. The analysis of the sources of new and approved drugs for the treatment of cancer shows that 60% of these drugs were shown to be of natural origin, being natural compounds or derivatives thereof [3].

_In vitro_ model system with human cells is increasingly used to investigate mechanism of chemical-induced toxicity and for toxicity screening of new drug families. Among the chemical entities assayed against cancer cell lines, acridone alkaloids have been a target of study by researchers. The acridone alkaloids are known to have several bioactivities, including antimalarial activity [4, 5, 6], antiviral [7, 8], and cytotoxicity activity [9, 10, 11]. In this article, the isolation of 11 acridone alkaloids and three _N_-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives from _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) Merr. and their _in vitro_ cytotoxicity activity on several cancer cell lines are described.

## 2 Results and discussion

The acridone alkaloids and _N_-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives were isolated from the methanol extract of the stem and fresh fruits of _Swinglea glutinosa_ (Bl.) Merr., respectively, and were identified on the basis of spectroscopic methods and comparison of literature data as: glycocitrine-IV (**1**) [12], 1,3,5-trihydroxy-4-methoxy-10-methyl-2,8-bis(3-methylbut-2-enyl)acridin-9(10_H_)-one (**2**) [13] and 1,3,5-trihydroxy-2,8-bis(3-methylbut-2-enyl)-10-methyl-9-acridone (**3**) [5], cithrasine (**4**) and citrusinine-II (**5**) [14], citrusinine-I (**6**) [15], 5-dihydroxyacronycine (**7**) [16], pyrazolo-foline (**8**) [17], dihydro-3,5,8-trihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,2,7-trimethyl-2_H_-pyrano[2,3-_a_] acridin-12(7_H_)-one (**9**), 2,3-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-2-(2-hydroxy-propan-2-yl)-11-methoxy-10-methylfuro[3,2-_b_]acridin-5(10_H_)-one (**10**) [13] and bis-5-hydroxyacronycine (**11**) [18], _N_-(2-{4-[(3,7-dimethylocta-2,6-dien-1-yl)oxy]phenyl}ethyl)benzamide (**12**), _N_-(2-{4-[(3,7-dimethyl-4-acetyl-octa-2,6-dien-1-yl)oxy]phenyl}ethyl)benzamide (**13**), and severine acetate (**14**) [19].

_Swinglea_ is native to the Phillipine Islands but was introduced into Brazil where it grows well. _Swinglea_ belongs to the Aurantioideae subfamily [20], and it is known to contain _N_-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives and protolimonoids [19]. In the Aurantioideae, the relatively small representation of quinolones contrasts with a preferential accumulation of coumarins, acridones, amides, and flavonoids [21]. Thus, the range of compounds that were isolated from _Swinglea_ reinforces its position as a member of the Aurantioideae.

Natural and synthetic acridones represent important antitumor drugs. A characteristic example is the natural acridone acronycine (**15**), which posses an IC50 in leukemia cells in the order of 25 \(\mu\)M [22]. The structure-activity relationships (SAR) of a series of naturally occurring acridones have been studied to determine the effects of these compounds on the inhibition of cell growth and macromolecular biosynthesis of human promyelocytic leukemia cells [23]. Among 50 alkaloids tested, glyfoline (**16**) was found to be the most active compound (IC50 1.1 \(\mu\)M) and 21 alkaloids were found to be more active than acronycine (IC50 26.2 \(\mu\)M), as compounds **6** (IC50 8.6 \(\mu\)M), **7** (IC50 8.8 \(\mu\)M), and **8** (IC50 7.1 \(\mu\)M). Further studies of glyfoline congeners by [24] revealed that the intramolecular hydrogen bonding between the 1-hydroxy and the peri-carbonyl function of the 1-hydroxy-9-acridone nucleus was an important determinant for their cytotoxicity. Other 15 acridones were examined as inducers of HL-60 cell differentiation. These cells were differentiated into mature monocyte/macrophage by 

## Page 5

atalaphyllidine (**17**), atalaphyllinine (**18**), and des-_N_-methylnoracronycine (**19**). The activities of NBT reduction (on a minimum of 200 cells), nonspecific esterase, and phagocytosis, were induced by 2.5 uM of **17**-**19**. After a 4-day treatment, **17**-**19** at 10 uM inhibited clonal proliferation of HL-60 cells by 28, 96, and 63%, respectively. The SAR from the results revealed again that hydroxyl group at C-1 had an important role, as well as a prenyl group at C-2 of the tetracyclic acridones [9]. The same 15 acridones were examined for their antiproliferative effect on monolayers and suspension of several types of cancer cell lines, human lung carcinoma (A-549), melanin pigment-producing mouse melanoma (B-16 melanoma 4A5), T-cell leukemia (CCRF-HSB-2), gastric cancer cell, and lymph-node metastasized (TGBC11TKB) [10]. As a result, atalaphyllidine (**17**), atalaphyllinine (**18**), des-_N_-methylnoracronycine (**19**), and 5-hydroxy-_N_-methylseverifoline (**20**) showed potent antiproliferative activity against tumor cell lines. The SAR established from the results revealed that a secondary amine, hydroxyl groups at C-1 and C-5, and a prenyl group at C-2 played an important role for antiproliferative activities of the tetracyclic acridones [23].

Some of the acridones isolated from _S. glutinosa_, i.e. compounds **6** (IC\({}_{50}\) 8.6 uM for HL-60), **7** (IC\({}_{50}\) 8.8 uM for HL-60), and **8** (IC\({}_{50}\) 7.1 uM for HL-60), possess the structural requirements for antiproliferative activity. This stimulated us to test these alkaloids on other types of cancer cell lines, the human lung carcinoma cell line,

## Page 6

COR-L23, human breast adenocarcinoma cell line MCF7, the human melanoma cell line, C32, and normal human fetal lung cell line, MRC-5. The sulforhodamine-B (SRB) assay was used to test cytotoxicity against all cell lines and vinblastine sulfate (Sigma) was used as a positive control. The IC50 values of antitumor activity of the eleven acridone alkaloids and three _N_-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives on COR-L23, MCF7, C-32, and MRC-5 are summarized in table 1. Unfortunately, in spite of their promising structural features, none of the acridone tested exhibited high level of cytotoxicity, with IC50 values ranging from 47.5 to 93.3 mM. In previous studies, di- and monoprenylate acridones were shown to be more active than acronycine (IC50 26.2 mM) on human leukemic HL-60 cell. Examples are 1,3,5-trihydroxy-2,4-bis(3-methyl-but-2-enyl)-10-methyl-9-acridone; with IC50 13.7 mM, and 1,3,6-trihydroxy-2-(3-methyl-but-2-enyl)-5-methoxyl-10-methyl-9-acridone with (IC50 10.1 mM) [10]. However, acridone congeners **1**-**3** did not show significant activity on cancer cell lines COR-L23 (IC50: **1**>100, **2** 66.1, **3** 69.1 mM), MCF7 (IC50: **1**>100, **2** 70.4, **3**>100 mM) and C32 (IC50: **1**>100, **2** 70.1, **3** 86.9 mM). In addition, what was particularly surprising in our study was the lack of appreciable activity for compounds **6**-**8** (COR-L23, IC50: **6**>100, **7** 69.9, **8**>100 mM; MCF7, IC50: **6**>100, **7** 77.6, **8**>100 mM, and C32, IC50: **6**>100, **7** 83.9, **8**>100 mM) since they were found to be more active than acronycine on human leukemic HL-60 cells [10]. Examination of the preceding compilation and our data reveal some impediments to develop a qualitative understanding of structure-activity. Different investigators seldom utilize the same cancer cell lines and interspecific differences in the response of the test cells can easily mask any meaningful observation of SARs. The present results obtained from acridone alkaloids on cancer cell lines COR-L23, MCF7 and C-32 are reported here for the first time. Among the enormous variety of alkaloids

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline  & \multicolumn{4}{c}{IC50 (μM)} \\ Compound & COR-L23 & MCF7 & C32 & MRC-5 \\ \hline
**1** & \(>\)100 & \(>\)100 & \(>\)100 & \(>\)100 \\
**2** & \(66.1\pm 0.4\) & \(70.4\pm 5.9\) & \(70.1\pm 2.3\) & \(71.9\pm 1.9

## Page 7

in the Rutaceae [21, 25], only evodiamine and rutaocarpine, indolopyridoquinazoline alkaloids, have been previously evaluated for antiproliferation activity on any of these cancer cell lines i.e. MCF7 [26]. They were found to possess pronounced cytotoxic activity. In order to find potential lead compounds, Rutaceous alkaloids deserve more attention as anticancer agents.

The _N_-phenylethyl-benzamide derivatives were also tested on cancer cell lines COR-L23, MCF7, and C32. Amides **13** (IC50 28.6 mM) and **14** (IC50 12.3 mM) were active against COR-L23 and only **14** (IC50 34.0 mM) against MCF7. However, amides **13** and **14** exhibited a high level of cytotoxic activity against the normal human fetal lung cell line, MRC-5 with IC50 values of 7.2 and 0.66 mM, respectively. This is the first report of cytotoxic, activity of _N_-phenylethyl-benzamide, but their lack of selectivity precludes any clinical application. However, it is possible that analog could be developed that would show selectivity and these would be of greater interest as lead compounds.



## Page 8



## 3 Experimental

### General

Optical rotations were measured using a Perkin Elmer 241. IR spectra were recorded on a BOMEM M-B Series. UV absorptions were recorded using a Varian 500 SCAN UV-VIS-NIR. \({}^{1}\)H NMR data were recorded Bruker ARX-200 NMR spectrometer (200 MHz) and Bruker DRX-400 NMR spectrometer (400 MHz); \({}^{13}\)C NMR data were recorded at Bruker ARX 200 NMR spectrometer (50 MHz) and Bruker DRX-400 NMR spectrometer (100 MHz). Spectra were recorded in acetone-d\({}_{6}\) and DMSO-d\({}_{6}\) with TMS as internal standard. All 2D NMR data were recorded at 400 MHz (Bruker DRX-400), HSQC \(J\) = 145 Hz; HMBC \(J\) = 8 Hz. HR-MS data were recorded at QTOF Micromass (QqTOF). Recycling HPLC Shimadzu SPD-6AV; TLC was carried out using Merck aluminum-backed silica gel 60 F\({}_{254}\).

### Plant material

Leaves, stem, and root bark were collected in Campinas (SP), Brazil, at Instituto Agronomico de Campinas, and dried in the shade. The plant was identified by Prof. Dr Maira Ines Salgado. A voucher specimen is deposited at the Herbarium of Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos (HUFSCar) number 7110 at Departamento de Botanica of Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos.

### Isolation of compounds

#### 3.3.1 Alkaloids.

The parts of the plant were extracted separately with \(n\)-hexane at room temperature for 3 days, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure at 40\({}^{\circ}\)C, this procedure was done three times to yield the hexane crude extract. The residue was extracted as the same way using MeOH to yield the \(n\)-hexane and methanol crude extract. The MeOH crude extract 60 g was fractioned by VCC over 1 kg of silica gel 60 (70-239 mesh, Merck) eluting with 1.5 L of the solvents: C\({}_{6}\)H\({}_{14}\) 100% (fraction 1), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) 100% (fraction 2), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) : CH\({}_{3}\)OH 3 : 1 (fraction 3); CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) : CH\({}_{3}\)OH 2 : 1 (fraction 4); CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) : CH\({}_{3}\)OH 1 : 1 (fraction 4) and CH\({}_{3}\)OH 100% (fraction 5). Fractions 2 and 3 were combined after analyses with TLC. The result was chromatographed on silica gel eluted with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\); the polarity was increased by addition of 5, 10, 13, 18, 20, and 25% of MeOH in a gradient system to yield 15 fractions. Lupeol was crystallized from the fractions 1-3. The fraction 5 was rechromatographed on Si gel eluted with \(n\)-hexane-acetone 1 : 3 and gel permeation CC (Sephadex LH 20, 60 x 4 cm\({}^{2}\); MeOH) yield alkaloids **1** (3.5 mg), **2** (16.3 mg), **3** (30.4 mg), **4** (11.2 mg), **7** (9.8 mg), **8** (13.4 mg), and **11** (5.4 mg). Further purification of fraction 9 using gel permeation CC (Sephadex LH 20, 45 x 3 cm\({}^{2}\); MeOH) followed by using of HPLC (column SHODEX ASAHIPAK GS-310 2G; flow rate at 3.0 mL min\({}^{-1}\); UV detection at 254 and 365 nm; MEOH as eluted) yield compounds **3** (7.3 mg), **5** (13.5 mg), and **6** (11.2 mg). Fraction 10 after rechromatographed on gel permeation CC (Sephadex LH 20, 30 x 3 cm\({}^{2}\); MeOH) afforded compound **9** (4.3 mg) and **10** (5.2 mg).



## Page 9



#### 3.3.2 \(N\)-phenylethyl-benzamide compounds.

The sliced fresh fruits were stirred with MeOH at room temperature for 3 days. The extract was evaporated under vacuum and residue partitioned into CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-, EtOHAc- and \(n\)-BuOH-soluble fractions. Fractions CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) and EtOAc were combined, solvent removed and the residue (26 g) was chromatographed on silica gel, elution with a hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc-MeOH gradient afforded 09 fractions. Fraction 2 was twice rechromatographed (silica gel, hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) 4 : 1; then silica gel, hexane-Me\({}_{2}\)CO 3 : 1) to give **12** and a fraction containing **13** and **14**. The latter was rechromatographed as above, elution with hexane-EtOAc 7 : 1 yielded a mixture of **13** and **14**. The latter was rechromatographed as described before, elution with hexane-EtOAc 7 : 1 and then by HPLC (column SHODEX ASAHIPAK GS-310 2G; flow rate at 3.0 mL min-1; UV detection at 254 and 365 nm; eluted with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)) affording compounds **13** (8 mg) and **14** (9 mg).

### 3.4. In vitro _biological assays_

#### 3.4.1. Cell lines.

Cancer cell lines used in this work were human lung carcinoma cell line, COR-L23, human breast adenocarcinoma cell line MCF7, the human melanoma cell line, C32 and normal human fetal lung cell line, MRC-5. The cells COR-L23, MCF7 and C32 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplement with 10% heated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% of 2 Mm l-glutamine and 50 mg/Ml penicillin/streptomycin. MRC-5 were cultured in DMEM (Dulbecco's Modified minimum essential medium) with 10% FBS, 1% of 2 Mm l-glutamine and 50 mg/Ml penicillin/streptomycin. All cell lines were maintained at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C in a 5% CO\({}_{2}\). According to their growth profiles, the follow densities of each cell were used: 1 x 10\({}^{3}\), 3 x 10\({}^{3}\), 3 x 10\({}^{3}\), and 2 x 10\({}^{3}\) cell/well for COR-L23, C32, MCF-7, and MRC5, respectively.

#### 3.4.2. Preparation of cell suspension for assay.

The human cell lines were washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). The PBS was decanted and cells detached with 2.5 mL of trypsin (Sigma) and PBS was added to a volume of 10 mL. The cell pellet obtained by centrifugation (37\({}^{\circ}\)C, 115 r.p.m. and 5 min) was resuspended in 10 mL of suitable medium to make a cell suspension. The cell density was counted by triplan exclusion in a hemocytometer and then diluted with medium to give the previously determined optimal densities for COR-L23, C32, MCF-7, and MRC5. The cell suspension (100 mL) from each cell were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C to allow the attachment. After 24 h the cells were treated with the pure compounds solutions. Each pure compounds was initially dissolved in DMSO (Sigma) and after they were diluted in medium to produce four concentrations of 50, 5, 0.5, and 0.05 mg mL-1.

#### 3.4.3. Sulforhodamine-B (SRB) assay.

The antiproliferative SRB assay was performed to assess growth inhibition by a colorimetric assay that estimates cell number indirectly by staining total cellular protein with the dye SRB [27]. Cells were fixed by layering 100 mL of ice-cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Aldrich Chemical) on top of grown medium. Cells were incubated at 4\({}^{\circ}\)C for 1 h, after which plates were washed five times with water, the excess water drained off, and the plates left to dry in air at room temperature. SRB stain (50 mL; 0.4 in 1% acetic acid) (Sigma) was added to each well and left in contact with the cells for 30 min, after which they were washed with solution

## Page 10

of 1% acetic acid and rinsed four times until only dye adhering to the cells was left. The plates were dried at room temperature and 100 \(\mu\)L of 10 \(\mu\)M Tris base pH 10.5 (Sigma) were added to each well to solubilize the dye. The plates were shaken gently for 2 min, and the absorbance of each well was read on a SLT 340 ATTC plate reader (SLT Labinstrument, Australia) at 492 nm. Cell survival was measured as the percentage absorbance compared to the control (nontreated cells). The IC\({}_{50}\) values were calculated from the PRISM program obtained by plotting the percentage of survival _versus_ the concentration and interpolated by cubic spine.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES), Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support, Marcia Ortiz Mayo Marques from the Instituto Agronomico de Campinas and Maria Ines Salgado from the Departamento de Botanica of Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos.

## References

* [1] A.D. Kinghorn, B. Su, D.S. Jang, L.C. Chang, D. Lee, J. Gu, E. Carcache-Blanco, A.D. Pawlus, S.K. Lee, E.J. Park, M. Cuendet, J.J. Gills, K. Bhat, H. Park, E. Mata-Greenwood, L.L Song, M. Jang, J.M. Pezzuto. _Planta Med._, **70**, 691 (2004).
* [2] R. Alexandrova, I. Alexandrov, M. Velcheva, T. Varadinova. _Exp. Pathol. Parasitol._, **4**, 15 (2000).
* [3] D.J. Newman, G.G.M. Cragg, K.M. Snader. _J. Nat. Prod._, **66**, 1022 (2003).
* [4] H. Fujioka, Y. Nishiyama, H. Furukawa, H. Kumada. _Antimicrob. Agents Chemother._, **33**, 6 (1989).
* [5] B. Weninger, B. Um, A. Valentin, A. Estrada, A. Lobstein, R. Anton, M. Maille, M. Sauvain. _J. Nat. Prod._, **64**, 1221 (2001).
* [6] M.W. Muriithi, W.R. Abraham, J. Addae-Kyereme, I. Scowen, S.L. Croft, P.M. Gitu, H. Kendrick, E.N.M. Nijagi, C.W. Wright. _J. Nat. Prod._, **65**, 956 (2002).
* [7] N. Yamamoto, H. Furukawa, Y. Ito, S. Yoshida, K. Maeno, Y. Nishiyama. _Antiviral Res._, **12**, 21 (1989).
* [8] J.M. Kramer, R. Cleeland, E. _Grunberg. Administrob. Agents Chemother._, **9**, 233 (1976).
* [9] S. Kawaii, Y. Tomono, E. Katase, K. Ogawa, M. Yano, Y. Takemura, M. Ju-Ichi, C. Ito, H. Furukawa. _Leukemia Res._, **23**, 263 (1999).
* [10] T.-C. Chou, C.-C. Tzeng, T.-S. Wu, K.A. Watanabei, T.-L. Su. _Pytother. Res._, **3**, 237 (1989).
* [11] M. Itoigawa, C. Ito, T.-S. Wu, F. Enjo, H. Tokuda, H. Nishino, H. Furukawa. _Cancer Lett._, **193**, 133 (2003).
* [12] C. Ito, Y. Kondo, T.-S. Wu, H. Furukawa. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **48**, 65 (2000).
* [13] D.A.P. dos Santos, P.C. Vieira, M.F. das, G.F. da Silva, J.B. Fernandes, L. Rattray, S.L. Croft. _J. Nat. Prod._ (In press).
* [14] T.-S. Wu, H. Furukawa. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **31**, 901 (1983).
* [15] H. Furukawa, M. Yogo, T.-S. Wu. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **31**, 3084 (1983).
* [16] T.-S. Wu, C.-S. Kuch, H. Furukawa. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **31**, 895 (1983).
* [17] T.-S. Wu, H. Furukawa., C.-S. Kuch, K.-S. Hsu. _J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans._, **1**, 1681 (1983).
* [18] Y. Takemura, M. Wada, M. Ju-Ichi, C. Ito, H. Furukawa. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._, **46**, 693 (1998).
* [19] D.L. Dreyer, J.F. Rigod, S.C. Basa, P. Mahanty, D.P. Das. _Tetrahedron_, **36**, 827 (1980).
* [20] P.A. de Campos Braga, D.A. Pereira dos Santos, M.F. das Gracas Fernandes da Silva, P.C. Vieira, J.B. Fernandes, P.J. Houghton, R. Fang. Rutaceae: Pilocarpus. In _Flora Brasiliensis_, A. Engler, C.F.P. Martius, A.G. Eichler (Eds), Vol. 12, pp. 131-139, R. Oldenbourg, Munich & Leipzig (1874).
* [21] M.F. das, G.F. da Silva, O.R. Gottlieb, F. Ehrendorfer. _Plant Syst., Evol._, **161**, 97 (1988).
* [22] K. Gerzon, G. Svoboda. _Alkaloids_, **XXI**, 1 (1983).
* [23] S. Kawaii, Y. Tomono, E. Katase, K. Ogawa, M. Yano, Y. Takemura, M. Ju-Ichi, C. Ito, H. Furukawa. _J. Nat. Prod._, **62**, 587 (1999).



## Page 11

* [24] T.-S. Su, B. Kohler, T.-C. Chou, M.W. Chun, K.A. Watanabe. _J. Med. Chem._, **35**, 2703 (1992).
* [25] M.P. Lima, L.V. Rosas, M.F. das, G.F. da Silva, A.G. Ferreira, J.B. Fernandes, P.C. Vieira. _Pytrochemistry_, **66**, 1560 (2005).
* [26] Y. Zhang, Q.H. Zhang, L.J. Wu, S. Tashiro, S. Onodera, T. Ikejima. _J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res._, **6**, 19 (2004).
* [27] P. Skehan, R. Storeng, D. Scudiero, A. Monks, J. McMahon, D. Vistica, J.T. Warren, H. Bokesch, S. Kenney, M.R. Boyd. _J. Nat. Cancer Inst._, **82**, 1107 (1990).



