# 10.1016@j.jfca.2003.09.013.pdf

## Page 1

Optimization of the relative contribution of phenolic antioxidants in orange juice by voltammetric methods

Wellington R. Sousa, Cleber da Rocha, Carmen Lucia Cardoso,

Dulce Helena S. Silva, Maria Valnice B. Zanoni

boldrinv@iq.unesp.br Instituto de Quimica-UNESP, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355-CEP, 14801-970 Araraquara SP, Brazil

Received 11 December 2002; received in revised form 20 August 2003; accepted 29 September 2003

###### Abstract

The electrochemical oxidation of caffeic, chlorogenic, sinapic, ferulic and _p_-coumaric acids was investigated by cyclic voltammetry on acetate buffer pH 5.6 on glassy carbon electrode and modified glassy carbon electrode. According to their voltammetric behavior, the antioxidant activity of these phenolic acids was evaluated and the results pointed to the following sequence: caffeic acid (\(E_{\text{a}}=+0.31\,\text{V}\)) > chlorogenic acid (\(+0.38\,\text{V}\)) > sinapic acid (\(+0.45\,\text{V}\)) > ferulic acid (\(+0.53\,\text{V}\)) > _p_-coumaric acid (\(+0.73\,\text{V}\)). The results were confirmed by DPPH test, which evidenced the strongest antiradical activity for compounds possessing the cathecol moiety (caffeic and chlorogenic acids). Linear calibration graphs were obtained for their determination at concentrations from \(1\times 10^{-4}\) to \(1\times 10^{-3}\,\text{mol}\,\text{L}^{-1}\). The method was applied to orange juice. Selectivity was illustrated by the analysis of caffeic and chlorogenic acids electrodeposited on a glassy carbon electrode previously modified by electrochemical activation in the presence of ascorbic acid.

keywords: Phenolic antioxidants; Voltammetric methods; Electrochemical oxidation; Orange juice +
Footnote †: journal: Journal of Food Composition and Analysis

## 1 Introduction

Dietary recommendations for healthy eating include the consumption of fruit juices (Williams, 1995) whose beneficial health effects are mostly ascribed to natural antioxidants. Although the majority of the evidence emphasizes the roles of vitamin E, vitamin C and \(\beta\)-carotene, recent studies have highlighted the importance of the phenolic antioxidants in the total antioxidant activity of fruits and vegetables.



## Page 2

Citrus phenolics represent a varied and widely studied class of compounds (Robards and Antolovich, 1995). The phenolic substances of importance in orange can be classified into two groups: phenolic acids and related compounds and flavonoids. The most important phenolic acid in orange juice is cinnamic acid and its derivatives: ferulic, _p_-coumaric, sinapic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids (Robards and Antolovich, 1995). The relative contribution of phenolic derivatives to the antioxidant potential is associated with their effectiveness as hydrogen donors, which is dependent on the number and arrangement of the hydroxyl groups and the extent of structural conjugation, as well as the presence of electron-donating and electron-withdrawing substituents in the aromatic ring (Rice-Evans et al., 2000; Miller et al., 1993; Clegg and Morton, 1968). The antiradical ability of organic compounds may be assessed by measuring the ease of their reaction with the stable free radical diphenylpycrylhydrazyl (DPPH _l_max 517 nm), leading to its reduced form (DPPH-H). Good free radical scavengers react fast leaving small amounts of unreduced DPPH, which indicates the presence of an effective antioxidant (Bonded et al., 1997).

In addition to their antioxidant capacity, fruit phenolics have been the subject of increased interest in the last few years because their presence can contribute to the sensory quality of the fruit and juice through their effect on color, bitterness, astringency and flavor. Therefore, different analytical methods are required for their quantification (Robards and Antolovich, 1995; Cordella et al., 2002). Phenolic substances have characteristic ultraviolet spectra, which have been used to detect adulteration in orange juice by spectrophotometric techniques (Escarpa and Gonzalez, 2001; Frenzel and Krekler, 1995). These procedures have been replaced by chromatographic procedures, which provide more detailed information on samples containing several organic compounds (Escarpa and Gonzalez, 2001; Bocchi et al., 1996). For example, analytical procedures for ferulic acid have been based on gas chromatography with flame ionization or electron-capture detection following derivatization. HPLC methods for these phenolic compounds in orange juice have been used involving derivatization and/or solid-phase extraction coupled with UV, photodiode-array and fluorescence detection (Robards and Antolovich, 1995; Bocchi et al., 1996; Moskvin et al., 1999; Karovicova and Simko, 2000; Miller and Rice-Evans 1997; Christofersen and Cardwell, 1996). Alternatively, serial coulometric detection of phenolic compounds has been used to generate multivariate data for differentiation of juices (Peyrat-Maillard et al., 2000).

The use of cyclic voltammetry as an instrumental tool for the evaluation of the total antioxidant capacity of the low-molecular-weight antioxidants (LMWAs) in both fluids (Chevion et al., 2000) and edible plants (Chevion et al., 1999) is well known. A cyclic voltammogram provides information describing the integrated antioxidant capacity, which arises in large part from the ability of the compound to donate electrons around the potential of the anodic wave. Most of the LMWAs are reducing agents, which quench reactive oxygen species through electron donation (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1985). Therefore, evaluation of the overall reducing power by cyclic voltammetry reflects the antioxidant activity of pure compounds as well as that of mixture of compounds. Most of the studies involving LMWA reports ascorbic acid as a major component in the cyclic voltammetry response identified by measure of anodic peak around \(+\) 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl/Cl\({}^{-}\) (Yu et al., 1996).

Glassy carbon is the electrode material used extensively in electrochemistry for analysis of electroactive substances and as the basis for surface-modified electrodes. The electrochemical properties of this material can be improved by surface treatment (Bard and Faulkner, 1980).



## Page 3

Electrochemical activation of the glassy carbon electrode through oxidation and reduction of the electrode surface is a widely used method to change its characteristics. Many authors (Zhang et al., 1996; Zare and Golabi, 1999; Golabi and Zare, 1999; Moreno et al., 2000) have demonstrated that this procedure can improve the selectivity and sensitivity of the electroanalytical method application. For instance, the electrode can present a good performance for catalysis and/or applications as electrochemical detectors for significant types of analytes due to selective chemical or physical interaction between specific functional groups generated on its surface and selective species in solution.

In spite of the high sensitivity and selectivity of electroanalytical methods and the great importance of phenolic acids in orange juice, few studies have been conducted on the application of this technique for their determination. So, the aim of the present work was to investigate the electrochemical behavior of cinnamic acid and its derivatives (Fig. 1) on glassy carbon electrode. In addition, the possibility of using electroactivated glassy carbon electrode for oxidation of ferulic, _p_-coumaric, sinapic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids was studied for their selective determination in orange juice without interference of ascorbic acid. In order to confirm the effectiveness of these phenolic acids as free radical scavengers and to correlate this activity with the electrochemical behavior, a spectrophotometric test using DPPH as a substrate was also undertaken.

## Materials and methods

### Apparatus and procedures

The electrochemical measurements were carried out using a Metrohm Polarecord E 506 linked to a compatible microcomputer through a Microquimica interface. The multimode electrode

Fig. 1: Chemical structures of (a) cinnamic acid, (b) caffeic acid (c) chlorogenic acid, (d) _p_-coumaric acid, (e) ferulic acid and (f) sinapic acid.



## Page 4

Metrohm stand 663 VA was used and a glassy carbon disc (0.02 cm\({}^{2}\)) from Metrohm was used as the working electrode. A carbon auxiliary electrode and an Ag/AgCl/Cl\({}^{-}\) (3.0 mol L\({}^{-1}\)) electrode were used as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. Electrode modification was based on the following procedure described previously (Golabi and Zare, 1999; Zare and Golabi, 1999). The glassy carbon electrode surface was polished with 0.05 um alumina suspension and rinsed with water. The electrode was immersed in 0.1 mol L\({}^{-1}\) sodium bicarbonate and submitted to continuous potential cycling from \(-\)1.3 to +1.6 V at a scan rate of 50 mV s\({}^{-1}\) for 5 min. The activated electrodes were rinsed and placed in a solution containing 1 x 10\({}^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) of the phenolic compounds in acetate buffer pH 5.6. The deposition was carried out by dipping and by cycling the potential from 0.1 to +0.8 V at 50 mV s\({}^{-1}\) during a controlled time of 5 min. After both these processes, the electrode was rinsed thoroughly with water and immersed in a solution containing acetate buffer pH 5.6. The modified electrode exhibited a well-shaped cyclic voltammogram corresponding to the reversible oxidation of surface deposited only for caffeic acid and chlorogenic acid and stable current values were obtained only for the cycling method used for the deposition of diphenol compounds.

Suprapur grade reagents supplied by Merck and demineralized water from a Milli-Q system (Milli-pore) were used in the preparation of all solutions. Acetate buffer used as a supporting electrolyte was prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of 0.2 mol L\({}^{-1}\) acetic acid and sodium acetate solution. Ferulic, _p_-coumaric, sinapic, caffeic, chlorogenic and ascorbic acid stock solutions (1 x 10\({}^{-2}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\)) were prepared from the dry pure substances in water. An aliquot of the standard solution to be investigated was added by micropipette to 20 mL of deaerated acetate buffer pH 5.6, unless stated otherwise.

Analyses of caffeic acid and chlorogenic compounds in orange juice were carried out using three representative samples of natural juice commercialized in Brazil as Danone(r), Jussy(r) and Batavo(r). For comparison reasons, all samples examined were recently produced and stored at 10\({}^{\circ}\)C in obscurity and analyzed shortly after opening. An aliquot of 600 mL of the orange juice (without any previous dilution or extraction) was transferred directly into the voltammetric cell containing 20 mL of acetate buffer pH 5.6. The previous activated electrode was immersed in this solution and seven uninterrupted voltammetric curves were recorded between +0.1 and +0.8 V at 50 mV s\({}^{-1}\) when stable curves were obtained. Finally, the cyclic voltammograms were carried out after a step where the electrode was rinsed and placed in a voltammetric cell containing 20 mL of acetate buffer pH 5.6. The mean values of peak currents were obtained and the acids composition determined after standard addition method, when 1 x 10\({}^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) of caffeic acid solution was added to the original sample and submitted to the deposition step, after which the voltammograms were recorded as shown above. All measurements were analyzed in triplicates.

### Reduction of 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical (DPPH)

The free radical scavenging capacity of ferulic, _p_-coumaric, sinapic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids was also estimated from its ability to reduce the free radical 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH). Each compound (1 mg) was solubilized in methanol (10 mL) to yield a stock solution. Several dilutions of each compound from 5 x 10\({}^{-6}\) to 1 x 10\({}^{-4}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) were then prepared in methanol and to each sample a solution of DPPH (0.004%) was added. The activity of caffeic, chlorogenic, ferulic, sinapic and _p_-coumaric acids was evaluated based on the ability of each 

## Page 5

phenolic acid to reduce the absorbance of DPPH solution at 517 nm, followed on a Milton Roy 20D spectrophotometer (Brand-Williams et al., 1995).

## 3 Results and discussion

### Voltammetric behavior of some phenolic acids at a glassy carbon electrode

Cinnamic acid and its derivatives, ferulic, _p_-coumaric, sinapic, caffeic and chlorogenic, contain reducible olefinic bond or oxidizible phenolic substituents on the aromatic ring that could provide the basis for their voltammetric determination. Nevertheless, only differential pulse voltammograms of 1 x 10-3 mol L-1 of cinnamic acid exhibit one cathodic peak in the pH range 3-7 at very negative potential (-1.5 V). The process is attributed to the reduction of the pre-protonated ethylene bond conjugated (H+[C6H5-CH]=CH-COOH) after two-electron transfer, as verified previously by polarographic studies (Ferreira et al., 1996). The inductive effects from _ortho_ and/or _para_ hydroxyl groups to the double bond, which is conjugated with the aromatic ring in the derivatives ferulic, _p_-coumaric, sinapic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids, make the molecule more difficult to reduce. Therefore, the cyclic voltammograms do not exhibit any voltammetric waves for reduction of phenolic derivatives on the useful potential range, and the methods do not demonstrate any analytical potentiality for their determination using the reduction of the olefinic bond in these compounds.

On the other hand, typical cyclic voltammograms obtained for all phenolic derivatives are shown in Fig. 2. Except cinnamic acid, which is not oxidized, all the derivatives present well-defined waves, and the shape and the peak potentials are characteristic of each compound.

The anodic oxidation of 1.0 x 10-3 mol L-1 caffeic acid and chlorogenic acid in acetate buffer pH 5.6 have shown only one anodic peak at _E_pa = +0.36 V and _E_pa = +0.38 V, respectively. Linear plots of peak current (ipa) as a function of \(v\)1/2 were obtained indicating that both oxidation processes are diffusion controlled (Bard and Faulkner, 1980). For both compounds, a cathodic peak is observed on the reverse scan. Epc-Epa values obtained from the cyclic voltammograms (_v_ = 20 mV s-1) are around 30 mV suggesting a process involving two electrons (Bard and Faulkner, 1980). The ratio of the anodic-to-cathodic peak heights (ipc/ipa) increases gradually from 0.8 to 1 with increasing potential sweep rate from 10 to 100 mV s-1 and the calculated current functions (ipa \(\cdot\) _v_-1/2) diminish gradually with the potential scan rate, showing the classical behavior of an oxidation process coupled with a slow subsequent chemical reaction.

In order to establish their analytical potentiality, quantitative tests were developed for caffeic and chlorogenic acids using their anodic peaks by linear voltammetric scan. At pH 5.6, the analytical curves are linear from 1 x 10-4 to 1 x 10-3 mol L-1 and are described by the following regression lines: ip (mA) = 0.08138 + 2.1472 x 103 C (C = mol L-1); correlation coefficient 0.9993, \(n\) = 7) for caffeic acid and: ip (mA) = 0.05321 + 1.9571 x 103 C (C = mol L-1); correlation coefficient 0.995, \(n\) = 6 for chlorogenic acid. The reproducibility of the response was tested using a series of standard solutions of 5 x 10-4 mol L-1 caffeic and chlorogenic acids. Relative standard deviations of 2.4% and 2.8% were obtained, respectively.

The cyclic voltammograms obtained for 1.0 x 10-3 mol L-1 sinapic, ferulic and coumaric acids in acetate buffer pH 5.6 have also shown one anodic peak at _E_pa = +0.45 V, _E_pa = +0.53 V and 

## Page 6

\(E_{\rm pa}=+0.73\) V, respectively. The influence of scan rate on the cyclic voltammetric parameters was investigated from 0.01 to 3 V s\({}^{-1}\). The anodic peak appears to correspond to an irreversible process, as no current is observed in the reverse scan. The peak current is proportional to \(v^{1/2}\), indicating that the process is diffusion controlled. The current function decreased markedly up to a highest scan rate. These results suggest that the oxidation step is followed by an electron transfer coupled with a rapid chemical reaction (Bard and Faulkner, 1980).

A linear relationship between peak current and sinapic acid and ferulic acid concentrations was obtained from \(4\times 10^{-4}\) to \(1\times 10^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) following the equation: ip (\(\mu\)A) = \(0.1302+0.602\times 10^{3}\) C (C = mol L\({}^{-1}\)); correlation coefficient 0.9089, \(n=7\) for sinapic acid and ip

Figure 2: Cyclic voltammograms for the oxidation of \(1\times 10^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) (buffer pH 5.6) of caffeic acid (a); sinapic acid (b); chlorogenic acid (c); ferulic acid (d); \(p\)-coumaric acid (e); and ascorbic acid (f) on glassy carbon electrode. Scan rate: 100 mV s\({}^{-1}\).



## Page 7

(\(\mu\)A) = 0.1034 + 0.837 x 103 C (C = mol L-1); correlation coefficient 0.9970, \(n\) = 7 for ferulic acid. A linear relationship was also obtained for coumaric acid from 4 x 10-5 to 1.2 x 10-3 mol L-1: ip (\(\mu\)A) = 0.05705 + 1.0663 x 103 C (C = mol L-1); correlation coefficient 0.995, \(n\) = 7.

In agreement with the literature (Golabi and Zare, 1999; Zare and Golabi, 1999; Baizer and Lund, 1972), the voltammetric behavior appears to agree with the global mechanism proposed for oxidation of phenol group in aromatic compounds (Baizer and Lund, 1972). The hydroxy groups are oxidized via two electrons transfer leading to the generation of a correspondent quinone after liberation of 2H+. The results have indicated that the higher the number of hydroxy substituents on the aromatic ring, the lower the electrochemical potential. Thus, _p_-coumaric acids (monophenols) have a higher potential than caffeic and chlorogenic acids (diphenyls). Such an order has already been defined by Peyrat-Maillard et al. (2000). In spite of the number of phenolic hydroxyls, the oxidation potential of caffeic and chlorogenic acids also presented a reversible redox couple that was not seen for the oxidation of the other phenolic compounds. The voltammetric behavior indicates that the oxidation process can involve the formation of a stable quinone which is reduced in the reverse scan, as observed in the oxidation of other phenolic compounds with the hydroxy group at the _ortho_ position (Baizer and Lund, 1972). In addition, the introduction of a quinic group on caffeic acid to give chlorogenic acid did not change the oxidation potential. However, the methoxylation of the phenolic groups (sinapic and ferulic acids) increases the peak potential and the rapid decomposition of the correspondent quinone makes the process appear to be an irreversible process since there is no reduction of quinone in the reverse scan.

The antioxidant activity of standard phenolic compounds is usually measured according to the method of Cuvelier et al. (1992) based on the accelerated autooxidation of methyl linoleate in anhydrous dodecane using strong oxidizing conditions or by spectrophotometric test measuring the antiradical capacity via reduction of the stable free radical 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (Brand-Williams et al., 1995) or by cyclic voltammetry (Chevion et al., 2000), in addition to several other available methods (Punchard, 1996).

In order to test the voltammetric results as a tool to evaluate the antioxidant capacity, the results were compared using the DPPH test (Brand-Williams et al., 1995). The activity of caffeic, chlorogenic, ferulic, sinapic and _p_-coumaric acids was evaluated based on the ability of each phenolic acid to reduce DPPH (see experimental section). Graphs of reduction of DDPH (%) as a function of different concentrations of phenolic compounds are shown in Fig. 3. The studied phenolic compounds showed free radical scavenging activity decreasing in the following sequence: caffeic acid > chlorogenic acid > sinapic acid > ferulic acid > coumaric acid. This behavior is attributed to the higher ability of diphenols to quench free radicals in solution by easier donation of hydrogen of hydroxy groups and to stabilize the respective radical forms due to electron delocalization.

As expected, the antioxidant or antiradical activity of most phenolic acids is inversely proportional to their oxidation potential. Diphenols (caffeic acid and chlorogenic acid) show high radical scavenging activities and low oxidation potentials when compared with other acids. Monophenols (_p_-coumaric acid) are less active and respond at a higher potential which is however smaller than those substituted by methoxy groups (sinapic and ferulic acids). In fact, the potential value is dependent upon the redox behavior of the compounds, reflecting their ability to lose electrons. The comparison is similar to that verified with DPPH measurement. Moreover, the 

## Page 8

significant difference noticed for antioxidant activity for caffeic and chlorogenic acids is also confirmed by the shape of the voltammograms which indicates oxidation processes with reversible electron transfer.

So, the electrochemical oxidation could be used as a simple model to compare antioxidant activity based on the evaluation of the shape of the voltammogram and the oxidation potential.

### Analysis of orange juice samples

In order to investigate the analytical potential of the electrochemical oxidation in determining phenolic derivatives in orange juice, cyclic voltammograms were recorded after a direct transfer of 100-3000 mL of natural orange juice samples to the voltammetric cell containing 10 mL of acetate buffer pH 5.6. The cyclic voltammogram, obtained as described in the experimental section, is shown in Fig. 4. A well-defined oxidation peak at \(+\) 0.38 V with 3.08 mA of anodic peak current (blank correction) is observed after transference of 600 mL of orange juice Danone(r), with peak heights proportional to the orange juice addition. Cyclic voltammograms recorded after standard addition of phenolic derivatives from \(1\times 10^{-4}\) to \(1\times 10^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) promote an extra peak at more positive values following the sequence: sinapic (70 mV), ferulic (150 mV) and _p_-coumaric (360 mV) acids indicating that they are probably not contributing significantly to the endogenous peak. Nevertheless, the standard addition of caffeic acid exhibited a concomitant increase in the peak current without any distortion of the peak potential. The same effect was observed with the standard addition of chlorogenic acid indicating that both contributions cannot be split.

Interference of ascorbic acid was also tested under the same experimental conditions. Cyclic voltammograms obtained for \(1\times 10^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) of ascorbic acid in acetate buffer pH 5.6 presents

Fig. 3: Free radical scavenging activity of phenolic acids towards DPPH after 30 min of chemical reaction: (a) caffeic acid, (b) chlorogenic acid, (c) sinapic acid, (d) ferulic acid and (e) _p_-coumaric acid. Measurements at \(T=25^{\circ}\)C and \(\lambda=517\) nm.



## Page 9

an irreversible oxidation peak at \(\,+\,0.42\,\mathrm{V}\), which was identified as potentially interfering in the analysis of phenolic compounds in orange juice, too. Similar results were obtained when the described method was applied to the determination of phenolic acids in commercial orange juice assigned as Batavo(r) and Jussy(r). The voltammograms obtained for \(600\,\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro L}\) of orange juice in \(10\,\mathrm{mL}\) of acetate buffer pH 5.6 present oxidation peaks similar to those previously detected, with peak currents of \(2.82\pm 0.21\) and \(2.75\pm 0.17\,\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro A}\) (values represent means of triplicate determinations), respectively. The peak height increases with standard addition of caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid or ascorbic acid, indicating value media of total phenolic compounds of \(244.8\pm 37\,\mathrm{mg}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) (\(n=3\)).

So, taking into consideration the fact that cyclic voltammetry could provide information about the total antioxidant capacity, without the specific determination of the contribution of each individual component, the method was tested using activated glassy carbon electrode.

### Voltammetric behavior of some phenolic acids at modified glassy carbon electrode

As described previously (Golabi and Zare, 1999; Zare and Golabi, 1999; Ozkan et al., 1994, 1997), glassy carbon electrode activated previously in bicarbonate solution can have its surface modified by active groups, where quinones, imidazoline groups and enzymes could be electrodeposited. Therefore, the analytical potentiality of the activated glassy carbon electrode obtained as described in the experimental section was investigated to determine phenolic compounds based on its interaction with the modified electrode.

The voltammetric response of glassy carbon electrode activated by continuous potential cycles from \(-1.3\) to \(\,+\,1.6\,\mathrm{V}\) at a sweep of \(50\,\mathrm{mV}\,\mathrm{s}^{-1}\) (50 cycles) in sodium bicarbonate (\(0.1\,\mathrm{mol}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\)) solution does not exhibit any electroactive sites in the potential range from -0.4 to \(\,+\,1.0\,\mathrm{V}\). Two different deposition methods of phenolic compounds were employed. These methods involved dipping and cycling of the potential during the electrodeposition process.



## Page 10

In the former method, the electrode was washed and transferred to a beaker containing \(1\times 10^{-3}\,\mathrm{mol}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) of phenolic compounds in acetate buffer pH 5.6 solution. After carefully rinsing with water, the electrode was placed in a solution of \(0.1\,\mathrm{mol}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) acetate buffer previously purged with nitrogen. In the latter method, the activated electrode was rinsed and placed in a \(1\times 10^{-3}\,\mathrm{mol}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) solution of phenolic compounds in acetate buffer pH 5.6, where it was submitted to seven potential cyclings between \(+\,0.1\) and \(+\,0.8\,\mathrm{V}\) (at \(50\,\mathrm{mV}\,\mathrm{s}^{-1}\)). The electrode was then removed to a solution containing only acetate buffer pH 5.6. The cyclic voltammograms obtained for both methods using caffeic acid were recorded at \(100\,\mathrm{mV}\,\mathrm{s}^{-1}\). A redox couple of peaks at \(+\,0.33/+\,0.30\,\mathrm{V}\) attributed to oxidation of phenol/quinone was observed for both methods, with characteristics close to those expected in a system involving surface process (Bard and Faulkner, 1980). The voltammetric curves obtained using the cycling method present a higher peak intensity (Fig. 5). Successive scans (Curve n of Fig. 5) have shown constant values of current after the first scan indicating that the remaining material is quite persistent on the electrode surface. The results obtained using the dipping method have shown repetitive voltammograms with continuous decay during the continuous scanning of potential indicating that the material is released due to weak bound to the surface. So, the results obtained for both processes indicate that caffeic acid can be deposited on the electrode surface due to a weak interaction with the phenolic group (dipping) or strong interaction with quinone groups generated after successive oxidation (cycling). The most effective method was the electrodeposition of caffeic acid onto glassy carbon electrodes activated previously in bicarbonate solution using cycling potential and it was chosen as the best condition for analysis of the phenolic compounds.

The influence of cycling time from \(+\,0.1\) to \(+\,0.8\,\mathrm{V}\) during accumulation of caffeic acid on the voltammetric response obtained for activated electrode was investigated immersing the previously

Fig. 5: Cyclic voltammograms obtained for oxidation of caffeic acid electrodeposited on glassy carbon modified electrode by electrochemical activation from \(5\times 10^{-4}\,\mathrm{mol}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) solution, rinsed and immersed in acetate buffer pH 5.6. \(v=100\,\mathrm{mV}\,\mathrm{s}^{-1}\); (1) first scan, (n) multiple scan.



## Page 11

activated electrode in \(5\times 10^{-4}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) caffeic acid and using cycling time from 50 s to 20 min. After a controlled time, the load electrode was removed to the voltammetric cell containing acetate buffer pH 5.6. The current increased linearly up to 5 min of exposition, showing that the analyte is easily and rapidly accumulated on the electrode surface. At higher time, the current reaches a plateau indicating saturation of the electrode surface.

In order to assess the reproducibility of the electrode response, a series of 10 repetitive measurements were carried out using cyclic voltammograms (at 100 mV s\({}^{-1}\)) recorded for the activated electrode immersed in \(1\times 10^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) caffeic acid solution and transported to a new solution of acetate buffer pH 5.6. The electrode response indicated a mean current peak value of \(4.24\pm 0.12\) mA, where the coefficient of variation calculated was \(4.3\permille\).

Under these experimental conditions, the calibration plots were tested immersing the coated electrode in caffeic acid solution containing \(1\times 10^{-4}-1\times 10^{-3}\) mol L\({}^{-1}\) using a controlled time of cycling of 5 min 

## Page 12

acids. The cyclic voltammograms recorded after activated electrode transference to a voltammetric cell containing \(1\times 10^{-3}\,\mathrm{mol}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) of these phenolic compounds exhibit the expected behavior of that verified at bare electrode. But, when the electrode is rinsed and placed in a new solution of acetate buffer pH 5.6 there is no voltammetric signal, indicating that there is no remaining material on the activated electrode surface.

The electrodeposition mechanism of _o-_, _p_-quinones onto activated glassy carbon electrode has been described (Zare and Golabi, 1999; Ozkan et al., 1994, 1997). The deposition of such compounds has been explained on the basis of a nucleophilic attack of quinones produced from the oxidation of phenolic compounds. When an activated glassy carbon electrode is used as a surface for electrooxidation of chlorogenic acid or caffeic acid, carboxyl and hydroxyl groups on the surface of the electrode act as nucleophiles against the _o_-quinone anodically formed. Such a process leads to bond formation and development of a stable modified electrode. The absence of _o_-hydroxyl substituents in the chemical structure or the irreversibility of the process observed during electrochemical oxidation, respectively, of _p_-coumaric, ferulic, sinapic and ascorbic acids, probably hinders this interaction or enhances the release rate from the surface and reduces the utility of activated glassy carbon electrode to pre-concentrate these phenolic compounds.

So, taking into consideration the selective interaction between activated glassy carbon electrode and caffeic acid and/or chlorogenic compounds, without interference of ascorbic acid, the applicability of the method was tested in three different samples of orange juice. Quantification of the caffeic acid content in orange juice was accomplished by multiple standard additions of caffeic acid on activated glassy carbon electrode as described in the experimental section. Five milliliters of the orange juice was directly diluted in the voltammetric cell by adding it to \(15\,\mathrm{mL}\) of pH 5.6 acetate buffer. After 10 cycles between the potential of \(+\,0.1\) and \(+\,0.8\,\mathrm{V}\), the activated glassy carbon electrode was replaced in a solution containing only acetate buffer pH 5.6 and characteristic cyclic voltammograms were obtained before and after the standard addition of caffeic acid. This method was also tested for aliquots of orange juice from 1.00 to \(10.00\,\mathrm{mL}\) and the peak current increases up to a dilution limit of \(50\%\) in juice:buffer. The peak rise at \(+\,0.4\,\mathrm{V}\) obtained in all voltammograms also increases with the amount of chlorogenic acid added as standard solution addition but has not shown any interference of _p_-coumaric, sinapic, ferulic or ascorbic acid, indicating that the modified electrode has shown high selectivity to caffeic acid or chlorogenic acid determination. The results obtained using the proposed method based on standard addition of caffeic acid are shown in Curves A and B of Fig. 7. The results obtained from the repetitions indicate that \(2.42\pm 0.28\,\mathrm{mg}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) of caffeic/chlorogenic acids are present in the Batavo orange juice samples. Danone(r) commercial orange juice presented \(2.15\pm 0.56\,\mathrm{mg}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) and Jussy(r), \(1.85\pm 0.39\,\mathrm{mg}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\), respectively. The results obtained using the proposed method are in agreement with the values provided by the literature (Robards and Antolovich, 1995) which indicate that caffeic and chlorogenic acids are the major cinnamic acid derivatives in orange juice and their usual concentrations are around \(0.1\)-\(2\,\mathrm{mg}\,\mathrm{L}^{-1}\) in commercial orange juices.

## 4 Conclusions

From these studies, it was concluded that cyclic voltammetry is a rapid, simple and efficient instrumental tool for evaluating the antioxidant capacity of phenolic derivatives: ferulic, _p_

## Page 13

coumaric, sinapic, caffeic and chlorogenic acid present in orange juice. The selective interaction of activated glassy carbon electrode and caffeic or chlorogenic acid offers a good method for the detection and determination of these phenolic antioxidants in complex matrices like orange juice with a high degree of sensitivity without any pre-extraction step or interference of ascorbic acid, _p_-coumaric, ferulic, sinapic or cinnamic acids since they are not deposited on modified electrode surface.

## References

* Baizer and Lund (1972) Baizer, M.M., Lund, H., 1972. Organic Electrochemistry. Harper and Row, New York, p. 300.
* Bard and Faulkner (1980) Bard, A.J., Faulkner, R.L., 1980. Electrochemical Methods--Fundamentals and Application. Wiley, New York.
* Barba et al. (1998)

Figure 7: (A) Results obtained from cyclic voltammograms obtained for glassy carbon modified electrode by electrochemical activation, rinsed and immersed in acetate buffer pH 5.6 containing 600 \(\mu\)L of orange juice Danone® before and after standard addition of caffeic acid. \(v=100\) mV s\({}^{-1}\). (B) Standard addition method applied for 600 \(\mu\)L of orange juice Jussy®.



## Page 14

* Brand-Williams et al. (1995) Brand-Williams, W., Curvelier, M.E., Berset, C., 1995. Antioxidative activity of phenolic composition of commercial extracts of sage and rosemary. Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft und-Technologie 28, 25.
* Bocchi et al. (1996) Bocchi, C., Careri, M., Groppi, F., Mangia, A., Manini, P., Mori, G., 1996. Comparative investigation of UV, electrochemical and particle beam mass spectrometric detection for the high-performance liquid chromatographic determination of benzoic and cinnamic acids and of their corresponding phenolic acids. Journal of Chromatography A 753 (2), 157-170.
* Bonded et al. (1997) Bonded, V., Williams, B.W., Berset, C., 1997. Kinetics and mechanisms of antioxidant activity using DPPH free radical methods. Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft und-Technologie 30, 609-615.
* Chevion et al. (1999) Chevion, S., Chevion, M., Chock, P.B., Beecher, G.R., 1999. The antioxidant capacity of edible plants: extraction protocol and direct evaluation by cyclic voltammetry. Journal of Medicinal Food 2, 1-11.
* Chevion et al. (2000) Chevion, S., Robers, M.A., Chevion, M., 2000. The use of cyclic voltammetry for the evaluation of antioxidant capacity. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 28 (6), 860-870.
* Christofersen and Cardwell (1996) Christofersen, M.J., Cardwell, T.J., 1996. Determination of total phenols in waters and wastewaters using flow injection with electrochemical detection, an alternative to the standard colorimetric procedure. Analytica Chimica Acta 323 (1-3), 39-46.
* Clegg and Morton (1968) Clegg, K.M., Morton, A.D., 1968. The phenolic compounds of blackcurrant juice and their protective effect on ascorbic acid. Journal of Food Technology 3, 277-284.
* Cordella et al. (2002) Cordella, C., Moussa, I., Martel, A.C., 2002. Recent developments in food characterization and adulteration detection. Techniques-oriented perspectives. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50 (7), 1751-1764.
* Cuvelier et al. (1992) Cuvelier, M.E., Richard, H., Berset, C., 1992. Comparison of the antioxidative activity of some acid-phenols: structure-activity relationship. Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biochemistry 56, 324-325.
* Escarpa and Gonzalez (2001) Escarpa, A., Gonzalez, M.C., 2001. Approach to the content of total extractable phenolic compounds from different food samples by comparison of chromatographic and spectrophotometric methods. Analytica Chimica Acta 427 (1), 119-127.
* Ferreira et al. (1996) Ferreira, V.S., Melios, C.B., Stradiotto, N.R., Zanoni, M.V.B., 1996. Determination of cinnamic acid in human urine by differential-pulse polarography. Analyst 121, 263-267.
* Frenzel and Krekler (1995) Frenzel, W., Krekler, S., 1995. Spectrophotometric determination of total phenolics by solvent extraction and sorbent extraction optosensing using flow injection methodology. Analytica Chimica Acta 310 (3), 437-446.
* Golabi and Zare (1999) Golabi, S.M, Zare, H.R., 1999. Electrocatalytic oxidation of hydrazine at glassy carbon electrode modified with electrodeposited film derived from caffeic acid. Electroanalysis 17 (11), 1293-1300.
* Halliwell and Gutteridge (1985) Halliwell, B., Gutteridge, J.M.C., 1985. Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
* Karavicova and Simko (2000) Karavicova, J., Simko, P., 2000. Determination of synthetic phenolic antioxidants in food by high-performance liquid chromatography. Journal of Chromatography 882 (1-2), 271-281.
* Miller et al. (1993) Miller, N.J., Rice Evans, C.A., Davies, M.J., Gopinathan, V., Milner, A., 1993. A novel method for measuring antioxidant capacity and its application to monitoring the antioxidant status in premature neonates. Clinical Science 84, 407-412.
* Miller and Rice-Evans (1997) Miller, N.J., Rice-Evans, C.A., 1997. The relative contributions of ascorbic acid and phenolic antioxidants to the total antioxidant activity of orange and apple fruit juices and blackcurrant drink. Food Chemistry 60 (3), 331-337.
* Moreno et al. (2000) Moreno, G., Pariente, F., Lorenzo, E., 2000. Electrocatalytic oxidation of ascorbate at glassy carbon electrodes modified with electrodeposited films derived from dihydroxybenzaldehyde isomers. Analytica Chimica Acta 420, 29-37.
* Moskvin et al. (1999) Moskvin, A.L., Moskwin, L.N., Moszhuchin, A.V., Fomin, V.V., 1999. Extraction-chromatographic preconcentration with chromatomembrane separation on extract from aqueous phase for luminescence determination of phenols in natural water by flow injection analysis. Talanta 50 (1), 113-120.
* Ozkan et al. (1994) Ozkan, S.A., Biryol, I., Snturck, Z., 1994. An activation method for glassy carbon electrode. Turkish Journal of Chemistry 18, 34-40.
* Ozkan et al. (1997) Ozkan, S.A., Senturk, Z., Biryol, I., 1997. Determination of ornidazole in pharmaceutical dosage forms based on reduction at an activated glassy carbon electrode. International Journal of Pharmacy 157, 137.
* Peyrat-Maillard et al. (2000) Peyrat-Maillard, M.N., Bonnely, S., Berset, C., 2000. Determination of antioxidant activity of phenolic compounds by volumetric detection. Talanta 51 (4), 709-716.



## Page 15

* [Punchard1996] Punchard, N.A., 1996. In: Punchard, N.A., Kelly, F.J. (Eds.), Free Radicals--A Practical Approach. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
* [Rice-Evans et al.2000] Rice-Evans, C.A., Miller, N.J., Bolwell, P.G., Bramley, P.M., Escarpa, A., Gonzalez, M.C., 2000. Optimization strategy and validation of one chromatographic method as approach to determine the phenolic compounds from different sources. Journal of Chromatography A 897 (1-2), 161-170.
* [Robards and Antolovich1995] Robards, K., Antolovich, M., 1995. Methods for assessing the authenticity of orange juice. Analyst 120, 1-28.
* [Williams1995] Williams, C., 1995. Healthy eating: clarifying advice about fruit and vegetables. British Medical Journal 310, 1453-1455.
* [Yu et al.1996] Yu, A.M., Sun, D.M., Gu, H.Y., Chen, H.Y., 1996. Catalytic oxidation of ascorbic acid at a polyhistidine modified electrode and its application to the voltammetric resolution of ascorbic acid and dopamine. Analytical Letters 29 (15), 2633-2643.
* [Zare and Golabi1999] Zare, H.R., Golabi, S.M., 1999. Electrocatalytic oxidation of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) at a chlorogenic acid modified glassy carbon electrode. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 464, 14-23.
* [Zhang et al.1996] Zhang, Z., Lei, C., Sun, W., Liu, H., Deng, J., 1996. Electrochemical immobilization of horseradish peroxidase on an electro-activated glassy carbon electrode. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 419, 85-89.



