# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89347-4.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2



## Results and Discussion

Table 1 shows the \(d\) values of compounds **2**-**4c**, since the shifts of compound **1**, has already been reported [3]. The spectra of seciosolaricresinol, **2a**, shows 10 signals which were assigned on the basis of chemical shift theory [8], comparison with shifts of related products [5] and analysis of the SFORD spectrum. The transformation of **2a** into its tetraacetyl derivative **2b**, causes the expected changes and confirms the above assignment.

The nonaromatic carbons of matairesinol **3a**[11] have their shift assigned by comparison with the recently reported \(d\) values of like carbons of pluviatolide and hinokinin, **3b** and **3c**, respectively [5]. Although differences can be observed in the shifts of comparable sites of both benzene rings of **3a**, they are too small to be analyzed. In lacriiesinol **4a**, however, the differences of the aromatic carbon shifts are larger and they were assigned by comparison with related products, compound **2a** for ring A and the neolignan licarin A, **5**[5] for ring B. shielding effect observed on C-1', C-2' and C-6', and resonate upfield in comparison with C-7 and C-9 of **2a**. The assignment of **4c** was based on the same arguments.

The nonaromatic carbons of isolariciresinol diMe ether **6a**, were split into two groups on the basis of their signal multiplicities from a SFORD spectrum. which shows triplets at 33.2, 62.6 and 66.2 ppm and doublets at 39.9, 48.0 and 48.2 ppm. The 33.2 ppm signal was assigned to C-7' and the remaining ones to C-9' and C-9, using _trans_-4-_t_-butylcyclohexylmethanol as reference [9]. The D_d_ value of the carbinyl carbon shift of the model compound (68.9 ppm) and that of C-9' (66.2 ppm), which is similar in magnitude to that observed in the methylcyclohexane to _trans_-dimethylcyclohexane change (D_d_ = 2.5 ppm), can be explained by the reciprocal _g_-effect of both carbonyl carbons. On C-9 this effect is enhanced by the vicinal aryl group.

The methines at 39.9, 48 and 48.2 ppm were distinguished by analysis of the corresponding diacetyl derivative, **6b**, carbon shifts, and comparison with the shifts of related carbons of _trans_-dimethylcyclohexane. **7**, and phenylcyclohexane, **8**[8]. As expected, acetylation induces desheliiding of the carbinyl carbons [10] and shielding of their neighbours by magnitudes normal for saturated alcohols: the signal at 48 ppm, which is practically unaffected in the transformation can be therefore, assigned to C-7. The distinction of remaining methines is founded on the fact that C-8, which suffers an _a_-effect by C-9, and two _b_-effects by C-9' and the dimethoxybenzene ring. should be deshielded in comparison to C-8'.

For the assignment of the aromatic carbons of **6a**, an exhaustive analysis of the spectra of the monomethyl ether **6c**, obtained by careful methylation of isolaricrisinol, the monomethyl ether isolated from \(A\). _angusifolia_, **6e**, and their corresponding di- and triacetyl derivatives **6b**, **6d** and **6f**. was undertaken. The aromatic methines were assgned by their multiplicities in the SFORD spectrum, standard chemical shift theory [8] and comparison of the shifts of the 6 compounds with each other. Comparison of the quaternary carbon shift data of **6a**, **6c** and **6d**, permits the assignment of the signals at 128.1 and 137.6 ppm of **6a**, to C-1' and C-6'

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c}  & **2a\({}^{\text{i}}\)** & **2b\({}_{\text{i}}^{\text{}



## Page 3

respectively, and the location of the OH group of 6c at C-4', on the basis of the known deshielding effect induced to the _para_ and _ortho_ positions and shielding effect to the ipso carbon on acetylation, [12] while the _meta_ position is practically unaffected. The same type of analysis applied to compounds 6a, 6e and 6f, shows the expected changes, deshielding effects on C-1, C-3 and C-5, and shielding on C-4 [13]. Carbon-6' suffers also a strong shielding effect, probably due to the transmission of the substituent effect through the methylene group [14, 15]. The shifts of isolaricinesinol 6g and its tetraacetyl derivative are in good agreement with the above results, 6h showing the sum of the effects observed on 6d and 6f.

The shifts of compounds 6a-6h, which were used not only for the assignment of all carbons of isolariciresinol and its derivatives, but also to establish the structure of its new 4'-methyl ether, are listed in Table 2 [16].

## EXPERIMENTAL

Knots of _A. angusifolia_ (from dead trees exposed to the weather for a long time) were collected at Araucaria (Estado do Parana, Brasil). Powdered knots (2.7 kg) were continuously extracted with C4H6 for 24 hr. The C4H6 extract, was concol _in vacuo_ and extracted with 3 x 11. portions of hexane, the insoluble residue, chromatographed on a Si gel column and eluted with C4H6, C4H6-E4,O4, EtO4 and Me2CO, yielding the following compounds in order of elution. pinoresiol did fibre ether I, Laricinesinol 4a, asociaricinesinol 2a, isovalericinesinol 4-Me ether 6e and isolaricinesinol 6g. The acetates and Me ethers were all prepared by standard methods, Ac2O and C5H6N and ether CH2N2 respectively, except for compound 6e, and the physical data were compared with those from the literature [17, 18].

_Pinoresinol diMe ether_, 1. (3 g), mp 107-109deg (from CHCl3-MeOH); [a2]35deg +46deg (c 1.0, CHCl3). Identical with authentic sample.

_Laricinesinol_, 4a. (0.55 g), mp 162-164deg(from CHCl3-MeOH); [a]35deg +18deg (c 1.0, Me2CO), M 3rd 360. Identical with authentic sample. _Laricinesinol triacetate_, 4b, viscous oil, [a]35deg +8deg (c 1.0, CHCl3, M 486. _Laricinesinol dMe ether_, 4c, mp 78-80deg, [a]35deg +12deg(c 1.0, Me2CO), M 3rd 388.

_Sociaricinesinol_, 2a. (0.6 g), mp 112-114deg (from C6H6-Me2CO), [a]35deg -32deg (c 1.0, Me2CO), M 362. _Sociosolaricinesinol tetraacetate_, 4b, viscous oil, [a]25deg -8deg (c 1.0 CHCl3), M 530.

_Solaricinesinol_-_4-Me ether_, 6e. (0.11 g), mp 188-190deg(from MeOH-Me2CO), [a]25deg +16deg(c 1.0 MeOH), MS (high resolution), found 374.1643, calc. for C2H6O3, 374.1729, M 47m/e 374 (100), 325 (700), 255 (360), 200 (291, 348), 189 (48), 151 (200, 371) (658, PM COED3; 2.65-29 (2H), M 36.35; 35; 39 (each 3H, s); 3.75 (m); 6.2 (1H, s); 6.6-6.85 (4H, m). _Nolaricinesinol_-_4-Me ether_, 6f, viscous oil, [a]25deg +3 (c 1.0) CHCl3, M 500; PM COED3; 2.1 (6H, s); 3.2 (6H, s); 3.2 (5H, s); 2.75-2.95 (2H, m); 3.6 (3.75, 3.85 (each 3H, s), 4.4-25 (m), 6.6-6.84 (4H, m), 7 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8 Hz).

_Isolaricinesinol_, 6g. (0.75 g), mp 155-157 (from CHCl3-MeOH), [a]25deg +68deg(c 1.0 Me2CO), M 360. _Isolaricinesinol tetraacetate_, 6h, mp 163-164deg, [a]35deg -3.5deg (c 1.0 CHCl3), M 528. _Isolaricinesinol dMe ether_, 6a, mp 175-177, [a]35deg +12deg(c 1.0 CHCl3), M 388. _Isolaricinesinol dMe ether_, 6h, viscous oil, [a]25deg -47deg(c 1.0 CHCl3), M 472.

_Isolaricinesinol_-_4-Me ether_, 6c. Isolaricinesinol_, 6g. (0.35 g) in MeOH was treated with CH3N2-E4O, at 140. When the dimethylated product was detected on TLC, excess reagent was evapd and the residue chromatographed on a Si gel column.

Elution with CHCl3, containing 1% MeOH yielded the following compounds: 6a (70 mg), 6e (75 mg), a mixture of 6e and 6e (85 mg) and 6g (60 mg). _Isolaricinesinol_-_4-Me ether_ showed mp 142-143°, [a]25deg +43deg(c 1.0 MeOH), M -9 (374,380), 325 (100, 298 (22), 255 (40), 201 (18), 194 (33), 189 (43), 187 (52), 155 (70), 181 (65), 137 (27). (PM. CDCl3); 6.2 6.25-29 (2H, m); 3.75 (_m_); 3.8 (3H, s). 2.9 (6H, s), 6.3 (1H, s), 6.6-6.85 (4H, m). The diMe ethers prepared from Ge and Ge were identical to each other and identical in all respects to the diMe ether, 6a prepared from isolaricinesinol. _Isolaricinesinol_-_4-Me ether_ triacetate_, 6d, mp 110-112° [a]25deg -3 (c 1.0 CHCl3), M 500; TMR (CDCl3). 5.2 (6H, s), 2.3 (3H, s), 2.75-2.9 (2H, m), 3.8 (6H, s), 3.9 (3H, s), 3.95-4.3 (m), 6.4, 6.6 (each 1H, s), 6.7-6.9 (3H, m).

###### Acknowledgements.

 We thank FINEP, Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos, for financial support, Professor Paul Baker (Nucleo de Pesquisas de Products Naturais, UFRJ) for the high resolution MS and Professor Ernst Wenkert (Rice University) for helpful discussions and encouragement.

## References

* [1] de Paiva Campello, J. and Ferreira Fonseca, S. (1975) _Phytochemistry_**14**, 2299.
* [2] The nomenclature and the numbering used in this paper are the ones reported by Weinges, K. and Spaing, R. (1967) in

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c}  & **6a\text{\text{\text{\text{\text{\text{\text{\text{\text{\textasci

## Page 4

Oxidative Coupling of Phenols_ (Taylor, W. I. and Battersby, A. R. eds). Marcel Dekker, New York: and Klynne. W. and Buckingham. J (1974) _Atlas of Stereochemistry, Absolute Configurations of Organic Molecules_ p. 185. Chapman & Hall London
* [3]Pelter, A., Ward, R. S., Venkata Rao, E. and Sastry. K V. (1976) _Tetrahedron_**32**, 2873
* [4]Anjaneyulu, A. S. R., Madhusudhana Rao, A., Kameswara Rao, V., Ramachandra Row. L., Pelter, A. and Ward. R. S. (1977) _Tetrahedron_**33**, 133.
* [5]Wenkert, E., Gottlieb, H. E., Gottlieb, O. R., Pereira, M. O. da S. and Formiga. M. D. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**15**, 1574, and references cited therein.
* [6]Kelley, C. J., Harruff, R. C. and Carmack, M. (1976) _J. Org. Chem._**41**, 449; and Castelao Jr J. F., Gottlieb, O. R., de Lima, R. A., Mesquita, A. A. L., Gottlieb, H. E. and Wenkert. E. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 735.
* [7]Imamura, P. M., Marsaol, A. J., Barata. L. E. S. and Ruveda, E. A. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 1842.
* [8]Stothers. J. B (1972) _Carbon-13 NMR Spectroscopy_ Academic Press, New York: Levy, G. C. and Nelson, G. L. (1972) _Carbon-13 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance for Organic Chemists_. Wilcy-Interscience, New York.
* [9]Buchanan, G. W., Stothers, J. B. and Wu. S. T. (1969) _Can. J. Chem._**47**, 3113.
* [10]The deshielding effects observed on C-9' and C-9 by acetylation, although small (C-9', \(\Delta\delta\) = 66 4-66.2 = 0.2 ppm. C-9. \(\Delta\delta\) = 63.4-6.26 = 0.8 ppm) are in agreement with the reported values for _trans-4-t_-butylcyclohexylmethanol acetate and _trans_-4-\(t\)-butylcyclohexylmethanol (carbonyl carbon \(\Delta\delta\) = 69.3-68.9 = 0.4 ppm) [9].
* [11]We thank Professor H. Erdtman (Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm) and Professor R. C Cambie (University of Auckland) for generous gift of lanciresinol and mata-resinol respectively.
* [12]Pelter, A., Ward. R. S. and Gray, T. J. (1976) _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin I_**2475.
* [13]Acetylation of **6c** to **6d**, the same as **6e** to **6f**, shields C-4' (\(\Delta\delta\) = 6.2 ppm) and C-4 (\(\Delta\delta\) = 0.7 ppm), but this effect is lower in the latter. Differences in shielding effects on acetylation were also observed in the transformation of **4a** to **4b**. \(\Delta\delta\) for C-4 \(\rightarrow\) 5 2 ppm. \(\Delta\delta\) for C-4' = 3.7 ppm).
* [14]Shapiro, M. J. (1977) _Tetrahedron_**33**, 1091.
* [15]Carbon-1' of \(p\)-benzylphenol suffers a shielding effect (\(\Delta\delta\) = 0.7 ppm) on acetylation.
* [16]The PMR spectrum of **6f** is in agreement with the proposed structure, since it shows a clear doublet at \(\delta\) 7 (\(J\) = 8 Hz), produced by the deshielding effect of acetylation on the _ortho_ positions. in comparison with the corresponding ones of **6e**.
* [17]Erdtman, H. and Tsuno, K. (1969) _Acta Chem. Scand._**23**, 2021.
* [18]Popoff, T. and Theander, O. (1977) _Acta Chem. Scand._**B31**, 329.



