# 10.1021@jf801103p.pdf

## Page 1

Chemical Characterization of _Citrus sinensis_ Grafted on _C. limonia_ and the Effect of Some Isolated Compounds on the Growth of _Xylella fastidiosa_

Alan Bezerra Ribeiro, Patricia Verardi Abdelnur, Claverson Fernando Garcia, Adriana Belini, Vanessa G. Pasqualotto Severino, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira, Sergio A. de Carvalho, Alessandra A. de Souza, Marcos A. Machado

# Abstract

Citrus sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ produces a considerable number of compounds that are not common in both plants developed from germination of seeds. The chemical profile of scion and rootstock differ notably for absence in the form of flavonoids and coumarins containing C5 premyl groups attached to the carbon atoms of aromatic and heterocyclic systems or to oxygen. Only linear pyranocoumarins xanthyletin and xanthoxpletin were found in scion. This observation indicates that the premylated compounds once biosynthesized in the roots could have been translocated to other organs. _Xylella fastidiosa_ colonizes the xylem of plants causing diseases on several economically important crops such as citrus variegated chlorosis (CVC). A number of flavonoids, coumarins, alkaloids, dihydrocinamic acid derivative, anacardic acid, triterpenes, and limonoids were tested for _in vitro_ activity on the growth of _Xylella fastidiosa_. Azadiractin A was the most active. Hesperidin, which occurs in great amounts in cells of the mesophyll of the affected leaves with CVC, showed a moderate activity suggesting that it can act as a good barrier for small-size colonies from _X. fastidiosa_.

## INTRODUCTION

_Xylella fastidiosa_ a Gram-negative bacterium is transmitted by xylem-feeding leafhoppers (Homoptera, Cicadellidae) and colonizes the xylem of plants causing diseases on several economically important crops such as citrus variegated chlorosis (CVC) in sweet orange, Pierce's disease (PD) of grapevine, and coffee leaf scorch (CLS) (_1_). The generally accepted cause of the symptoms induced by _X. fastidiosa_ is the occurrence of vascular occlusion inside the vessel leading to water stress. It was previously demonstrated that the bacterium is able to grow as a Biofilm, which could be an important factor for pathogenicity (_1_).

CVC has been observed in all commercial sweet orange varieties, with transmission occurring mainly by xylem-feeding insects but also by graft propagation (_2, 3_). Symptoms include leaf chlorosis, stunting, canopy dieback, and fruits that are small and useless for the juicing industry (_4_). To reduce losses and prevent dissemination of the pathogen, pruning, insecticide application, and healthy nursery trees have been used, but effective control has not been reported. CVC has affected up to 36% of commercial sweet orange trees, causing great economic damage to the Brazilian citrus industry, which produces most of the orange juice in the international market (_4_).

Rangpur lime (_Citrus limonia_ Osbeck) is the key rootstock for citriculture in Brazil, on which more than 80% of citrus trees are grafted. _C. limonia_ trees, developed from the germination of seeds, may be grown in orchards in the presence of high disease and insect pressure, and they do not show foliar symptoms of the disease. However, it does not confer resistance to susceptible sweet orange varieties grafted on to it (_2, 3_). This information stimulated us to undertake phytochemical studies of the _Citrus sinensis_ L. Osbeck grafted on _C. limonia_. Thus, roots, stems, and leaves of this combination were examined in order to determine if secondary metabolites present in the rootstock could be translocated into _C. sinensis_. The roots of _C. limonia_ were also studied to gain a better understanding of 

## Page 2

whether the compounds obtained from the rootstock in graft occur also in this organ in plants developed from the germination of seeds.

The occurrence in great amounts of hesperidin in the cells of the mesophyll of the affected leaves with CVC and xanthyletin, a linear pyranocumarin, in the roots of _C. limonia_, observed with this work, has stimulated us to test the hesperidin and some roots coumarins on the growth of _X. fastidiosa_. The results could clarify the basis of its resistance to _X. fastidiosa_. However, as part of our efforts to find potential lead compounds as bactericides against this economically important phytopathogenic bacterium, coumarins, flavonoids, alkaloids, dihydrocinnamic acid derivative, anacardi acid, triterpenes, and limonoids isolated from Rutaceae, Meliaceae, and Anacardiaceae plants were also assayed against _X. fastidiosa_.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Phytochemical Analysis.

_General._ Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were obtained on a Bruker DRX 400 and ARX 200, with tetramethylsilane as internal standard. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed on a model Shimadzu SCL-10A; detection (Shimadzu SCL-10A). Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), low resolution, was performed on a HP-2576 instrument. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MSMS) was performed on a Micromass Quattro LC instrument, equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source.

_Plant Material._ Nursery trees of _Citrus limonia_ developed from the germination of seeds and _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_, both 10 months old, were produced in the greenhouse of the Centro APTA Citros Sylvio Moreira, Cordeiropolis, SP-Brazil.

_Isolation of Compounds._ Ground leaves (273 g), stem (625 g), rootstock stem (442 g), and roots (502 g) from two grafts of _C. sinensis_ on _C. limonia_ were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl3, and finally with MeOH at room temperature 3 times. The concentrated hexane extract from the leaves (6.7 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EOAC, and MeOH afforded 8 fractions. Fraction 4 was flash rechromatograph on silica gel eluting with CH2Cl3/hexane 3:1, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; CH2Cl3/hexane 7:2) yielding compound **7** (17 mg, 0.25%) and an amorphous solid characterized by low resolution GC-MS as a mixture of (8 mg, 0.12%) isstored, campesterol, and stigmasterol. Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as above using hexane/CH2Cl3/EtOAc (1:4:1) and CH2Cl2/EtOAc (4:1) for preparative TLC (silica gel) to give compound **5** (2 mg, 0.03%). Fraction 6 was rechromatographed as above (column chromatography: CH2Cl3/EtOAc 3:1; preparative TLC, CH2Cl3/EtOAc acetone 6:1:0.5) affording compounds **4** (2 mg, 0.03%) and **3** (1 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 7 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with CH2Cl3/EtOAc/acetone (4:1:1) yielding **2** (2.5 mg, 0.04%) and **1** (7.2 mg, 0.11%). During the concentration of fraction 8, a crystalline material separated, which was collected and crystallized from MeOH to give **6** (128 mg, 1.9%). The dichloromethane extract from leaves (4.3 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 10 fractions. Fraction 1-3 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/CH2Cl3/acetone/MeOH gradient and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; CH2Cl3/acetone 7:2) yielding compounds **11** (4.8 mg, 0.11%) and **8** (23 mg, 0.53%). Fraction 6-7 was twice rechromatographed as above (CH2Cl3/acetone 5:1, then hexane/CH2Cl3/EtOAc 16:3:1 gradient) affording compound **12** (13 mg, 0.30%). Fraction 8 was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; CH2Cl3/acetone 5:0.5) to give 2 new fractions. Both fractions were purified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) to give compound **9** (23 mg, 0.53%), and CH2Cl3/acetone (1:1) to yield **10** (2 mg, 0.05%), respectively. During the concentration of the MeOH extract from leaves (6.3 g) a crystalline material separated, which was collected and crystallized from MeOH to give **6** (812 mg, 1.3%).

The concentrated hexane extract from the stems of scion _C. sinensis_ (4.1 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 10 fractions. Fraction 4 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/CH2Cl3/EtOAc/MeOH gradient to give **13** (14 mg, 0.34%). Fraction 7-8 was twice rechromatographed as above (CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2, then acetone/CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2:0.5) affording compound **11** (1.6 mg, 0.04%). During the concentration of fraction 9-10, a crystalline material separated, which was collected and crystallized from MeOH to give **6** (97 mg, 2.4%). The dichloromethane extract from the stem of scion (4.3 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc 16:3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 10 fractions. Fraction 5 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/CH2Cl3/EtOAc 16:3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 10 fractions. Fraction 4 was flash rechromatographed as above (CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2, then acetone/CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2:0.5) affording compound **11** (1.6 mg, 0.04%). During the concentration of fraction 9-10, a crystalline material separated, which was collected and crystallized from MeOH to give **6** (97 mg, 2.4%). The dichloromethane extract from the stem of scion (4.3 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc 16:3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 8 fractions. Fraction 5 was flash rechromatographed as above (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc/MeOH gradient to give **13** (14 mg, 0.34%). Fraction 7-8 was twice rechromatographed as above (CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2, then acetone/CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2:0.5) affording compound **11** (1.6 mg, 0.04%). During the concentration of fraction 9-10, a crystalline material separated, which was collected and crystallized from MeOH to give **6** (97 mg, 2.4%). The dichloromethane extract from the stem of scion (4.3 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc 16:3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 5 fractions. Fraction 5 was flash rechromatographed as above (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc/MeOH gradient to give **13** (14 mg, 0.34%). Fraction 7-8 was twice rechromatographed as above (CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2, then acetone/CH2Cl3/EtOAc 1:2.0.5) affording compound **11** (1.6 mg, 0.04%). During the concentration of fraction 9-10, a crystalline material separated, which was collected and crystallized from MeOH to give **6** (97 mg, 2.4%). The dichloromethane extract from the stem of scion (4.3 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc 16:3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 5 fractions. Fraction 5 was flash rechromatographed as above (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3/EtOAc/MeOH gradient to give **13** (14 mg, 0.04%). Fraction 4 was flash rechromatographed as above (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl3, EUOAc, and MeOH afforded 10 fractions. Fraction 4 was flash rechromatographed as described above affording **11** (10 mg, 0.05%), **15** (5 mg, 0.03%), **16** (3 mg, 0.02%). **22** (3 mg, 0.02%). **23** (2 mg, 0.01%) and **24** (1.5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds **19** (23 mg, 0.13%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.03%) and **20** (1.2 mg, 0.02%). **12** (5 mg, 0.04%) and **21** (3 mg, 0.02%). **12** (5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds **19** (23 mg, 0.13%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.03%) and **20** (1.2 mg, 0.02%). **12** (5 mg, 0.04%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds **19** (23 mg, 0.13%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.03%) and **20** (1.2 mg, 0.01%). **12** (5 mg, 0.01%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds **19** (23 mg, 0.13%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.03%) and **20** (1.2 mg, 0.01%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds **19** (23 mg, 0.13%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.03%) and **20** (1.2 mg, 0.01%). **12** (5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds **19** (23 mg, 0.13%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.03%) and **21** (5 mg, 0.01%) and **20** (1.2 mg, 0.01%). **12** (5 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 4-3 was rechromatographed as described above affording **26** (2.5 mg, 0.01%) and a new fraction, which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc 3:2) yielding **25** (3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 5 was rechromatographed as described above affording 2 new fractions. Both fractions were repurified by preparative TLC (silica gel) using CH2Cl3/acetone (5:0.5) for fraction (Fr) 5-1 to give compounds

## Page 3

MeOH at room temperature 3 times. During the concentration of the hexane extract (8 g) a crystalline material (68 mg) separated, which was collected and flash chromatographed on silica gel eluting with hexane/EtOAc gradient to give compounds **7** (157 mg, 1.9%), **14** (4 mg, 0.04%), and an amorphous solid characterized by low resolution GC-MS as a mixture of (3.5 mg, 0.04%) silosterod, campscret, and stigmasterol. The residual hexane (7.9 g) and dichloromethane (5.7 g) extracts were combined in only one on the basis of analytical TLC, and this was subjected to column chromatography on gel permeation Sephadex LH 20 using CHCl3/MeOH (1:1) to give 4 fractions. Fraction 2 was flash chromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/acetone/MeOH gradient affording 2 new fractions. Fraction 2-1 was purified by HPLC using a 250 mm x 6 mm i.d., 10 _m_m, phenyl Hexyl column (Phenomenex, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil), eluted with MeOH/H2O (2:1) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min and UV/vis detection at 280 nm to yield compound **18** (2 mg, 0.01%). Fraction 3 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/CHCl3/MeOH gradient affording compounds **20** (8.1 mg, 0.06%), **7** (35 mg, 0.26%), **14** (30 mg, 0.22%), **31** (3.6 mg, 0.03%), **32** (4.3 mg, 0.03%), and a new fraction. Fraction 3-1 was rechromatographed as described above affording **28** (3.7 mg, 0.03%). Fraction 4 was subjected to column chromatography on gel permeation Sephadex LH 20 using CHCl3/MeOH (1:1) to give 2 fractions. Fraction 4-1 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/EtOAc/MeOH gradient affording **33** (3.3 mg, 0.02%). Fraction 4-2 was purified by HPLC separation using a 250 mm x 6 mm i.d., 10 _m_m, phenyl Hexyl column (Phenomenex, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil), eluted with MeOH/H2O (2:1) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min and UV/vis detection at 254 nm to yield compounds **25** (5 mg, 0.04%) and **11** (6 mg, 0.04%).

The MeOH extract (13.7 g) was subjected to column chromatography on gel permeation Sephadex LH 20 using MeOH, CHCl3/MeOH (1:1), and CHCl2Cl to give 4 fractions. Fraction 1 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel eluting with a hexane/EtOAc/MeOH gradient affording **29** (30 mg, 0.22%). Fraction 2 was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane/EtOAc/EtOAc :1) yielding **7** (20 mg, 0.15%). Fraction 3 was twice flash rechromatographed on silica gel (hexane/EtOAc/MeOH gradient) yielding **30** (2 mg, 0.02%), **32** (2 mg, 0.02%), and **34** (2 mg, 0.02%).

### Biological Assays

_Growth Conditions._ To prepare fresh isolated bacteria, _Citrus sinensis_ plants were previously inoculated with the 9a5c strain of _X. fastidiosa_ and when CVC symptoms were visible; petioles and stems were collected and aseptically ground in PBS (phosphate-buffered saline). The suspension was distributed on plates containing liquid pervininkle with medium (PW) (5).

_Liquid PW Medium._ Into a flask containing 500 mL of distilled H2O was added 4.0 g of phytore peptone (Sigma, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil); 1.0 g of tri-pyriose peptone (Sigma, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil); 1.2 g of K2HPO4: 1.0 g of K2HPO4: and 0.4 g of MgSO4:H2O; by mechanic agitation was added 10 mL of them chloride 0.1% 10 mL g of hemicin C1 (Sigma, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil), 0.2 g NaOH, and 100 mL H2O; and 10 mL of phenol red 0.2% (0.2 g of phenol red, 10 drops of NaOH 20%, and 100 mL H2O); and distilled water was added to complete 800 mL. Then this solution was transferred into 10 Erlenmeyer flasks, in a total volume of 80 mL in each, and they were autoclaved at 120 degC for 20 min. After autoclaving, 10 mL of bovine serum albumin (BSA) 10% [6 g of BSA fraction V (Sigma, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil), 100 mL of autoclaved water, and filtered through a 0.22-_m_m Millipore membrane] and glutamine 4% [4 g of glutamine (Sigma, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil), 100 mL of autoclaved water, and filtered through a 0.22-_m_m Millipore membrane] were added in each Erlenmeyer flask (5).

_Solid PW Medium._ For the solid medium, 12 g of bacteriological agar was added before adding distilled water to complete 800 mL.

_Inculum Preparation._ Flasks containing 30 mL of liquid PW medium were inoculated with 1.0 mL of freshly prepared suspensions of _X. fastidiosa_ 9a5c culture grown in solid medium. After 5 days (exponential phase; OD300nm = absorbance 0.080) or 10 days (stationary phase; OD600nm = absorbance 0.281) of growth at 28 degC in a rotary shaker at 140 rpm, these cultures were used for inoculation of each medium used in the growth assays. A mix of the Biofilm (with growth attached to the glass at the medium--air interface) cells were used in minimal inhibitory concentration experiments (MIC).

_Antibacterial Activity._ Stock solutions of the compounds were prepared at a concentration of 5 mg/mL in DMSO (Sigma, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil)/H2O (1:1) and diluted to appropriate concentration prior to assays. In Eppendorf tubes containing 100 _m_L of bacterial culture in liquid PW medium (exponential phase or stationary phase) were added 0.5, 0.6, 1.0, or 2.0 mg/mL of each tested compound and kept in biological oxygen demand for 24 h at 28 degC, and 100 _m_L was then transferred to a 96-well microplate containing solid PW medium. The microplates were incubated for 10 days in biological oxygen demand at 28 degC. Growth was monitored by the number of bacterial colonies and by the change in color from yellow to red because phenol red produced a red--pink color (alkalkized) after cell growth resulting in the consumption of glucose. The MIC was defined as the lowest test compound concentration, which prevented the visible growth of bacteria. This procedure was carried out in triplicate, and in each case, a blank experiment was performed with DMSO/H2O (1:1) alone (100 _m_L of bacterial culture, 33.5 _m_L of DMSO and 33.5 _m_L of H2O) in the well and was used as a positive control. The growth of _X. fastidiosa_ 9a5c was not significantly affected by 40% DMSO/H2O (1:1) alone. The positive control well was prepared without the test compound and only with bacterial culture.

_Purity Standard._ All experiments were carried out with cells verified as _X. fastidiosa_ by PCR with specific primers (_6, 7_).

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The Centro APTA Citros Sylvio Moreira in Brazil has a citrus sanitation program that cleans citrus material from CVC and other diseases by the use of shoot-tip grafting. There are a limited number of accredited institutions delivering certified disease-free buudwoods _Citrus_. The Centro APTA has produced certified budwoods _Citrus_ under favorable phytosanitary conditions in a screen house. This work was undertaken on _Citrus sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ produced at this Centre. Roots, stems, and leaves of this graft were studied separately in order to compare their chemical profile (**Figures 1-3**). The structures of isolated compounds were identified on the basis of spectral data, particularly 1H and 13C NMR, HSQC, HMBC, and ESI-MSMS, and by comparison of the 13C NMR spectrum with those from the literature.



## Page 4

Cumarins xanthyletin (**7**) and xanthoxyletin (**11**) were previously isolated from the root of _C. sinensis_ but not so far in the leaves of this species (_15_).

The limonoid limonin has been found in fruits (_16_), roots (_17_), and shoots (_18_) of _C. sinensis_. In the later reference, the authors observed that limonin concentration in shoots decreased during the growing period in the cultivars. However, in this study limonin was found in the leaves of 10 month old _C. sinensis_ plants.

**Compounds Isolated from the Stems of _C. sinensis_ Grafted on _C. limonia._** The hexane extract from _C. sinensis_ stems of scion gave the triterpene friedelin (**13**), coumarin xanthoxyletin (**11**), and flavanone hespedrein (**6**). The dichloromethane extract from stems of scion afforded friedelin (**13**), flavone nobelitin (**4**), and 3_b-O-b_-glucopyranosylistorest. The methanol extract from scion stems yielded only flavanone hesperidin (**6**).

Nobiletin (**4**) was previously obtained from the dried bark of _C. sinensis_ (_19_); however, here the stem and bark were studied together. Xanthoxyletin (**11**) is reported here for the first time from the stem of _C. sinensis_. The pentacyclic triterpene friedelin (**13**) was previously isolated from the leaves (_20_) and peel (_21_) of _C. sinensis_; thus, it is reported here for the first time from the stem.

**Compounds Isolated from the Stem of the Rootstock of _C. sinensis_ Grafted on _C. limonia._** When the scion and

Figure 1.: Structure of flavonoids isolated.

Figure 3.: Structure of limonoids, triterpene, and alkaloid isolated.

Figure 2.: Structure of coumarins isolated.



## Page 5

rootstock are joined, they form a calloused area. It was removed, and only the stem of the _C. limonia_ (rootstock) was studied. The hexane and dichloromethane extracts from this stem were combined and after successive chromatographic separations afforded the coumarins xanthyletin (**7**), seselin (**14**), suberosion (**15**), crenalutin (**16**), and tamarin (**17**); the flavonoids limonian (**18**), lupinifolia (**19**), and erythrisenegalone (**20**); and the acridone alkaloid 5-hydroxynoracryione (atalophyllidine, **21**).

Plants of _Citrus sinensis_ and _C. limonia_ have been widely investigated, but to date, there are no records of studies of their graft working separately with scion and rootstock. The unique investigation of the stem of _C. limonia_ revealed the presence of coumarins imperatorin, xanthotoxin, begrapten, isopipinelinelin, limetin, scopoletin, umpelliferone, xanthotoxol, and aseucletin, and the steroids stimagerol and sitosterol (22). Thus, all compounds obtained here from the stem of the rootstock of _C. limonia_ have not been found in the stem of the plant developed from the germination of seeds. This observation suggests that these constituents could have been translocated from the roots where they have been isolated (_23_). The literature did not mention tamarin **17** from _C. sinensis_ and _C. limonia_, but from the roots of hybrid _C. paradise_ Macf. X _C. tangerina_ Hort. Ex Tanaka (_24_). Thus, the finding of **17** from the rootstock stem in this study suggested that it might have been biosynthesized from suberosion **15** in this part of the graft since it was not found in the roots. The results suggest that the rootstock stem does not biosynthesize metabolites _de novo_; however, it is clear that much further work is need to establish whether the metabolic changes are associated with the graft.

**Compounds Isolated from the Roots of the Rootstock of _C. sinensis_ Grafted on _C. limonia._** The hexane and dichloromethane extracts from the roots of _C. limonia_ rootstock were combined and purified by repeated column chromatography on silica gel and preparative TLC to give the coumarins xanthyletin (**7**), xanthovyletin (**11**), suberosin (**15**), crenalutin (**16**), butnasin (**22**), (_E_)-suberend (**23**), (_Z_)-suberend (**24**), clausarin (**25**), and nordentatin (**26**); the flavanone lupinifolia (**19**), the limonoids limonin (**12**), and limonyl acetate (**27**); and the acridone alkaloid 5-hydroxynoracronycine (atalophyllidine, **21**).

Compounds **12**, **22**-**24**, and **27** were not previously found from the roots of the plant _C. limonia_ developed from the germination of seeds. Limony acetate (**27**) has been found in fruits of the _Citrus_-_Poncitus_ hybrid (25). The coumarins buntasin (**22**) and (_E_)-suberend (**23**) are cited from the roots of hybrid _C. paradise_ Macf. X _C. tangerina_ Hort. Ex Tanaka (_24_) and (_Z_)-suberend (**24**) from _C. fjandoko_ (_26_). The coumarins xanthyletin (**7**), xanthoxylettin (**11**), suberosin (**15**), crenalutin (**16**), and nordentatin (**26**) were previously isolated from the roots of _C. limonia_ (_23_).

**Compounds Isolated from the Roots of _C. limonia_ Developed from the Germination of Seeds.** The roots of _C. limonia_ were also studied to gain a better understanding of whether the compounds obtained from the rootstock in grafts also occur in this organ of trees developed from the germination of seeds. During the concentration of the hexane extract, a crystalline material separated, which was collected and chromatographed on silica gel to afford xanthyletin (**7**), seselin (**14**), and the steroids sitosterol, stigmasterol, and campesterol. The hexane and dichloromethane extracts were combined and purified by repeated column chromatography yielding again xanthyletin (**7**), seselin (**14**), and xanthoxylettin (**11**), clausarin (**25**), scopoletin (**28**), _trans_-kellactone (**31**), _trans_-decurisdion (**32**), and junosamin (**33**); and the flavonoids limonian (**18**) and erythrisengalone (**20**). The methanol extract afforded xanthyletin (**7**), isoscopoletin (**29**), 7-demethylsuberosin (**30**), _trans_-decurisdion (**32**), and xanthoarol (**34**).

Flavona **18** and the coumarin 7-demethylsuberosin (**30**) were previously isolated from the roots of _C. limonia_ (_23_), while seselin (**14**), clausarin (**25**), scopoletin (**28**), isoscopoletin (**29**), _trans_-kellactone (**31**), _trans_-decurisdionol (**32**), junosamin (**33**), and xanthonoval (**34**), and flavanone erythrisengelalone (**20**) are reported here for the first time from this organ. The coumarins **14**, **25**, **28**, **29**, and **31**-**33** have been found from the roots of the hybrid _C. paradise_ Macf. X _C. tangerina_ Hort. Ex Tanaka (_24_), and flavanone erythrisengalone (**20**) from several hybrid seedlings resulting from a cross of _C. tamurana_ Hort. Ex. Takahashi and _C. kinokuni_ Hort Ex. Tanaka (_27_). This appears to be the first record of xanthonoval (**34**) in _Citrus_, which occurs in rutaceous genus _Zanthoxylum amortianium (28_).

**Comparison between the Chemical Profiles of Roots, Stems, and Leaves of _C. sinensis_ Grafted on _C. limonia._ Roots, stems, and leaves of _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ produce a considerable number of compounds that are not common in both plants developed from the germination of seeds. These differences in the chemical profile could be attributed to the influence of the graft on the biosyntheses of these compounds in all organs. However, different investigators seldom publish the developmental stage of the plant, making the above comparisons invalid. Thus, it is premature to draw any conclusions about the role of the graft on the absence or presence of new compounds in roots, stems, and leaves of _C sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_, until plants developed from the germination of seeds with the same developmental stage can be evaluated. However, little is known about the chemistry of grafts to clarify the translocation of metabolites from the rootstock to the scion or the reasons why some compounds are only present in grafted plant. Our own investigations of the stem of _Cedrela odorata_ grafted on _Toona ciliata_ (Meliaceae) revealed the presence of some limonoids, which are common in the former developed from the germination of seeds and many others, which were not previously found from that (29).

The results above, which suggest that the rootstock stem does not biosynthesize metabolites _de novo_, remain obscure. The chemical profile of the scion and rootstock differ notably in absence of flavonoids and coumarins containing C5 premyl groups attached to the carbon atoms of aromatic and heterocyclic systems or to oxygen, in the former. Only xanthyletin (**7**) and xanthoxyletin (**11**) were found in scion. This observation indicates that the premylated compounds once biosynthesized in the roots could have been translocated to other organs. Xanthyletin (**7**) and xanthoxylettin (**11**) appear to be translocated to scion stems and leaves, while other premylated coumarins and flavonoids only to rootstock stem. Further experiments on the enzymatic formation of xanthyletin (**7**) and seselin (**14**) from dimethylallyl diphosphate using cell-free extract from leaves, roots, and stems in order to determine if secondary metabolites present in the roots of rootstock could be translocated into rootstock stem and to graft _C. sinensis_ are in progress. Preliminary results showed that in the roots of _C. sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_ the biosynthesis of xanthyletin (**7**) and seselin (**14**) is time-regulated and that preyltransferase activity depends upon circadian variation. The cell-free extracts from scion leaves and stems were also similarly incubated with dimethylallyl diphosphate but did not give exurbitetin (**7**) and seselin (**14**), suggesting that the enzyme is not present in these organs.

**Effect of Some Sapindale Compounds on the Growth of _Xylella fastidiosa._** A number of flavonoids, coumarins, and limonoids reported here, and alkaloids, dihydroxymethylamid acid 

## Page 6

derivative, anacardic acid, triterpenes, and limonoids (**Figure 4**) isolated from other Rutaceae, Meliaceae, and Anacardiaceae (Sapindales) were tested for _m vitro_ activity on the growth of _X. fusidiosa_. The tested compounds rutacearpin (**35**), _N_-methyl-4-methoxyquinolin-2-one (**36**), 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**37**), and guyanin (**38**) were isolated from _Hortia brasiliana_ and _H. oreadica_; 3',4',5',5,7-pentamethoxyflavanone (**39**), 3',4',7,8-tetramethyl-35,6-(2'',2'',dimethylpyrano)-flavone (**43**) from _Neoparatinia magnifica_; 3(1,1-dimethyl)-isospecopoletin (**40**), raunin (**42**), and gravellifereno methyl ether (**41**) from _Rauait resinosus_ (Rutaceae); odoraton (**46**), godtacone (**47**), godunion (**48**), and catechin (**44**) from _Cedrala odorata_ grafted on _Toona ciliata_ (29); azadirachitin (**49**) from _Azadirachita indica_ (Meliaceae); and anacardic acid (**45**) from Anacardiaceae. All compounds above were isolated in our own investigations of plants from Saipindales.

The 9a5c strain was obtained from the petioles and stems of CVC-affected sweet orange (_Citrus sinensis_) plants (4 months) maintained in a protected greenhouse at Centro APTA Citros Sylvio Moreira, Instituto Agronomico, Cordeiroopolis, SP, Brazil. The 9a5c strains evaluated were PCR positive for specific _X. fusidiosa_ primers.

The fact that stationary phase bacteria are more resistant to antibiotics than logarithmically growing cells has been known for some time (_30_). Thus, preliminary assays were performed on stationary phase cells of _X. fusidiosa_ and with compounds obtained in great amount from _Hortia brasiliana_ and _H. oreadica_ (Rutaceae). Concentration of rutacearpin (**35**) at 1.00 mg/mL or higher effectively inhibited _X. fusidiosa_ cell proliferation, while _N_-methyl-4-methoxyquinolin-2-one (**36**), 5,7-dimethoxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-propanoic acid (**37**), and the limonoid guyanin (**38**) showed antibacterial activity only at 1.50 mg/mL. Then, the MICs were determined in dilutions from 1.60 to 0.70 mg/mL on stationary phase. The MICs were, in order of their decreasing activity, 2.9 x 103 _m_M for **38** and 4.2 x 103 _m_M for **35**, 4.8 x 103 _m_M for **37**, and 7.9 x 103 _m_M **36** (**Table 1**).

The assays with _X. fusidiosa_ after 5 days (exponential phase) and 10 days (stationary phase) of growth have been developed in order to compare _in vitro_ activity of some test compounds on both phases. Only xanthyletin (**7**), seselin (**14**), limonin (**12**), and 3',4',5',5',7-pentamethoxyflavanone (**39**) were assayed on exponential and stationary phases, and the growth inhibition was very similar for both. This study demonstrated that _X. fusidiosa_ was affected by tested compounds **7**, **14**, **12**, and **39** at concentrations ranging from 1.00 to 2.00 mg/mL. In the case of coumarins **7** and **14**, logarithmically growing cells (2.00 mg/mL, complete growth inhibition) were found to be more resistant

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c}  & stationary phase & exponential phase \\ compounds & MIC mg/mL (103 _μ_M) & MIC mg/mL (103 _μ_M) \\
**7** & 1.00 (4.4) & \\
**12** & 1.60 (3.4) & \\
**14** & 1.00 (6.1) & \\
**35** & 1.00 (4.2) & \\
**36** & 1.50 (7.9) & \\
**37** & 1.40 (4.8) & \\
**38** & 1.50 (2.9) & \\
**39** & 1.40 (3.7) & 2.00 (3.3) \\
**6** & & \textgreater{}2

## Page 7

than stationary phase cells (1.00 mg/mL, complete growth inhibition). One possible explanation for this resistance is that logarithmic phase bacteria have a more efficient system for the detoxification of foreign compounds within their cells. However, a more systematic analysis is necessary to clarify this resistance. In a recent study, Teitzel and Parsek (_31_) examined the relative effects of heavy metal copper and lead on stationary and logarithmic phase cells of _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ and also found that the latter were more resistant to metals.

Moreover, the exponential phase may be helpful in the estimation of MICs, and it can reduce the time needed for bacterial growth; thus, the other compounds were assayed with _X. fastidiosa_ after 5 days of growth. The results for exponential phase are summarized in **Table 1**.

Trietpene derivatives were the most active, odoratone (**47**), gedunin (**48**), and aazidarcina A (**49**) showed MICs of 2.3 x 103 _m_M, 2.7 x 103 _m_M, and >2.2 x 103 _m_M, respectively. The activities of limonoid limonin (**12**, 3.4 x 103 _m_M) and triterpene odoratol (**46**, 3.8 x 103 _m_M) were comparable to those of flavonoids 3',4',7',8-tetramethyl-5,6-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)-flavonoto (**43**, 3.1 x 103 _m_M), catechin (**44**, 3.4 x 103 _m_M), and 3',4',5',5',7-pentanchrysflavonome (**39**, 3.7 x 103 _m_M).

The cells of the mesophyll of the affected leaves with CVC also present a reduced number of chloroplasts associated with a larger concentration of hesperidin (**6**) crystals (_32_). Then, hesperidin (**6**), 7-rutinosyl-4'-methoxy-3',5-dihydroxyflavanone, was assayed; however, it showed a moderate activity with MIC at 3.3 x 103 _m_M. This result suggests that hesperidin (**6**) acts as a good barrier for the growth of _X. fastidiosa_ in small-size colonies.

The coumarins xanthyletin (**7**, 4.4 x 103 _m_M), raunion (**42**, 5.5 x 103 _m_M), seselin (**14**, 6.1 x 103 _m_M), gravelliferone methyl ether (**41**, > 6.4 x 103 _m_M), 3-(1,1-dimethylallyl)-isoscopoletin (**40**, > 7.7 x 103 _m_M), and anacadic acid (**45**, 4.9 x 103 _m_M) showed no appreciable activity against _X. fastidiosa_ (**Table 1**).

**Comparison of the Antimicrobial Activities of the Sapindale Compounds with Those from the Literature.** The biological assay results indicated that the compounds tested _in vitro_ against the _X. fastidiosa_ 9a5c strain were active at concentrations in the 1.00 mg/mL range, while the antibiotics ampicillin (10 mg/mL), kanamycin (2 _m_g/mL), neomycin (5 _m_g/mL), penicillin (50 _m_g/mL), streptomycin (10 _m_g/mL), and tetracycline (1 _m_g/mL) were active in the concentrations lower than 50 _m_g/mL under the agar disk diffusion and MIC methods (_33_). However, this work did not evaluate the bacterium in Biofilm or in higher density growth; moreover, antibiotics are not utilized in agriculture to treat plants with diseases because of the environmental and economic impact. A second class of organic compounds evaluated for their antimicrobial activity against _X. fastidiosa_ (PD00-2 isolated from grapevine with Pierce's disease) was lytic peptides. Peptides cerropin A and B totally inhibited the cell growth of _X. fastidiosa_ at a concentration of 0.5 _m_M (_34_). However, other studies determined cerropin B activity against different sized aggregation of _X. fastidiosa_ and demonstrated that this peptide at 10 _m_M was not efficient to kill large-size colonies from this bacterium. The authors suggested that aggregation of _X. fastidiosa_ cells may serve as a mechanism of protection against cerropin B (_35_). In the present work, the tested compounds showed weak activity ranging from 2.2 x 103 _m_M to 7.9 x 103 _m_M; however, we utilized cells in higher density and in aggregated form (Biofilm cells), which could reflect what occurs in plants with CVC, and the aggregation of bacteria may serve as a mechanism of protection against bactericides. Thus, if it is assumed that the MICs obtained in this condition suggest continued investigation, clearly the limonoid aazidarcithin A (**49**, MIC 2.2 x 103 _m_M) and the flavanone hesperidin (**6**, 3.3 x 103 _m_M) need further investigation as potential bactericidal agents. Hesperidin (**6**) is most probably involved as a natural defense or in resistance mechanisms against _X. fastidiosa_ in sweet orange varieties (_32_). Thus, it can be efficient to kill small-size colonies from _X. fastidiosa_ and could be used as a preventive of disease. It has long been recognized that orange peel represents a promising source of hesperidin. A million metric tons of peel residues are generated as result of fruit processing, and thus, an extract of this residue could be considered for practical use to prevent and control CVC.

Azadirachtin A (**49**) occurs only in the Neem tree _Azadirachta indica_ A. Juss. Oil from the seeds of _A. indica_ contain a mixture of seven isomeric compounds labeled azadirachtin-A to azadirachtin-G, with the former being present in the highest quantity. This cocktail of compounds significantly reduces the chances of tolerance or resistance developing in any of the affected organisms. In addition, they have significant effect on pests without harming beneficial organisms. Toxicology studies have indicated them to be quite safe to mammals (_36_). Emulsified neem oil (5%) was bactericidal against green pepper bacterial leaf spot incited by economically important phytopathogenic _Xanthomonas campestris pv vesicatoria_ (_36_). These data stimulated an investigation of neem oil as _X. fastidiosa_ inhibitor. Experiments on the dose response of _X. fastidiosa_ Biofilm to hesperidin and neem oil _in vitro_ and _in plant_ are in progress.

## ABBREVIATIONS USED

CVC, citrus variagated chlorosis; TLC, thin layer chromatography; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; HSQC, heteronuclear single quantum correlation; HMBC, heteronuclear multiple bond correlation; GC-MS, gas chromatography\(-\)mass spectrometry; ESI-MSMS, electrospray tandem mass spectrometry; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; UV, ultraviolet; EtOAc, ethyl acetate; MeOH, methanol; PW, periwinkle wilt; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

**Supporting Information Available**: References for the compounds tested for _in vitro_ activity on the growth of _X. fastidiosa_, which were not obtained from _Citrus sinensis_ grafted on _C. limonia_, and the 13C NMR data of isolated compounds. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org).

## Literature Cited

1 Souza, A. A.; Takita, M. A.; Pereira, E. O.; Coletta-Filho, H. D.; Machado, M. A. Expression of pathogenicity-related genes of _X. ykella fastidiosa_ in vitro and in plants. _Curr. Microbiol._**2005**, 50, 223-228.
2 Roberto, S. R.; Coutinho, A.; Lima, J. E. O.; Miranda, V. S.; Carlos, E. F. Transmissao de _Xyella fastidiosa_ pclass cigarrinhas _Eliophopterus costalimai_, _Arcogna ic terminalis e Oncometopia facialis_ em citros. _Fitopotal. Bras._**1996**, 21, 517-518.
3 He, C. X.; Li, W. B.; Ayres, A. J.; Hartung, J. S.; Miranda, V. S.; Teixeira, D. C. Distribution of _Xyella fastidiosa_ in citrus rootostocks and transmission of citrus variagated chlorosis between sweet orange plants through natural root grafts. _Plant Dis._**2000**, 84, 622-626.
4 Lee, R. F.; Derrick, K. S.; Beretta, M. J. G.; Chagas, C. M.; Rosseti, V. Citrus variageted chlorosis: a new destructive disease of citrus in Brazil. _Citrus Industry_**1991**, 72, 12-15.



## Page 8

* (5) Davis, M. J.; French, W. J.; Schaad, N. W. Axenic culture of the bacteria associated with phony disease of peach and plum scalp scalp. _Curr. Microbiol._**1981**, \(6\), 309-314.
* (6) Minsavage, G. V.; Thompson, C. M.; Hopkins, D. L.; Leite, R. M. V. B.; Stall, R. E. Development of a polymerase chain reaction protocol for detection of _Xylella fastidosa_ in plant tissue. _Phytopathology_**1994**, _84_, 456-461.
* (7) Pooler, M. R.; Hartung, J. S. Genetic relationship among strains of _Xylella fastidosa_ based on RAPD-PCR data. _Curr. Microbiol._**1995**, _31_, 134-137.
* (8) Hagga, E. G.; Mahmound, I. I.; Abou-Moustafa, E. A.; Mabry, T. J. Flavonoids from the leaves of _Citrus auramitan_ (sour orange) and _Citrus sinensis_ (sweet orange). _Asian J. Chem._**1999**, _11_, 707-714.
* (9) Kawaii, S.; Tomono, Y.; Katase, E.; Ogawa, K.; Yano, M.; Koizumi, M.; Ito, C.; Furukawa, H. Quantitative study of flavonoids in leaves of Citrus plants. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2000**, _48_, 3865-3871.
* (10) Li, S.; Lo, C-Y.; Ho, C-T. Hydroxylated polymethoxyl flavones and methylated flavonoids in sweet orange (_Citrus sinensis_) peel. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2006**, _54_, 4176-4185.
* (11) Shi, R.; Liu, Bin.; Li, J.; Zhibin, D. Total Flavonoids Extract of _Citrus aurantium_ and Its Manufacturing Method. CN Patent 101062165; CAN 147:547801 AN 2007: 1255965.
* (12) Ho, C-T.; Li, S.; Pan, M-H.; Lo, C-Y.; Dushenkov, S. Hydroxylated Polymethoxyl flavone Compositions. US Patent 2007109071; CAN 147:392437 AN 2007: 1088295.
* (13) Wada, K.; Kamizato, N.; Takara, K.; Tome, Y.; Yano, M.; Ishii, T.; Ohta, H. Characteristics and polymethoxylated flavones of seedless shikuwasa (_Citrus depressa_ Hayata). _Nihon Shokuhin Hozo Kagaku Kaishi_**2007**, _33_, 15-20; CAN 148: 49814 AN 2007: 404155.
* (14) Farid, S. New flavone from bergamot oil. Weak coupling in nuclear magnetic resonance between ring and methoxyl protons. _Tetrahedron_**1968**, _24_, 2121-2123.
* (15) Wu, T. S.; Furukawa, H. Acridone alkaloids. VII. Constituents of _Citrus sinensis_ Obeck var. brasiliensis Tanaka. Isolation and characterization of three new acridone alkaloids, and a new coumarin. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1983**, _31_, 901-906.
* (16) Vikram, A.; Jayaprakasha, G. K.; Patil, B. S. Simultaneous determination of _Citrus limonoid_ aglycones and glucosides by high performance liquid chromatography. _Anal. Chim. Acta_**2007**, _590_, 180-186.
* (17) Bayet, C.; Fazio, C.; Darboux, N.; Berger, O.; Raad, I.; Chaboud, A.; Dumontet, C.; Guilet, D. Modulation of P-glycoprotein activity by acridones and coumarins from _Citrus sinensis_. _Phytorher. Res._**2007**, _21_, 386-390.
* (18) Yamamoto, M.; Matsumoto, R.; Yamada, Y. Varietal difference of juice and shoot limonoids concentration in Citrus and the relationship between shoots and juice limon concentration. _Kaju Shikenjo Hokoku_**1998**, _30/31_, 25-37; CAN 130:209043 AN 1999: 4026.
* (19) Tomas, F.; Serrano, F. A.; Carpena, O. Rare flavonoids in the Salustiana variety of _Citrus sinensis. I. Rev. Agroquim. Tecnol. Aliment._**1973**, _13_, 99-103.
* (20) Hagga, E. G.; Mahmound, I. I.; AbouMoustafa, E. A.; Mabry, T. J. Coumarin, fatty acids, volatile and non-volatile terpenoids from the leaves of _Citrus aurantium_ (sour orange) and _Citrus sinensis_ (L.) Oshock (sweet orange). _Asian J. Chem._**1999**, _11_, 784-789.
* (21) Zhai, F.; Zhang, S.; Wang, X.; Ma, B.; Dai, Q. Study on the constituents of flavonoids and other substances from peel of _Citrus sinensis_ (L.) Oshock. _Beijing Gongye Davac Xuebao_**1997**, _23_, 39-43; CAN 128:72916 AN 1998:10223.
* (22) Abdel-Fattah, M. E.; Taha, K. E.; AbdelAziz, M. H.; Missalem, A. A.; ElKhrisy, E. A. M. Chemical constituents of _Citrus limonia and Foeniculum vulgare_. _J. Heterocycl. Chem_**2003**, _13_, 45-48.
* (23) Chang, S. H. Flavonoids, coumarins and acridone alkaloids from the root bark of. _Citrus limonia. Phytochemistry_**1990**, _29_, 351-353.
* (24) Takemura, Y.; Kawaguchi, H.; Maki, S.; Juichi, M.; Omura, M.; Ito, C.; Furukawa, H. Constituents of domestic Citrus plants. Part XXVI. Studies on the constituents of Yalaha. Structures of a new acridone alkaloid and two new coumarins. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1996**, _44_, 804-809.
* (25) Bennett, R. D.; Hasegawa, S. 7-a-Oxygenated limonoids from the Rutaceae. _Pytochemistry_**1982**, _21_, 2349-2354.
* (26) Juichi, M.; Inoue, M.; Ikegami, M.; Kajiura, I.; Omura, M.; Furukawa, H. Constituents of domestic Citrus plants. Part VII. New coumarins from _Citrus fintodox. Heterocycles_**1988**, _27_, 1451-1454.
* (27) Itoigawa, M.; Ito, C.; Ju-ichi, M.; Nobukuni, T.; Ichishi, E.; Tokuda, H.; Nishino, H.; Furukawa, H. Cancer chemopreventive activity of flavanones on Epstein-Barr virus activation and two-stage mouse skin carcinogenesis. _Cancer Lett._**2002**, _25_-29.
* (28) Ishii, H.; Ishikawa, T.; Sekiguchi, H.; Hosoya, K. Xanthoarol. New dihydrofuranococcumarin. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1973**, _21_, 2346-2348.
* (29) Paula, J. R.; de, Vieira, I. J. C.; Silva, M. F.; das, G. F. da.; RodriguesFo., E.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. Chemistry of _Cedrela odorata_ graft and speculations on the induced resistance against _Hyspiyula grandella. Phytochemistry_**1997**, _44_, 1449-1454.
* (30) Gilbert, P. S.; Collier, P. J.; Brown, M. R. Influence of growth rate on susceptibility to antimicrobial agents: biofilms, cell cycle, dormancy, and stringent response. _Antimicrob. Agents Chemother._**1990**, _34_, 1865-1868.
* (31) Teitzel, G. M.; Parsek, M. R. Heavy metal resistance of Biofilm and planktonic _Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Appl. Environ. Microbiol._**2003**, _69_, 2313-2320.
* (32) Queiroz-Voltan, R. B.; Paradela-Filho, O. Caracterizacao de estruturas anatomicas de citros infectados com _Xylella fastidosa. Laranja_**1999**, _20_, 55-76.
* (33) Lacava, P. T.; Araujo, W. L., Jr.; Azevedo, J. L. RAPD profile and antibiotic susceptibility of _Xylella fastidosa_, causal agent of citrus variegated chlorosis. _Lett. Appl. Microbiol._**2001**, _33_, 302-306.
* (34) Li, Z. T.; Gray, D. J. Effect of five antimicrobial peptides on the growth of _Agrobacterium tumefaciens_, _Escherichia coli_ and _Xylella fastidosa. Vitis_**2003**, _42_, 95-97.
* (35) Ishida, M. L.; Andersen, P. C.; Leite, B. Effect of _Vitis vinifera_ L. cv. Chardomay xylem fluid on coercion B activity against _Xylella fastidosa. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol._**2004**, _64_, 73-81.
* (36) Parmar, B. S.; Singh, R. P. _Neem in Agriculture_; Indian Agricultural Research Institute: New Delhi, India, 1993; pp 1-8.



