# 10.1016@0305-1978(92)90104-L.pdf

## Page 1



# Chemistry of _Zanthoxylum rhofolium_: A New Secofluroquinoline Alkaloid

MARA S. P. ARRUDA, Joao B. FERNANDES, Paullo C. VIEIRA, T M. FATIMA DAS G. F. DA SILVA+ and JOSE R. PIRANH+

# Abstract

Six coumarins, four fluoroquinoline alkaloids, one glycosylflavonoid, two triterpenes, and one steroid have been characterized from stems, leaves and fruit of _Zanthoxylum rhofolium_ Lam. var. _peidulatum_ Engler (_Fagara rhofolium_), of which one fluoroquinoline alkaloid is a new compound. The composition is very different from other reported studies of _Z. rhofolium_. The structures of the compounds isolated were determined by spectroscopic methods.

## Introduction

_Zanthoxylum rhofolium_ is widely distributed in South America, growing from French Guiana to Brazil and Argentina. _Z. rhofolium_ shows cardiorespiratory activity [1] as part of its pharmacological activity. It has also been used popularly against toothache [2].

_Zanthoxylum rhofolium_ from Argentina, south of Brazil and Colombia has previously been investigated. Tertiary and quaternary alkaloids, flavonoids and triterpenes have been isolated [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9].

The subject of the present paper is to report the presence of a new compound from _Z. rhofolium_ collected in Anchieta, ES, Brazil. We also wish to show the difference in the distribution of the metabolites depending on the organ and the region where the plant was collected.

## Materials and Methods

_Plant material. Zanthoxylum rhofolium_ was collected in Anchieta, ES, Brazil and a voucher (SPF 38205) is deposited at the herbarium of the Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP.

_Extraction and isolation of compounds._ The fruits, leaves and stems plus bark were dried and extracted, respectively, with petrol, CH2Cl2 and MeOH at room temperature during seven days (fruit 186 g, petrol 10.7 g (EX-1), CH2Cl2, 8.2 g (EX-2), MeOH 8.4 g (EX-3): leaves 781 g, petrol 18.7 g (EX-4), CH2Cl2, 17.3 g (EX-5), MeOH 22.1 g (EX-6); stems+bark 773 g, petrol 16.9 g (EX-7), CH2Cl2, 2.2 g (EX-8), MeOH 114 g (EX-9). Extract 1 (EX-1) was defatted as usual and 4.1 g of this extract was chromatographed on a conventional silica gel column eluting with a mixture of hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH of increasing polarity. Each of the resulting fractions was rechromatographed on Si gel TLC and the substances isolated are shown in Table 1. The extracts EX-2 (8.0 g), EX-4+EX-5 (15.0 g) and EX-7 (10.0 g) were chromatographed on dry column over Si gel (50-380 g) deactivated with 10% of water, using hexane: EtOHac (1:1, EX-2); CH2Cl2; acetone (95:5, EX-4+EX-5), and CH2Cl2 (EX-7) for elution. The columns were cut and the fractions were chromatographed by CC and/or TLC to yield the compounds shown in Table 1. EX-3 and EX-6 were submitted to classical alkaloid extraction, crystallizing skimminine. The methanolic solution was rechromatographed in CC of Si gel as described for EX-1 (Table 1). EX-8 has the same composition as EX-7 by TLC. EX-9 was treated with pyridine and acetic anhydride under reflux. The acetates (4.5 g) were chromatographed on a Si gel column (150 g) using a mixture of CH2Cl2, (CH2)2CO, MeOH as eluent, affording lupeol acetate and hesperidin acetate (Table 1).

Based in part on the Doctorate thesis presented by M.S.P.A. to PPGQ-UFSCar (1990).



## Page 2

Characterization of isolated compounds._ Compounds **1-9**, lupeol, lupenone and b-sitosterol are identical with standard samples, as shown by mp, 3H and 3C NMR, IR, MS, UV.

_Z-Dimethylthiofilinate_ (**10**). Amorphous solid IR: text; UV _A_(MeOH) nm: 216, 252, 300sh (log \(e\) = 4.29, 4.26, 3.73); HRMS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 291.07429 (33%), 261 (3), 250 (21), 259 (3), 244 (23), 233 (34), 232 (100), 27 (21); 3H NMR: Table 2; 3C NMR: Table 3.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c}  & & Fruits & Fruits & Fruits & Leaves & Leaves & Stems & Stems \\ Compounds & Extract & petrol & CH2Cl2 & MeOH & Petrol+Ch2Cl2 & MeOH & Petrol & MeOH \\ Isopimpinellin & (1) & 34 & 235 & 7 & 151 & — & — & — \\ Pheilopterin & (2) & 167 & 65 & — & 209 & — & — & — \\ Aurapten & (4) & 21 & — & — & 21 & — & — & — \\ Umbelifrerone & (5) & 24 & 5 & 4 & 21 & — & — & — \\
5’-Hydroxvaarapten & (6) & 48 & 28 & — & — & — & — & — \\ Imperatorin & (3) & 10 & 58 & — & 62 & — & — & — \\ Skimminaine & (7) & 4 & 120 & 87 & 12 & 73 & — & — \\ Haplonine & (8) & — & — & — & 4 & — & — & — \\ Lupeol & — & — & — & 15 & — & 201 & 69 \\ Lupenone & — & — & — & — & — & 36 & — \\ β-Sitosterol & — & — & — & 90 & — & 258 & — \\ Hesperidine & (9) & — & — & — & — & — & 700 \\ _E.Z_-Dimethylthiofilinate & (10+11) & — & — & — & 4 & — & — & — \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: COMPOUNDS OF FRUITS, LEAVES AND STEMS OF _ZANTHOXYLUM HHOFOLIUM_ FROM ANCHETA, ES, BRAZIL

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} C & **10** & **11** \\
2 & 163.0 & 163.0 \\
3 & 109.0 & 109.0 \\
4 & 158.4 & 158.4 \\
5a & 105.5 & 105.5 \\
5 & 137.7 & 142.0 \\
6 & 121.7 & 123.0 \\
7 & 166.0 & 166.0 \\
8 & 166.0 & 166.0 \\
8a & NR & NR \\
2’ & 145.



## Page 3



### Results and Discussion

The chromatographic separation of the extract of fruits, leaves and stems of _Z__rhofilium_ allowed us to identify a total of 14 components (Table 1), of which isopimpinellin (1) [10, 11], phellopterin (**2**) [11, 12], imperatorin (**3**) [10, 11], aurapten (**4**) [11, 13], umbelliferone (**5**) [10, 14], 5'-hydroxyaurapten (**6**) [15], skimminaine (**7**) [16, 17], haplopine (**8**) [18, 19], lupeol [20], lupenone [20], b-sitosterol [21], and hesperidin (**9**) [22] had already been described in the literature. A classical test for alkaloids was carried out for the methanolic extract of leaves and was positive. The route for isolation of quaternary alkaloids [23] was carried out but gave only skimminaine and hesperidin.

The new natural substance, _Z_-dimethylrrhoifolinate (**10**) is an amorphous solid, mp 99-101degC, with IR absorption at 1720, 1640, 1570, 1335, 1090 cm-1. Its high resolution MS showed [M]+ 291.07429 confirming the molecular formula (CmHt3NO6).

Compound **10** possesses a _seco_ ring A, having two methoxycarbonyl groups at C-7 and C-8 (3C NMR: 0 166.03, 165.99 C-7, C-8 and 0 50.27, 5118 CO2Me), as well as an a,b-unsaturated ester. The IR showed only one absorption (1720 cm-1) characterizing a

## Page 4

conjugated carbonyl ester in this molecule. In the 1H NMR an AX coupling system d6.16 and 7.26 (_d, J_=11.8 Hz) was attributed to H-5 and H-6 of _Z_-a,b-unsaturated ester. The 13C NMR for **10** showed signals (d 137.74 and 121.70) attributed to C-5 and C-6 which are in agreement with the structure proposed.

Compound **11**, which is different from **10** only in the stereochemistry of the double bond, _trans_ in the latter, was detected in very small amounts as a contaminant of **10**.

It was observed that there are important differences in the chemical composition of _Z. rhoifolium_ collected in different regions. Thus, mainly quaternary and tertiary alkaloids were found in some areas, whereas in others coumarins and terpenoids were found. Tables 1 and 4 show these data. It is also important to note that the chemical composition of each plant organ is very different. In the present study coumarins were found to occur in the leaves and fruits, but they were not found in the stems. The opposite occurs with terpenes, which were observed in the fruits and stems (Table 1).

## Conclusion

The structure of the new compound **10** is reinforced by its probable formation from and co-occurrence with **7** and **8**. The biosynthesis of **10** probably involves the 

## Page 5

oxidation of the A ring to an _ortho_ quinone of **7** or **8** and oxidation to a diacid and then esterification. Compound **11** is obtained by isomerization of **10**.

The difference in the composition among each organ of the plant and the region where they are collected is very important, especially when it is intended to use them for pharmacological screening. It is also probable that the plant tested by Barros _et al._[1] contained mainly coumarins and skimmianine, as we have obtained in the present study, in reason of proximity of the place of collection.

The isolation of _seco_ furoquinoline alkaloids, together with the normal furoquinoline alkaloids, represent a significant enlargement of the patterns of furoquinoline alkaloids production previously noted in the Rutaceae. The reduction of the benzene ring of the furoquinoline followed by ring-opening extends the pattern seen previously in _Haplophyllum_[24].The compounds we have isolated from _Z. rhoifolium_ reinforce its position in the Rutaceae [25].

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for financial support. We also wish to thank the University of Strathclyde for HRMS. One of us (M.S.P.A.) acknowledges CAPES (PICD) for a scholarship.

## References

* [1] Barros, G. S. G., Matos, F. J. A., Vieira, J. E. V., Souza, M. P. and Medeiros, M. C. (1970) _J. Pharm. Pharmac._**22**, 116.
* [2] Correa, M. P. (1984) _Dicionario de Planta Uteis do Brasil._ 2nd Edn, Vol. V. p. 59. Inst. Bras. de Desenvolvimento Flowestal, Rio de Janeiro.
* [3]

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c}  & & Argentina [3] & Origin not related [6] \\ Bark\({}^{*}\) & & Bark\({}^{*}\) & Bark \\ \hline Candicine & (**12**) & Candicine & (12) & 6-Hydroxy-2,3,5-trimethoxy- \\ Ternbetarine & (**13**) & Niddine & (16) & _N_/M-dimethylporphyrinium \\ Magnoflorine & (**14**) & Magnoflorine & (14) & chloride \\ _N_-Methyl-isocorydine & (**15**) & _N_/Methyl-isocorydine & (15) & (-)-Methylcanadine \\ Chelarythrine & (**17**) & _α_-Allocryptropine & (**20**) \\ Rio de Janeiro, Brazil [3] & & South Brazil \\ \hline Bark & & Leaves [7] & Bark [8] \\ \hline Lupool & & Text+to alkaloids & Niddine \\ Sesamine & (**23**) & Text+to terpenoids & \\  & & Vitexin & (**21**) \\ Isovitexin & (**22**) & \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: COMPOUNDS OF _ZANTHOXYLUM RHOFOLIUM_ LAM. (ENGL.)\({}^{*}\) AND _Z. RHOFOLIUM_ VAR. _PETOULATUM_ (ENGL.) ENGL.\({}^{*}\) FROM DIFFERENT REGIONS

## Page 6

* [3] Kuck, A. M., Albonico, S. M., Deulofeu, V. and Escalante, M. G. (1967) _Phytochemistry_**6**, 1541.
* [4] Albonico, S. M., Kuck, A. M. and Deulofeu, V. (1964) _Chem. Ind._, 1580.
* [5] Ramirez, A., Bermudez, S., Larosa, C. de and Echeverri, L. F. (1988) _Workshop Internacional de Plantas Medicinais do Paises do Tatado de Cooperacao Amazonica_, Belem, Pa. 24-30/01/1988.
* [6] Calderwood, J. M. and Fish, F. (1966) _Chem. Ind._, 237.
* [7] Von Poser, G. L., Gosmann, G. and Camargo, S. A. (1989) _Cianc. e Cult._**41**, (7-Suppl.), 487.
* [8] Ribeiro, H. B., Zanatta, N. and Morel, A. F. (1989) _Cianc. e Cult._**41**, (7-Suppl.), 508.
* [9] Antonaccio, L. D. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1959) _Annais da Assoc. Bras de Quimica_, 183.
* [10] Duddeck, H. and Kaiser, M. (1982) _Org. Mag. Res._**20**, 55.
* [11] Nielsen, B. E. (1970) _Coumarins of Umbelliferous Plants_, p. 52. Kandrup and Wunsch, Copenhagen.
* [12] Kokwaro, J. O., Messana, I., Galeffi, C., Patamia, M. and Marini Betolo, G. B. (1983) _Planta Med._**47**, 251.
* [13] Patra, A., Mukhopadhayay, A. K., Ghosh, A. and Mitra, A. K. (1979) _Ind. J. Chem._**17B**, 385.
* [14] Murray, R. D. H., Mendez, J. and Brown, S. A. (1982) _The Natural Coumarins, Occurrence, Chemistry and Biochemistry_, p. 21. John Wiley, New York.
* [15] Zdero, C., Bohlmann, F., King, R. M. and Robinson, H. (1986) _Phytochemistry_**25**, 2841.
* [16] Ahond, A., Picot, F., Potier, P., Poupat, C. and Sevenet, T. (1978) _Phytochemistry_**17**, 166.
* [17] Brown, N. M. D., Grundon, M. F., Harrison, D. M. and Surgenor, S. A. (1980) _Tetrahedron_**36**, 3579.
* [18] Fish, F., Gray, A. l. and Waterman, P. G. (1976) _Phytochemistry_**14**, 841.
* [19] Suzhen, C. and Zhi, X. (1985) _Zhongcaoyao_**16**, 146.
* [20] Wenkert, E., Vernon Baddeley, G., Burfitti, I. R. and Moreno, L. N. (1978) _Org. Mag. Res._**11**, 337.
* [21] Seo, S., Uomori, A., Yoshimura, Y., Takeda, K., Seto, H., Ebizuka, Y., Nogushi, H. and Sankawa, V. (1988) _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. I_**2407.
* [22] Harborne, J. B. and Mabry, T. J. (1982) _The Flavonoids: Advances in Research_, p. 1!9. Chapman & Hall, New York.
* [23] Cordell, A. G. (1981) _Introduction to Alkaloids_, p. 12. John Wiley, New York.
* [24] Fish, F. and Waterman, P. G. (1973) _Taxon_**22**, 177.
* [25] Mester, I. and Vicol, E. C. (1971) _Rev. Roum. Biol. Bot._**18**, 221.



