# 10.1016@j.micres.2004.06.003.pdf

## Page 1



# Antibacterial activity from _Penicillin corylophilum_ Dierckx

M. Garcia Silva, Niege Aracari Jacometti Cardoso Furtado, Monica Tallarico Pupo, Maria Jose Vieira Fonseca, Suraia Said, Ademar Alves da Silva Filho, Jairo Kenupp Bastos

Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciencias e Letras de Formiga, Fundacao Educacional Comunitaria Formiguense, Avenida Dr. Arnaldo de Senna, 328 CEP 35570 000 Formiga MG, Brazil Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Departamento de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Avenida do Cafe, s/n, CEP 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

A strain of _Penicillin corylophilum_ isolated from Brazilian soil sample was submitted to different culture conditions to investigate the production of secondary metabolites with antimicrobial activity. The largest number of conidia was obtained after 5 days of incubation in oat medium and the highest level of antimicrobial activity was produced when the fungus culture was developed in the Czapek medium. The activity against _Staphylococcus aureus_ was found only in the chloroform extract from Czapek culture broth, which also showed activity against _Micrococcus luteus_. Fumiquinoazoline F was isolated from the active chloroform extract by using chromatographic methods. The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for _M. luteus_ and _S. aureus_ were 99 mg/mL and 137 mg/mL, respectively.

## Introduction

Microorganisms have been traditionally used to produce a variety of important substances for the pharmaceutical and food industries. Hence, primary and secondary metabolites, such as peptides, enzymes, organic acids and antibiotics produced by filamentous fungi are used for these purposes (Bennett, 1998; Demain, 2000).

The discovery and development of antibiotics was one of the most significant advances in medicine in the 20th century. Nevertheless, many antimicrobial agents that were used to treat a variety of human infectious diseases are now

## Page 2

ineffective. Therefore, to ensure that effective drugs will be available in the future, it is necessary to improve the antimicrobial use patterns and to devise strategies to identify new antibiotics through previously unexplored targets (Smith and Jarvis, 1999).

Natural products play an important role in the discovery of leads for the development of drugs for the treatment of human diseases and microbial environment is an important source of novel active agents (Newman et al., 2003). Many of this products currently used are produced by microbial fermentation, or are derived from chemical modification of a microbial product (Donadio et al., 2002). In this regard, the fermentation process is an important tool for production of secondary metabolites that can not be isolated from plants and animals, or synthesized by chemists because of the ease of increasing production by environmental and genetic manipulation (Demain, 2000).

Several secondary metabolites have been identified from _Penicillinum corylophilum_, as well as their biological activities. In this work, we determined the best procedure for the production and extraction of antimicrobial metabolites from _P. corylophilum_ and an alkaloid derived from tryptophan with antimicrobial activity was isolated by using chromatographic methods.

## Material and methods

Microorganisms: _P. corylophilum_ was isolated from a soil sample collected in Sao Carlos, state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, and identified by "Fundacao Tropical de Pesquisas e Tecnologia Andre Toselo". The fungus is stored as a conidial suspension on silica gel (6-12 mesh, grade 40, desiccant activated) at 4 degC. The strains of _Staphylococcus aureus_ ATCC 25923, _Micrococcus luteus_ ATCC 9341, _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ ATCC 27853 and _Escherichia coli_ ATCC 25922 were acquired from the ATCC.

_Conidia production:_Penicillinum corylophilum_ was submitted to four different media: oat agar (Crotti et al., 1999), malt extract (Tzean et al., 1992), potato dextrose agar-PDA (Kim et al., 1990) and Vogel medium (Vogel, 1956). The cultures were incubated at 30 degC for 5 days. Conidia produced in each culture were harvested with 2% of Tween 80 and counted in a Neubauer hemocytometer.

_Production of secondary metabolites_: The production was carried out by inoculating \(4 \times 10^{6}\) conidia/mL, obtained in oat medium, into the pre-fermentative medium (Jackson et al., 1993) at 30 degC with shaking (120 rev/min) for 24 h. The obtained mycelium mass was then inoculated into three different fermentative media: Czapek (Atlas, 1995), Jackson (Jackson et al., 1993) and Vogel (Vogel, 1956). Cultures were reincubated at 30 degC and 120 rev/min for an additional 144 h. For alkaloid production the fungus was grown in five Erlenmeyer flasks containing 240 mL of pre-fermentative medium in each and was transferred to Erlenmeyer flasks containing 480 mL of Czapek medium.

_Partition of the culture broth with organic solvents and isolation of the funiquinazoline F from the chloroform extract_: The culture broths were separated by filtration, followed by three times partition with chloroform and buthanol in sequence. All the resulting organic solvents were evaporated under vacuum and the remaining water fractions of the culture broths were lyophilized. The crude chloroform extract from Czapek culture broth (3698 mg), the active one, was then submitted to column chromatography over 400 g of silica gel 60 H (70-230 mesh, Merck) and eluted with hexane-ethyl acetate at increasing proportions. The 7th fraction eluted with ethyl acetate (1077 mg) was submitted to flash chromatography (Still et al., 1978) over 11 g of silica gel 60 (230-400 mesh), which was eluted with an isocratic mobile phase of hexane-acetate 3:2. Afterwards, the fourth obtained fraction (576 mg) was submitted to HPLC analysis. Instrumentations consisted of a Shimadzu (SCL-10Avp, Japan) multisolvent delivery system, Shimadzu SPD-_M_10Avp Photodiode Array Detector, and an Intel Celeron computer for analytical system control and data collection and processing. Analytical chromatography was carried out using isocratic gradient (methanol/water/acetonitrile 11:1:8) in 25 min. A CLC-ODS (M)-4.6 x 250 mm2 Shimadzu column was used at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The spectral data from the detector were collected within 25 min over the 200-400 nm range of the absorption spectrum and the chromatograms were analyzed and plotted at 281 nm. The alkaloid was collected between 16.1 and 16.5 min.

_General experimental procedures_: A Bruker DRX-400 spectrometer, operating at 400.13 MHz for 1H and 100.62 MHz for 13C was used. All spectra were run in CDCl3 with TMS as internal standard. For a HREIMS an Autospec-Micromass-EBE was used (Universidade Estadual de Campinas, UNICAMP).

_Antimicrobial activity_: The crude extracts were investigated for antimicrobial activity by using the agar diffusion method with Petri dish template system inoculated with the assayed microorganisms, followed by incubation at 37 degC for 24 h. For this procedure, aliquots of the extracts, free of 

## Page 3

solvents, were solubilized (5.0 mg/mL) in 50% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, v/v) aqueous solution and applied into the template holes made on the medium surface. Negative controls were run for DMSO aqueous solution, chloroform and buthanol. Streptomycin (77.7 U, 50 mL, Sigma) for Gram-negative bacteria (_P. aeruginosa_ and _E. coli_), Penicillin G (0.6075 U, 50 mL, Sigma) for _M. luteus_ and Penicillin G (1.215U, 50 mL, Sigma) for _S. aureus_ were used as the positive controls. The inoculum was prepared by culturing each organism in Antibiotic N+1 agar medium (Merck) for 24 h at 37 degC. The microorganisms were transferred to 0.9% NaCl until they reached the turbidity equivalent to 0.5 McFarland standard. Each microorganism suspension (0.5%) was added in Antibiotic N+1 agar medium, and distributed over the plates. The MIC values of the isolated alkaloid were evaluated in triplicate by microdilution broth method (Andrews, 2001). The alkaloid was solubilized in DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide) at 1 mg/mL, and was diluted in Tryptone soya broth in the range of 147.5-36.8 mg/mL. The inoculum was adjusted to each organism yielding a cell concentration of 103 colony forming units (CFU/mL). It was included both inoculated wells, that controls the adequacy of the broth to support the growth of the organisms and uninoculated wells, that remains free of antimicrobial agent to check the sterility of the medium. Penicillin G (Sigma) was used as positive control. The microplates (96-well) were incubated at 37 degC for 24 h. After that, 40 mL of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (0.7%) in aqueous solution were added to indicate the viability of microorganisms (Leverone et al., 1996). The MIC was determined as the lowest concentration of drug able to totally inhibit microorganism growth.

## Results

### Determination of the best conditions for conidial production

The largest number of conidia was obtained after 5 days of incubation in oat agar, Vogel, malt extract and PDA media, in this order (Fig. 1).

### Selection of fermentative medium for antimicrobial activity production

Different fermentative media were investigated to determine in which broth the antimicrobial activity was produced. The highest level of antimicrobial activity was produced by _P. corylophilum_ when the fungus culture was developed in the Czapek medium, as observed for the results obtained by the agar diffusion method (Table 1). The activity was considered for inhibition zones wider than 12 mm since the template punches holes of approximately 10-11 mm into the agar surface. The activity against _S. aureus_ was found only in the chloroform extract from Czapek culture broth. Independently of the culture medium, the antimicrobial activity was detected only in the chloroform extracts. Moreover, no extracts showed activity against Gram-negative bacteria at the concentration evaluated in this work.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Microorganisms & Extracts or standards & Fermentative medium & Inhibition zones (mm) \\ Micrococcus luteus & Chloroformic & Czapek & 14 ± 0.577 \\  & & Jackson & 14 ± 0.577 \\  & & Vogel & 13 ± 0.577 \\  & Penicillin G & & 26 ± 0.577 \\ _Staphylococcus aureus_ & Chloroformic & Czapek & 13 ± 0.577 \\  & & Jackson & 09 ± 0.577 \\  & & Vogel & 08 ± 0.577 \\  & Penicillin G & & 20 ± 0.577 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Antimicrobial activity of different extracts from cultures of _Penicillin corylophilum_

Figure 1: Determination of the best conditions for conidial production by _P. corylophilum_.



## Page 4



### Identification and antimicrobial activity of the alkaloid from Czapek chloroform extract

The chemical structure of the isolated compound (Fig. 2) was identified from 1H and 13C Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), Attached Proton Test (APT), 1H-1H Correlation Spectroscopy (COSY), Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Coherence (HMQC), Heteronuclear Multiple Quantum Coherence (HABC), and Mass Spectra (MS) spectral data in comparison with previous published data (Takahashi et al., 1995). The MS High Resolution showed the [M*] peak m/z 358.14298. The 13C NMR spectrum of the compound showed 21 carbon signals. The multiplicities of the carbons determined by APT led to the attribution of: 8 C, 11 CH, 1 CH2 and 1 CH3. Among the quaternary carbons two were attributed to amide carbonyls (d 168.9, C-12 and 160.7, C-5). The 1H NMR spectrum showed two broad singlets at d 8.00 (1H, H-13) and d 5.83 (1H, H-16) indicating that these hydrogens could be attached to nitrogens. Hence, these data suggested an alkaloid type structure for the compound (Fig. 2).

The 1H NMR spectrum also showed nine hydrogen signals between d 6.64 and d 8.30. In the 1H-1H COSY experiment the signals at d 7.35 (_dd_, \(J\) = 8.1 and 0.8 Hz, H-9), d 6.87 (_ddd_, \(J\) = 8.1, 7.1 and 0.8 Hz, H-10), d 7.06 (_ddd_, \(J\) = 8.1, 7.1 and 0.8 Hz, H-11) d 7.23 (_dd_, \(J\) = 8.1 and 0.8 Hz, H-12) were coupled to each other. The hydrogen at d 6.64 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.5 Hz, H-14) was coupled to the hydrogen at d 8.00 (H-13). The chemical shifts of the carbons attached to these hydrogens were attributed according to the HMQC data (Table 2). These data allowed us to propose an indolic moiety for the compound, which was corroborated by the H-C correlations observed in the HMBC experiment. The HMBC experiment showed the correlation of the indolic carbon at d109.6 (C-8a) with the hydrogens at d 3.66 (_dd_, \(J\) = 14.9 and 3.3 Hz, H-8') and d 3.59 (_dd_, \(J\) = 14.9 and 5.3 Hz, H-8''). In the HMQC experiment these hydrogens were attached to the carbon at d 27.0. The 1H-1H COSY experiment showed that these hydrogens (H-8) are coupled to each other and to another hydrogen at d 5.63 (_dd_, \(J\) = 5.3 and 3.3 Hz, H-7). The HMBC experiment showed the correlation of both H-8 with C-7, C-8a and C-15. These data led us to propose an alkaloid derived from tryptophan for the isolated compound (Bergman and Bergman, 1985).

The 1H-1H COSY experiment also revealed that the hydrogens at d 8.30 (_ddd_, \(J\) = 8.1, 1.5 and 0.5 Hz, H-4), d 7.47 (_ddd_, \(J\) = 8.1, 7.3 and 1.3 Hz, H-3), d 7.71 (_ddd_, \(J\) = 8.3, 7.3 and 1.5 Hz, H-2) and d 7.53 (_dd_, \(J\) = 8.3 and 1.5 Hz, H-1) were coupled to each other. The aromatic carbons chemical shifts were attributed on the basis of HMQC data. These spectral data suggested an anthranilic acid derivative moiety. It was corroborated by the correlation of the carbon at d 160.7 (C-5) with H-4 (d 8.30).

The remaining 1H NMR signals were observed at d 1.29 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.6 Hz, 3 H, H-19) and d 2.99 (_q_,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Position & C & H \\
1 & 127.3 & 7.53 _dd_ (8.3; 0.5) \\
2 & 134.6 & 7.71 _ddd_ (8.3; 7.3; 1.5) \\
3 & 127.1 & 7.47 _ddd_ (8.1; 7.3; 1.3) \\
4 & 126.9 & 8.30 _ddd_ (8.1; 1.5; 0.5) \\
4a & 120.3 & – \\
5 & 160.7 & – \\
6 & – & – \\
7 & 55.6 & 5.63 _dd_ (5.3; 3.3) \\
8 & 27.0 & 3.66 _dd_ (14.9; 3.3) \\  & & 3.59 _dd_ (14.9; 5.3) \\
8a & 109.6 & – \\
8b & 127.2 & – \\
9 & 118.6 & 7.35 _ddd_ (8.1; 0.8) \\
10 & 121.6 & 6.87 _ddd_ (8.1; 7.1; 0.8) \\
11 & 122.6 & 7.06 _ddd_ (8.1; 7.1; 0.8) \\
12 & 111.1 & 7.23 _dd_ (8.1; 0.8) \\
12a & 136.0 & – \\
13 & – & 8.00 _br_ \(s\) \\
14 & 123.4 & 6.64 \(d\) (2.5) \\
15 & 168.9 & – \\
16 & – & 5.83 _br_ \(s\) \\
17 & 49.1 & 2.99 \(q\) (6.6) \\
17a & 151.6 & – \\
18 & – & – \\
18a & 147.1 & – \\
19 & 19.3 & 1.29 \(d\) (6.6) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: 13C (100 MHz) and 1H NMR (400 MHz) spectral data for fumiguinozoline F (CDCl3)

Figure 2: Structure of the fumiguinozoline F, isolated from Czapek chloroform extract.



## Page 5

6.6 Hz, 1 H, H-17), both coupled to each other as observed in the 1H-1H COSY experiment. The HHBC experiment showed the following correlations: H-19 (d 1.29) correlated with a carbon at d 151.6 (C-17a) and C-19 (d 19.3) correlated with H-16 (d 5.86). These data suggested an alanine moiety for the compound. Therefore, the data allowed to propose the structure of fumiquinazoline F as an alkaloid derived from the linking of the aminoacids tryptophan and alanine plus an anthranilic acid unit.

Regarding the antimicrobial activity, the MIC values of this compound against _M. luteus_ and _S. aureus_ were of 99 mg/mL and 137 mg/mL, respectively. Nevertheless, the penicillin G standard was more active than the isolated compound for both microorganisms (0.011 mg/mL and 0.023 mg/mL, respectively).

## Discussion

The expression of secondary metabolites might depend on the culture conditions and the strains. _P. corylophilum_ is often isolated from temperate climates (Malmstrom et al., 2000), but in this work we investigated a strain isolated from Brazilian soil sample, a tropical country.

According Gaden-Junior (2000), the metabolites production is influenced by medium composition, nutrients availability and others aspects. Different nitrogen and carbon sources may affect the synthesis of enzymes involved in primary and secondary metabolism. Microorganisms are able to use a wide variety of carbon and nitrogen sources. Nevertheless, many secondary metabolic pathways are negatively affected by these sources favorable for growth (Sanchez and Demain, 2002).

In the study of the secondary metabolites of the _P. corylophilum_, Cutler et al. (1989) isolated the 3,7-dimethyl-8-hydroxy-6-metoxysocroman, from the mycelia using shredded wheat medium, which was maintained 12 days at 22 degC. By cultivation in malt medium, strains of _P. corylophilum_ produced the alkaloid epoxyagroclavine I (Grabley et al., 1992).

In this work, a two step culture was used for antimicrobial active compounds production. In the first step, the microorganism was cultivated in prefermetative medium, which is rich in nutrients to increase vegetative biomass production. The harvested mycelium was then transferred to fermentative medium for secondary metabolites production. The fumiquinazoline F was isolated from the chloroform extract of the Czapek fermentative medium, after 144 hours of incubation. From the three evaluated media, the Czapek one was the best for antimicrobial metabolites production.

Fumiquinazoline F was originally obtained from a strain of _Aspergillus fumigatus_, which was isolated from the gastrointestinal tract of the marine fish _Pseudolabrus japonicus_ (Takahashi et al., 1995), and it was also detected in _Penicillium thymicola_ (Larsen et al., 1998). It was the first time that Fumiquinazoline F was isolated from _P. corylophilum_. Besides, it is the first time that the antimicrobial activity of this compound is been described.

The fumiquinazolines belong to a class of compounds possessing a wide range of biological activities. For instance, fumiquinazolines A, B and C from _A. fumigatus_ showed moderate cytotoxicity against the cultured P-388 (ymbrocytic cells (Numata et al., 1992). Fumiquinazolines H and I, isolated from _Acremonium_ sp. presented significant antifungal activity (Snider and Zeng, 2003).

Kariba et al. (2002), showed that extracts of _Schizozygous coffaeoides_, containing indolines presented antifungal and antibacterial activities. The berberine, benzylisoquinoline alkaloid, isolated from _Hydrastis canadensis_, is active against many Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, as well against fungi and parasites (Scazzocchio et al., 2001).

Fumiquinazoline F is derived of tryptophan, plus anthranilic acid and it showed value of MIC lower than berberine, canadaline and canadine for _S. aureus_ (ATCC 25923) (Scazzocchio et al., 2001).

The identification of this class of alkaloid in cultures of _P. corylophilum_ opens new possibilities for bioprospection of new compounds belonging to this class with potential for the design of new drugs.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to CAPES for fellowship and FAPESP for financial support (Grants # 01/14209-7 and # 99/09850-8) for financial support.

## References

- Andrews (2001) Andrews, J.M., 2001. Determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 48 (Suppl. S1), 5-16.
- Atlas (1995) Atlas, R.M., 1995. Handbook of Microbiological Media. CRC Press, Boca Raton, p. 280.

- Bennett (1998) Bennett, J.W., 1998. Mycotechnology: the role of fungi in biotechnology. J. Biotechnol. 66, 101-107.



## Page 6

* Bergman and Bergman (1985) Bergman, J., Bergman, S., 1985. Studies of rutaecarpine and related quinazolinocarboline alkaloids. J. Organic Chem. 50, 1246-1255.
* Crotti et al. (1999) Crotti, L.B., Jabor, V.A.P., Chellegatti, M.A.S.C., Fonseca, M.J.V., Said, S., 1999. Studies of pectic enzymes produced by _Talaromyces flavus_ in submerged and solid substrate cultures. J. Basic Microbiol. 39, 227-235.
* Cutler et al. (1989) Cutler, H.G., Arrendale, R.F., Cole, P.D., Cox, R.H., 1989., 3,7-Dimethyl-8-hydroxy-6-metoxy-isochroman from _Penicillium corylophium_: plant growth regulatory activity. Agric. Biol. Chem. 53, 1975-1977.
* Demain (2000) Demain, A.L., 2000. Small bugs, big business: the economic power of the microbe. Biotechnol. Adv. 18, 499-514.
* Donadio et al. (2002) Donadio, S., Monciardini, P., Aldulina, R., Mazza, P., Chiocchini, C., Cavaletti, L., Sosio, M., Puglia, A.M., 2002. Microbial technologies for the discovery of novel bioactive metabolites. J. Biotechnol. 99, 187-198.
* Gaden-Junior (2000) Gaden-Junior, E.L., 2000. Fermentation process kinetics. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 67, 629-635.
* Grabley et al. (1992) Grabley, S., Granzer, E., Hutter, K., Ludwig, D., Mayer, M., Thiericke, R., Tilt, G., Wink, J., Philipps, S., Zeeck, A., 1992. Secondary metabolites by chemical screening. 8' Decaerstricines, a new family of inhibitors of cholesterol biosynthesis from _Penicillium_--Strain description, fermentation, isolation and properties. J. Antibiotic. 45, 56-65.
* Jackson et al. (1993) Jackson, M., Karwoswsky, J.P., Humphrey, P.E., Kohl, W.L., Barlow, G.J., Tanaka, S.K., 1993. Calibrins, novel antifungal agents produced by _Penicillium restrictum_. J. Antibiotic. 46, 34-38.
* Kariba et al. (2002) Kariba, R.M., Houghton, P.J., Yenesew, A., 2002. Anti-microbial activities of a new schizozygane indoline alkaloid from _Schizozygina coffreeoides_ and the revised structure of isoschizogaline. J. Nat. Prod. 65, 566-569.
* Kim et al. (1990) Kim, K.K., Fravel, D.R., Papavizas, G.C., 1990. Production, purification, and properties of glucose oxidase from the biocontrol fungus _Talaromyces flavus_. Can. J. Microbiol. 36, 199-205.
* Larsen et al. (1998) Larsen, T.O., Frydenvang, K., Frisvad, J.C., Christophersen, C., 1998. UV-guided isolation of alantrypinone, a novel _Penicillium_ alkaloid. J. Nat. Prod. 61, 1154-1156.
* Leverone et al. (1996) Leverone, M.R., Owen, T.C., Tieder, F.S., Stewart, G.J., Lim, D.U., 1996. Resting-cell dehydrogenase assay measuring a novel water soluble formazan detects catabolic differences among cells. J. Microbiol. Methods 25, 49-55.
* Malmstrom et al. (2000) Malmstrom, J., Christophersen, C., Frisvad, J.C., 2000. Secondary metabolites characteristic of _Penicillium citrinum, Penicillium steckii_ and related species. Phytochemistry 59, 301-309.
* Newman et al. (2003) Newman, D.J., Craag, G.M., Snader, K.M., 2003. Natural products as source of new drugs over the period 1981-2002. J. Nat. Prod. 66, 1022-1037.
* Numata et al. (1992) Numata, A., Takahashi, C., Matsushita, T., Miyamoto, T., Kawai, K., Usami, Y., Matsumura, E., Inoue, M., Ohishi, H., Shingu, T., 1992. Fumiquinazolines, novel metabolites of a fungus isolated from a saltfish. Tetrahedron Lett. 33, 1621-1624.
* Sanchez and Demain (2002) Sanchez, S., Demain, A.L., 2002. Metabolic regulation of fermentation processes. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 31, 895-906.
* Scazzocchio et al. (2001) Scazzocchio, F., Cometa, M.F., Tomassini, L., Palmery, M., 2001. Antibacterial activity of _Hydrastis canadensis_ extract and its major isolated alkaloids. Planta Med. 67, 561-564.
* Smith and Jarvis (1999) Smith, T.L., Jarvis, W.R., 1999. Antimicrobial resistance in _Staphylococcus aureus_. Microbes Infect 1, 795-805.
* Snider and Zeng (2003) Snider, B.B., Zeng, H., 2003. Total synthesis of (-)-fumiquinazoline A, B, C, E, H and I. Aproaches to the synthesis of fiscalin A. J. Organic Chem. 68, 545-563.
* Still et al. (1978) Still, W.C., Kanh, M., Mitra, A., 1978. Rapid chromatographic technique for preparative separations with moderate resolution. J. Organic Chem. 43, 2923-2925.
* Takahashi et al. (1995) Takahashi, C., Matsushita, T., Doi., Minuura, K., Shingu, T., Kumeda, Y., Numata, A., 1995. Fumiquinazolines A-G, novel metabolites of a fungus separated from a _Pseudolabrus_ marine fish. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 2345-2353.
* Tzean et al. (1992) Tzean, S.S., Chen, J.L., Shiu, S.H., 1992. _Talaromyces flavus_ sp. nov. from Taiwan. Mycologia 84, 739-749.
* Vogel (1956) Vogel, H.J., 1956. A convenient medium for Neurospora (medium N). Microb. Genet. Bull. 13, 42-43.



