# 10.1016@S0031-9422(97)00598-0.pdf

## Page 1



# FLAVONOIDS from the FRUITS OF _MURRAYA PANICULATA_+
Footnote †: Based in part on the Ph.D. thesis presented by R.J.F. to the Universidade Federal de São Carlos.

Ricardo J. Ferracin, M. Fatima Das G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira

# Abstract

In an investigation of the peel and pulp of the fresh ripe fruits of _Murraya paniculata_ nine flavonoids: 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavanonol, 5,6,7,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone, 3,5,6,7,3',4',5'-heptamethoxyflavone, 5,7,8,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone, 3,5,7,8,3',4',5'-heptamethoxyflavone, 3,5,7,8,3',4'-hexamethoxyflavone, 5-hydroxy-3,7,8,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone and 8-hydroxy-3,5,7,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone, were identified. The latter two compounds appear to be novel. (c) 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

## Introduction

_Murraya paniculata_ (Linn.) Jack, which is native to Southeast Asia, was introduced to Brazil and has flourished in Sao Paulo state. In Brazil it is used as an ornamental plant, but this plant is used for its medicinal properties in tropical and subtropical Asia [1]. A search for previous phytochemical studies of _M. paniculata_ revealed that only the coumarin, coumarin, has been reported from the ripe fruits of this species [2]. Working separately on peel and pulp of the fresh ripe fruits, we have isolated only polymethoxylated flavones, flavonols and flavononols.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The dichloromethane extract of the peel of _M. paniculata_ after successive chromatographic separations afforded six flavonoids: 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavanonol [3, 4], 5,6,7,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone (1) [5], 3,5,7,8,3',4',5'-heptamethoxyflavone (2) [6], 5,7,8,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone (3) [7], 5-hydroxy-3,7,8,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone (4) and 8-hydroxy-3,5,7,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone (5). Compounds 4 and 5 appear to be novel.

The 13C NMR data for 2 and 3 do not appear to have been reported in the literature. Thus, the 13C chemical shifts of 2 and 3 have been listed in Table 1 using 1 and 5,7,8,2',3',4',5'-heptamethoxyflavone (6) [3] as models. The carbon signals of 1, isolated from _Neoraputia magnifica_ (Rutaceae), were assigned by use of HMQC and HMBC experiments [5].

Compound 4 was obtained as a yellow powder. The presence of a flavonoid nucleus was suggested by its UV and IR spectra. In the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 2) of 4, three aromatic protons appeared at \(d\) 6.43 (1H, _s_) and \(d\) _7.52 (2H, \(s\), H-2' and H-6'), one hydroxyl group at \(d\) 12.38 (1H, \(s\), OH-5) and six methoxy groups at \(d\) 3.95 (6H, _s_), 3.94 (6H, _s_), 3.92 (3H, _s_), and 3.90 (3H, _s_). The assignment of one singlet to H-2' and H-6' suggested that three methoxys were attached to the B-ring. Furthermore, the singlet at \(d\) 6.43 clearly indicated the A-ring to be 5,6,7- or 5,7,8-trisubstituted. A comparison of 13C chemical shifts of 5-hydroxy-7,8- and 5-hydroxy-6,7-dimethoxyflavone and 5-hydroxy-3,7,8- and 5-hydroxy-3,6,7-tri-methoxyflavonol indicated that the C-6 methine (_ca_ \(d\) 96) resonates at a lower field than the C-8 methine (_ca_ \(d\) 91) [3]. Thus, the correct A-ring structure was, decided on the basis of the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1), which showed a signal at \(d\) 95.5 for C-6, so placing the methoxy substituents at C-7 and C-8. Moreover, the 13C NMR spectrum showed signals for three methyl oxyl groups at \(d\) 61.5, 61.0 and 60.3, indicating a 3-methoxyflavonol derivative and confirming the oxygenation patterns in the \(A\) and B-rings. This was corroborated by the fragments at _m/z_ 207 [C12H14O4-Me]+ and 181 [C6H8O5-Me]+, associated with the retro-Diels-Alder cleavage of the C-ring followed by the loss of a methyl group, respectively. From these data 4 was characterized as 5-hydroxy-3,7,8,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone. The structural assignment was also supported by comparison of the 13C NMR spectrum with those of 4',5-dihydroxy-3,3',7,8-tetra-methoxyflavone (ternatin, 7) and 4',5-dihydroxy

## Page 2

3,3',8-trimethoxy-7-(3-methylbut-2-enyloxy)-flavone (**8**) [8]. Complete and unambiguous 13C NMR assignments for **8** were made using the HMBC technique [8].

Compound **5** exhibited similar NMR spectra to **4** (Table 1 and 2) except for the absence of the signal for one chelated hydroxyl. The mass spectrum indicated a molecular formula C2H2O9 ([M]+ = 418), which strongly suggested an isomer of **4**. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed signals for two methoxyl groups at \(d\) 61.3 and 60.1, which were assigned to the 3- and 4'- positions. This implies that the methoxyls in the A-ring were located at C-5 and C-7 (_d_ 56.4 and 56.1) and determined the position of the hydroxyl group at C-8. The 5,7,8- and 5,6,7-trimethoxyflavones can be differentiated by the 13C NMR chemical shifts of the unsubstituted methine which absorbs at \(d\) 92.6 (C-6, for example **6**) in the case of the former [3] and at \(d\) 96.3 (C-8, for example **1**) in the case of the latter. Thus, the 13C signal at \(d\) 91.6 for C-6 supported the proposed structure of **5** as 8-hydroxy-3,5,7,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone.

A hexane-soluble fraction of the hydromethanolic extract of pulp after successive chromatographic separations afforded three flavonols: **4**, **9** and **10**. Compound **4** could not be separated from a small amount of **9**. The 1H NMR in addition to signals described above for **4**, revealed the presence of three protons in the B-ring, giving rise to an ABC coupling system (_d_ 7.02, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.8 Hz, H-5'; \(d\) 7.81, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-2'; \(d\) 7.86, _dd_, \(J\) = 8.8 and 2.0 Hz, H-6'). This was supported by the mass spectrum which showed fragments at _m_/_z_ 177 [C1H2O3 - Me]+ and 181 [C3H6O3 - Me]+ due to the retro-Diels-Alder cleavage 

## Page 3

of the C-ring followed by loss of a methyl group, respectively. These data were consistent with the structure of 5-hydroxy-3,7,8,3',4'-pentamethoxyflavone for **9**, which has been found previously in _Citrus reticulata_ (tangerine peel) [9].

Compound **10** gave spectral data in agreement with those published for 3,5,6,7,3',4',5'-heptamethoxyflavonol [10]. However, its \({}^{13}\)C NMR data do not appear to have been reported previously in the literature. Thus, they have been listed in Table 1 using **1**, **2** and **3** as models.

A dichloromethane-soluble fraction of the methanolic pulp extract gave four flavonoids: **3**, **5**, 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavanol [3, 4] and 3,5,7,8,3',4'-hexamethoxyflavone [3, 11].

Other organs of _M. paniculata_ have long been the subject of extensive chemical investigations, which have proved that it is a rich source of coumarins, flavones and flavonoids as are other plants of the Auriatoideae [12]. The leaves have been reported to contain 2 [13], **3**[1, 13] and **10**[10], while **3** has also been found in the roots [7]. Flavonol **1** has been isolated from the leaves of _M. exotica_ [6], which has been considered to be a synonym of _M. paniculata_ [14]. By contrast, the flowers appear to be poor in flavonoids. However, the only flavonoid, 3,5,7,3',4',5'-hexamethoxyflavone, reported from the flowers shows an oxidation level comparable to those of the leaves.

Flavonol **9**, 3,5,7,8,3',4'-hexamethoxyflavone and 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavanonol are reported for the first time from the _Murraya_, while the latter does not appear to have been recorded previously from the Rutaceae.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_General._ NMR: Bruker ARX 400, with TMS as int. standard; GC-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument; R-HPLC (recycling HPLC): model Shimadzu LC-6AD; the column used was a Shim-pack Prep-Sil (H), 250 x 20 mm, 5 \(\mu\)m particle size, 100 A pore diameter; eluent: hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (5:15:0.3); flow rate: 3.0 ml min-1; detection (Shimadzu SPD-GAV): V \(\lambda\) 254 nm.

_Plant material. Murraya paiculata_ was collected in Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil and vouchers are deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias, USP, Sao Paulo.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c} \hline C & **1** & **2** & **3** & **6** & **4** & **7** & **8** & **5** & 10 \\ \hline
2 & 161.0 & 156.1 & 160.2 & 158.0 & 155.1 & 156.9 & 156.8 & 156.1 & 157.7 \\
3 & 108.3 & 139.6 & 107.8 & 112.3 & 138.8 & 139.2 & 139.2

## Page 4

_Isolation of compounds_. The seeds, peel and pulp of the fresh ripe fruits were sepd by a perforated plate sieve (0.5 mm; tyler 32). The seeds and peel were dried, powdered and successively extracted with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH. The pulp was stirred with MeOH at room temp. The extract was decanted, and the residual pulp similarly extracted a second time. The combined extracts were evapd under vacuum and the residue partitioned into hexane-, CH2Cl2-, MeOH- and _n_-BuOH-soluble frs.

The concd CH2Cl2 extract of peel was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using hexane-Me2CO (9:1), yielding 48 frs. Fr 23 was chromatographed on silica gel using hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (10:10:1) as eluents affording further frs. Fr 23-4 purified x 2 by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 10:10:1) to yield a mixt. of **1** and 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavanonol (40 mg), which was sepd by R-HPLC (detection UV \(l\) 254 nm) to give 1 (1st peak, 18 mg) and 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavanonol (2nd peak, 16 mg), after recycling x 3/Fr 33 was purified by prep. TLC as above to afford **2** (15 mg), **3** (13 mg) and **4** (15 mg). Fr 50 was purified as above affording **5** (20 mg).

The concd hexane-soluble pulp fr. was repeatedly purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-Me2CO, 3:1) to yield **10** (20 mg) and a mixt. of **4** and **9** (15 mg).

The concd CH2Cl2-soluble pulp. fr. was subjected to CC over silica gel. Elution with a hexane-Me2CO gradient afforded **5** (23 mg), 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethoxyflavonol (20 mg), **3** (22 mg) and a mixt. of **2** and 3,5,7,8,3',4'-hexamethoxyflavonol (38 mg) which was purified by RP-HPLC as above.

5-_Hydroxy_-3,7,8,3',4',5'-_hexamethoxyflavone_ (4). Yellow plates; UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{CHCl}}\), nm: 276, 309; IR _v_\({}_{\max}\) (KBr) cm-1: 3400, 1630. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): Table 2; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): Table 1. MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 403 [M - Me]+ (100), 207 (22), 181 (4).

8-_Hydroxy_-3,5,7,3',4',5'-_hexamethoxyflavone_ (5). Amorphous solid; UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{CHCl}}\); nm: 260, 358; IR _v_\({}_{\max}\) (KBr) cm-1: 3450, 1670. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): Table 2; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): Table 1. MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 418 [M]+ (100), 403 [M - Me]+ (43), 207 (62), 196 (6), 181 (25).

5-_Hydroxy_-3,7,8,3',4'-_pentamethoxyflavone_ (9). Yellow powder (trace of **9** with **4**). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): Table 2. GC-MS of **9**: (GC: HP-1 column 50 m x 0.25 mm programmed from 100-200\({}^{\circ}\) at 8.0\({}^{\circ}\) min-1) \(R\) 32.930 min. MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 388 [M]+ (45), 373 [M - Me]+ (100), 181 (6) 177 (7).

###### Acknowledgements.

 The authors are grateful to the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for financial support. One of us (R.J.F.) acknowledges FAPESP for the award of a scholarship

## References

* [1] Imai, F., Kinoshita, T. and Sankawa, U., _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_, 1989, **37**, 358.
* [2] Ramstad, E., Lin, W. C., Lin, T. J. and Koo, W. Y., _Tetrahedron Letters_, 1968, 811.
* [3] Agrawal, P. K., _Carbon_-13 _NMR of Flavonoids_. Elsevier, New York, 1989.
* [4] Rao, M. M., Gupta, P. S., Krishna, E. M. and Singh, P. P., _Indian Journal of Chemistry_, 1979, **17B**, 178.
* [5] Passador, E. A. P., Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Rodrigues Fo., E., Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C. and Pirani, J. R., _Photochemistry_, 1997, **45**, 1533.
* [6] Bishay, D. W., El-Sayyad, S. M., Abad, E. H. M. A., Achenbach, H. and Desoky, E. K., _Bulletin of Pharmaceutical Sciences_, 1987, **10**, 55.
* [7] Imai, F., Itoh, K., Kishibuchi, N., Kinoshita, T. and Sankawa, U., _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_, 1989, **37**, 119.
* [8] Ahsan, M., Armstrong, J. A., Gibbons, S., Gray, A. I. and Waterman, P. G., _Phytochemistry_, 1994, **37**, 259.
* [9] Chkhikivishvili-I-D, Gogiya-N-N and Shalashvili-A-G, _Prikladnaya Biokhimiya i Mikrobiologiya_, 1993, **29**, 604.
* [10] Dreyer, D. L., _The Journal of Organic Chemistry_, 1968, **33**, 3574.
* [11] Talapatra, S. K., Mallik, A. K. and Talapatra, B., _Journal of Indian Chemical Society_, 1982, **59**, 534.
* [12] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Gottlieb, O. R. and Ehrendorfer, F., _Plant Systematics and Evolution_, 1988, **16**, 97.
* [13] Yang, J. S. and Du, M. H., _Zhtivu Xuebao_, 1984, **26**, 184.
* [14] Ito, C. and Furukawa, H., _Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin_, 1987, **35**, 4277.
* [15] Wu, T. S., Chan, Y. Y., Leu, Y. L. and Huang, S. C., _Phytochemistry_, 1994, **37**, 287.



