# 10.1016@j.tetasy.2010.09.004.pdf

## Page 1

Absolute configuration reassignment of two chromanes from _Peperonia obtusifolia_ (Piperaceae) using VCD and DFT calculations

Joao Marcos Batista Jr., Andrea N. L. Batista, Daniel Rinaldo, Wagner Vilegas, Quezia B. Cass, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Massuo J. Kato, Silvia N. Lopez, Maysa Furlan, Laurence A. Nafie

# Abstract

Previous analysis of the ECD spectra of two prenylated benzopyrans isolated from _Peperonia obtusifolia_, by means of the helicity rule for the chromane chromophore, resulted in the incorrect assignment of their absolute configuration, (_S_) instead of (_R_) for a deduced _P_-helicity of the chromane ring for the (+)-enan-tionmers. This was discovered by the application of DFT calculations and VCD spectroscopy. Experimental and calculated (B3LYP/6-31G(d)) VCD and IR spectra were compared, and a definitive absolute configuration of (+)-1 and (+)-2 is reassigned directly in solution as (_R_). The assumption of equatorial positioning of bulky groups, shown here to be invalid for the title molecules, is the underlying cause of the previous incorrect assignment of absolute configuration. Moreover, TDDFT (B3LYP/6-311+G(2d,2p)/B3LYP/6-31G(d)) calculations of ECD spectra have shown that both _P_- and _M_-helicity of the heterocyclic ring. for a given absolute configuration, lead to the same sign for the \({}^{1}\)Ls ECD band, thus bringing into question the validity of the empirical ECD helicity rule for chromane molecules.

## Introduction

Electronic circular dichroism (ECD), which arises from the differential absorption for left and right circularly polarized light by a chiral molecule, has been proven to be an invaluable technique in determining the absolute configuration of 2-substituted chromane derivatives.1 These compounds have been widely investigated using ECD and in fact, a well-established empirical rule exists, relating the sign of the long-wavelength \({}^{1}\)Ls ECD band to the chiral conformation, that is, the _P_- or _M_-helicity, assumed by the dihydropyrane ring.2-5

Footnote 1: \({}^{\circ}\)Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +1 315 443 5912.

It is widely accepted in ECD spectroscopy that the \({}^{1}\)Ls ECD band for chromane derivatives is determined by the _P_- or _M_-helicity assumed by the heterocyclic ring, which is in turn assumed to be governed by the position assumed by the substituents at C-2 (Fig. 1). In this regard, most of the data for this class of compounds indicate that bulky alkyl chains preferentially occupy an equatorial position.3-6 Based on these rules and observations the absolute configurations of two chiral chromanes, peperobtusin A **1** and 3,4-dihydro-5-hydroxy-2,7-dimethyl-8-(3'-methyl-2''-butenyl)-2-(4'-methyl-1',3'-pentadienyl)-2H-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylic acid **2**, isolated as racemates from the leaves of _Peperonia obtusifolia_ (Piperaceae)7 were previously determined8 (ECD data for **1** are part of unpublished results) as (_S_) assuming _P_-helicity for the chromane ring. For these molecules, an equatorial position was assumed for the isoprenyl group, an assumption shown in this paper to be invalid for these molecules.

Footnote 8: \({}^{\circ}\)Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +1 315 443 5912.

A reinvestigation of the stereochemistry of these two chromanes using density functional theory (DFT) calculations and vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) spectroscopy has revealed that the absolute configuration of these molecules is (_R_) with _P_-helicity of the chromane ring of the (+)- enantiomers, which is the opposite absolute configuration of the previously assigned (_S_)-configuration for the same deduced _P_-helicity. The conformational analysis along with the VCD experimental data confirmed that the bulky isoprenoid chain at C-2 preferentially adopts the axial position, contrary to the assumption of the equatorial positioning of the chromane helicity rule, within the half-chair conformation. This result explains the previous incorrect assignment of the absolute configuration. Beyond this finding, time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations of the ECD spectra also showed that both _P_- and _M_-helicity of the heterocyclic ring, for a given absolute configuration (a diastereomeric pair of structures), lead to the same sign within the \({}^{1}\)Ls ECD band for **1** and **2**. This result calls into question the validity of the helicity rule for the chromomae chromophore since for these TDDFT calculations, the absolute 

## Page 2

configuration at the C-2 center has a greater influence on the sign of the \({}^{1}\)I\({}_{\text{b}}\) ECD band than does the helicity of the chromane ring.

Herein we report the use of VCD spectroscopy to correct the previous assignment of the absolute configuration of the enantiomers of two natural racemic chromances, isolated from _P. obtusifolia_ and resolved by chiral chromatography. The absolute configurations of both (+)-**1** and (+)-**2** were determined to be (_R_) for a chromane conformational helicity of \(P\). In addition, the predominant solution-state conformers of the molecules in CDCl3 at room temperature are identified. The TDDFT calculations of the ECD spectra also corroborated the new assignment and called into question the generality of the chromane helicity rule.

## Experimental part

### Isolation and resolution of the racemic chromanes

Compounds **1** and **2** were isolated, as racemic mixtures ([\(\begin{equation*}\left\{\omega_{\text{D}}^{25}=0\;(c\;1.0,\;\text{CHCl}_{3})\right\}\end{equation*}\)), from the leaves of _P. obtusifolia_ (Pipera-ceae) following the methodology previously described.7 Racemic resolutions were achieved by semi-preparative HPLC using Shimadzu LC-6AD and Daicel Chiralcel OD-H chiral column (250 x 10 mm, 5 mm) following the methodology already described,8 except for the addition of 0.1% of HOAc to the mobile phase. The enantiomeric excess (ee >=99%) for each resolved enantiomer was determined by HPLC using commercial analytical chiral column Chiralcel OD-H (250 x 4.6 mm, 5 mm, 0.5% EtOH/hexanes with 0.1% HOAc, 0.7 mL/min, 254 nm).

For compound **1**, the (-)-enantiomer [(\(\begin{equation*}\left\{\omega_{\text{D}}^{25}=-80\;(c\;0.45,\;\text{CHCl}_{3})\right\}\end{equation*}\)) with \(k\) = 14.9 eluted first, followed by the (+)-enantiomer [(\(\begin{equation*}\left\{\omega_{\text{D}}^{25}=+80\;(c\;0.45,\;\text{CHCl}_{3})\right\}\end{equation*}\)) with \(k\) = 19.7. Regarding compound (2, the (-)-enantiomer [(\(\begin{equation*}\left\{\omega_{\text{D}}^{25}=-6.0\;(c\;0.3,\;\text{CHCl}_{3})\right\}\end{equation*}\)) with \(k\) = 9.7 eluted first, followed by the (+)-enantiomer [(\begin{equation*}\left\{\omega_{\text{D}}^{25}=+6.0\;(c\;0.3,\;\text{CHCl}_{3})\right\}\end{equation*}\)) with \(k\) = 11.4.

### Spectroscopic methods

The IR and VCD spectra of the enantiomers of **1** and **2** were recorded with a modified Dual-PEM ChiralIRIRTM FT-VCD spectrometer (BioTools, Jupiter, FL) using a resolution of 4 cm-1 and a collection time of 11 h. The optimum retardation of the two ZnSe photoelastic modulators (PEMs) was set at 1400 cm-1. VCD spectra were measured with the dual-PEM option by subtracting in real time the VCD spectra associated with each of the two PEMs as previously described.9 An optical band-pass filter was used to allow only the spectroscopic region 800-2000 cm-1 to reach the detector. Spectra were calibrated automatically, using the standard calibration files. VCD spectra were recorded in CDCl3 solution (5 mg of each compound in 100 mL of CDCl3 in a BaF2 cell with 100 mm path length). Minor instrumental baseline offsets were eliminated from the final VCD spectra by subtracting the VCD spectra of the enantiomer and its antipode and dividing by 2.

Optical rotations at 589 nm were recorded in chloroform on a Perkin Elmer 241 polarimeter, at 25 degC, using a 10 cm cell. The ECD spectra of each enantiomer in 0.5% EtOH/hexanes (concn 0.5 mg/mL) were recorded by direct injection on a Jasco CD-2095 detector in a 1.0 cm quartz cell.

### Computational methods

All DFT and TDDFT calculations were carried out at 298 K in the gas phase with CAUSIAN 03 and/or 09.10 For the conformational search as well as VCD and ECD calculations, the absolute configuration (_R_) was chosen. In order for the calculations to be simplified, the first steps of the conformational search and geometry optimization were carried out for a fragment molecule of each compound (Fig. 2). The conformational search with the fragments was carried out at the molecular mechanics level of theory employing MM+ and MMFF force fields incorporated in Hyperchem (Hypercube, Gainesville, FL) and Spartan (Wavefunction, Irvine, CA) software packages, respectively.

For the fragment of compound **1**, conformers with relative energy (rel _E_) within 6 kcal/mol of the lowest-energy conformer

Figure 1: Structure of the racemic chromanes **1** and **2** isolated from _Preparina obtusifolia_ and helicity rule or sign of the second sphere contribution to the \({}^{1}\)I\({}_{\text{b}}\) band CD. The straight arrow stands for the electric transition moment vector (□).

Figure 2: Fragment molecules used in the first optimization steps for **1** and **2**.



## Page 3

were selected and further geometry optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. From the 44 conformers calculated, 24 (Boltzmann distribution >= 2%) were selected to build up the whole molecule **1**. After adding the isoprenyl groups, a new conformational search was carried out at the molecular mechanics level of theory, but this time, the pre-optimized cores were constrained. As a result, 53 conformers (rel <= 3 kcal/mol) were found and geometry optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. From 10 conformers with rel <= 1.4 kcal/mol, the 4 lowest-energy conformers, which correspond to 75% of the total Boltzmann distribution, were considered for IR and VCD spectral calculation.

For the fragment of compound **2** a similar approach was used. From the conformational search, conformers with rel <= 6 kcal/mol of the lowest-energy conformer were selected and further geometry optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. Among the 54 conformers calculated, 11 (Boltzmann distribution >= 2%) were selected to build up the whole molecule **2**. In order to obtain a better agreement between experimental and calculated data, beyond this point all subsequent calculations were carried out considering this molecule as a dimer **2** (hydrogen bonded to formic acid to simulate an carboxylic acid dimer at the molecule-molecule interface).11 After adding the isoprenyl groups, a new conformational search was carried out at the molecular mechanics level of theory, but now with the pre-optimized cores constrained. As a result, 48 conformers (rel <= 3 kcal/mol) were found and geometry optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. Among the 8 conformers with rel <= 1.4 kcal/mol, the 4 lowest-energy conformers, which correspond to 80% of the total Boltzmann distribution, were considered for the IR and VCD spectral calculation. For this compound bearing a carboxylic acid, no torsions were selected within this group because additional experimental data ('H NMR, \(d\) 11.5, s, 1H) revealed the phenolic OH strongly H-bonded with the carbonyl group.12

Dipole and rotational strengths from GAUSSIAN were converted into molar absorptivities (M-1 cm-1), and each spectrum was plotted as a sum of Lorentzian bands with half-widths of 6 cm-1. The calculated wavenumbers were multiplied with a scaling factor of 0.97 and the Boltzmann-population-weighted composite spectra were plotted using Origin software (OriginLab, Northampton, MA).

In order to accurately compare the calculated and experimental IR and VCD data, the recently developed confidence level algorithm Compare_VOA_ (BioTools, Inc., Jupiter, FL) was used, which provides a direct quantitative comparison of experimental and calculated spectra as a measure of the degree of agreement and hence level of confidence.13,14 It also provides the enantiomeric similarity index (ESI) for the given configuration and the position of this value within an internal database of correct VCD assignments.

For the ECD calculations, the same four lowest-energy conformers of **1** and **2** (without dimer linkage) considered for VCD were selected. TDDFT was employed to calculate the excitation energy (in nm) and rotatory strength \(R\) in dipole velocity (_R_vel) form, at the B3LYP/6-311++G(2d,2p) level of theory. The calculated rotatory strengths from the first 20 singlet--singlet electronic transitions were simulated into an ECD curve using GAUSSIAN band shapes and 10 nm half-width at half-peak height. The predicted wavelength transitions are used as such without any scaling. The adequacy of B3LYP/6-31G(d) for the optimization of geometry and calculation of IR and VCD spectra as well as B3LYP/6-311++G(2d,2p) for ECD calculations have been previously demonstrated.15,16

## 3 Results and discussion

The absolute configurations at C-2 for the enantiomers of **1** and **2** were assessed after comparison of the experimental VCD data with those obtained by quantum-mechanical calculations (B3LYP/6-31G(d)). For compound **1**, such a comparison unambiguously confirms the (+)-enantiomer to have an (_R_)-absolute configuration (Fig. 3). The analysis of the VCD spectra also reveals the conformer population in solution. The presence of the strong fundamentals 77, 88, and 89, almost absent in conformer 4, confirms the isoprenyl group at C-2, for the lowest-energy conformers of **1**, predominantly in the axial position, as predicted by the calculations (Fig. 4). The other configurationally changing feature is the flexible prepuly group attached to the aromatic ring. For this assignment, the output of the confidence level algorithm was as follows: ESI = 76.6 and Confidence Level of 100%. This value of the ESI lies at the 85th percentile in the database for correct assignments.

For compound **2**, a very similar scenario is presented. The analysis of the IR and VCD spectra confirms the (+)-enantiomer to also have an (_R_)-absolute configuration at C-2 (Fig. 5) and the lowest-energy conformers to predominantly accommodate the isoprenyl group in the axial position (Fig. 6). All the fundamentals, except number 125, were accurately predicted both in frequency and intensity by the calculations. The fundamental 125 is due to C=O stretch of the formic acid used to form the dimer linkage.

For this assignment, the output of the confidence level algorithm was the ESI = 82.2 and a Confidence Level of 100%, which lies at the 91st percentile in the database for correct assignments. Furthermore, the almost perfect match between the calculated and experimental VCD spectra as well as the unusual shorter retention time for a more polar compound in normal-phase chromatography confirms **2** as an H-bonded acid dimer in apolar solvents.

The finding of the isoprenyl group in the axial position is quite interesting since in most of the publications regarding benzo-pyrans,3-6 including the previous assignment of the absolute

Figure 3: Comparison of the VCD and IR spectra of the measured (+)-**1** with the calculated VCD and IR spectra of the Boltzmann average of the four lowest-energy conformers of the corresponding (_R_)-**1**. The comparison establishes the absolute configuration of this molecule as (+)-(_R_)-**1**.



## Page 4

configuration of **2**,8 the bulky substituents are assumed to be in equatorial positions. This assumption basically governs the interpretation of the ECD spectra based on the helicity rule of the chromame chromophore (Fig. 1). Upon changing the bulky substituent from the axial to the equatorial position, the heterocyclic half-chair changes its helicity (dihedral angle C-8a, O, C-2, C-3). A negative dihedral angle C-8a, O, C-2, C-3 is referred to as _M_-helicity and gives rise to a positive Cotton effect within the 1Lb band.3 Analogously, a positive dihedral angle corresponds to _P_-helicity and gives rise to a negative ECD band for the 1Lb transition.

However, the prediction of the ECD spectra using TDDFT methods uncovered a possible exception to the chromame helicity rule. Both the first three lowest-energy conformers of **2**, which present positive helicity \(P\) (positive C-8a, O, C-2, C-3 dihedral angle), and conformer 4, which presents negative helicity \(M\) (negative C-8a, O, C-2, C-3 dihedral angle), yielded a negative 1Lb CD band (_l_ 260-290 nm). These results are in perfect agreement with the experimental data (Fig. 7).

As described beforehand, the same optimized conformers taken into account for the VCD calculations were considered for the TDDFT ECD calculations, with the only modification being the Boltzmann population, since the relative conformer energies differ slightly with the basis set.17 Figure 7 presents the experimental and calculated ECD spectra for compound **2**, corroborating the new assignment of its absolute configuration.

Ever since its development,2 the helicity rule for the chromame chromophore has been investigated for different substituents in the aromatic ring. Antus et al. (2001)3 reported that methoxy and/or hydroxyl groups at C2, C3, C5, and/or C7 do not change the chromame helicity rule, meaning that substituted chromame derivatives can also be analyzed using this technique. Even a hydroxyl group substituted at C-6 does not put a limit to the empirical rule.5 Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge this is the first time that a molecule bearing a methyl group at C-7, a hydroxyl group at C-5, and a carboxylic acid at C-6 has been investigated. The latter might be responsible for the break in the chromame helicity rule as presented for **2**.

Figure 4.: Calculated VCD spectra, optimized structures, and relative energies of the four lowest-energy conformers of (_R_)-**1**.

Figure 5.: Comparison of the VCD and IR spectra of the measured (+)-**2** with the calculated VCD and IR spectra of the Boltzmann average of the four lowest-energy conformers of the corresponding (_R_)-**2**. The comparison establishes the absolute configuration of this molecule as (+)-(_R_)-**2**.



## Page 5

Nevertheless, the effect of the carboxylic acid was not confirmed by the analysis of the ECD spectra of compound **1**. TDDFT calculations for (_R_)**-1** also predicted a weak negative Cotton effect at approximately 275 nm for virtually all of the conformers considered, including that with negative C-8a, O, C-2, C-3 dihedral angle (_M_-helicity, conformer 4), which is in close agreement with the experimental data (Fig. 8). Therefore, empirical rules should be used with care due to the presence of a few bands in the ECD spectrum and the possibility of complex interactions in the excited electronic state between different chromophores within a given molecule.

From the analysis of the VCD spectra, however, there is no doubt left, given the wealth of bands and the ease to predict them from properties of the ground electronic state using DFT calculations.

## Conclusions

The VCD study of the enantiomers of **1** and **2** provides their absolute configuration assignment as (+)-(_R_) and (-)-(_S_) at C-2, not consistent with the earlier suggested assignment from the application of the chromane helicity rule for the ECD spectra [1, 8]. Herein the solution conformations of these compounds in CDCl3 have also been identified, pointing out the predominance of the conformations with the bulky isoprenyl chain in the axial position. This seems to be especially true for substituents with an sp\({}^{2}\) carbon attached to the stereogenic center (C-2).

The TDDFT calculations of the ECD spectra of **1** and **2** corroborate the new assignment and suggest the possible breakdown in the chromane helicity rule for such compounds since both _P_- and _M_-helicity of the chromane ring in these compounds yield the

Figure 6: Calculated VCD spectra, optimized structures, and relative energies of the four lowest-energy conformers of (_R_)**-2**.

Figure 7: On the left, experimental ECD spectra of the enantiomers of **2** assigned as (−)-(_S_) (dotted line) and (+)-(_R_) (solid line), on the right, calculated ECD spectra [83LYP/6-311+C(2,2,4)/[83LYP/6-31C(d)] of the Boltzmann average of the four lowest-energy conformers of the corresponding (_R_)**-2** (red) and conformers 1–4; conformer 2 (blue, 43%), conformer 1 (green, 23%), conformer 3(yellow, 20%), and conformer 4 (brown, 14%). The bars represent the rotational strengths for the weighted ECD spectrum.



## Page 6

same sign for the Cotton effect of the \({}^{1}\)I\({}_{b}\) ECD band for the same absolute configuration at the C-2 chiral center. These computation results indicate that the sign of this ECD transition is influenced more by the chirality at the C-2 carbon than the helicity of the chromane ring.

As demonstrated in several published papers and confirmed here, VCD is a more accurate and powerful method compared with all previous spectroscopic approaches to absolute configuration determination using various forms of optical activity, including ECD.[18] VCD does not suffer from exceptions to rules since it is straightforward to calculate on an equal basis all structural sources of chirality (stereogenic centers and ring helicities) in any molecule following the required full and complete conformational analysis of the molecule in the ground electronic state. A general recommendation that follows from this study is that any future application of the chromane helicity rule includes a thorough conformational analysis of the compound considered to determine whether assumed equatorial or axial conformations of the substituent are satisfied. Beyond this recommendation, such a conformational analysis would best be followed by comparison of measured and calculated VCD spectra, if available, as demonstrated in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Professor Prasad L. Polavarapu for providing the software for ECD simulations and to Professor Teresa B. Freedman for her help in the initial stages of this work. This work was supported with grants provided by the State of Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the BIOTA/FAPESP\(-\)Biodi-University Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br) (2003/02176-7). J.M.B.J. wishes to thank FAPESP for the provision of scholarship (2008/58658-3) and The Brazilian Federal Agency for Support and Evaluation of Graduate Education (CAPES), within the PDE program (3686/09-4), for the international scholarship. S.N.L. wishes to thank CONICET and FONCYT. W.V., Q.B.C., M.J.K., V.S.B., and M.F. are also grateful to the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for research fellowships.

## References

* (1) Cichewicz, R. H.; Kenyon, V. A.; Whitman, S.; Morales, N. M.; Arguello, J. F.; Holam, T. R.; Crews, P. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **2004**, _126_, 14910-14920.
* (2) Snatzke, G.; Ho, P. C. _Terrahedron_**1971**, _27_, 3645-3653.
* (3) Artus, S.; Kurtan, T.; Juhasz, L.; Kiss, I.; Hollosi, M.; Majer, Z. S. _Chirality_**2001**, _13_, 493-506.
* (4) Slade, D.; Ferreira, D.; Marais, J. P. J. _Pytochemistry_**2005**, _66_, 2177-2215.
* (5) Mazzini, F.; Vescifelli, G.; di Bari, L.; Nestcher, T.; Salvatori, P. _Chirality_**2009**, _21_, 35-43.
* (6) Kikuchi, T.; Mori, Y.; Yokoi, T.; Nakazawa, S.; Kuroda, H.; Masada, Y.; Kitamura, K.; Kuriyama, K. _Chem. Pharm._**1988**, _139_, 106-113.
* (7) Mota, J. S.; Leite, A. C.; Batista, J. M., Jr.; Lopez, S. N.; Ambrosio, D. L.; Passerini, G. D.; Kato, M. J.; Bolzani, V. S.; Cicarelli, R. M. B.; Furlan, M. _Planta Med._**2009**, _75_, 620-623.
* (8) Batista, J. M.; Jr.; Lopez, S. N.; Mota, J. S.; Vanzolini, K. L.; Cass, Q. B.; Rinaldo, D.; Vilegas, W.; Solzani, D. V.; Kato, M. J.; Furlan, M. _Chirality_**2009**, _21_, 799-801.
* (9) Naife, L. A. _Appl. Spectros._**2000**, _564_, 1364-1365.
* (10) Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, J. R.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V.; Huchnucci, B.; Petersson, G. A.; Nakatsii, H.; Caricato, M. J.; Li, X.; Harchatan, H.; Izmaylov, A. F.; Bloino, J.; Zheng, G.; Sonnenberg, J. L.; Hada, M.; Ehara, M.; Toyota, K.; Fukuda, R.; Hasegawa, J.; Ishida, M.; Nakajima, T.; Honda, Y.; Kitao, O.; Nakai, H.; Treven, T.; Montgomery, J. A.; Jr.; Feratta, J. E.; Ogliaro, F.; Bearpark, M.; Heyd, J. J.; Brothers, E.; Kudin, K. N.; Staroverov, V. N.; Kobayashi, N.; Normand, J.; Raghavachari, K.; Rendell, A.; Brantant, J. C.; Iyengar, S. S.; Tomasi, J.; Gosk, T.; Rega, N.; Millam, J. M.; Kleene, M.; Knox, J. E.; Cross, J. B.; Bakken, V.; Adamo, C.; Jaramillo, J.; Gomperts, R.; Stratmann, R. E.; Yazyev, O.; Austin, A. J.; Camm, R.; Pompelli, C.; Cutterski, J. V.; Martin, R. I.; Mordovan, K.; Zakzewski, V. G.; Voth, G. A.; Salvador, P.; Dannenberg, J. J.; Dapprich, S.; Daniels, A. D.; Farkas, O.; Foresman, J. B.; Ortiz, J. V.; Goloswinski, J.; Fox, D. J. _C._ _subsur_ 09, _Revision A02_, _Gaussian Inc.; Wallingford_ 07, 2009.
* (11) Freedman, T. B.; Cao, X.; Phillips, L. M.; Cheng, P. T. W.; Dalterio, R.; Shu, Y. Z.; Zhang, H.; Zhao, N.; Shukla, R. B.; Tymik, A.; Gozo, S. K.; Naife, L. A.; Gozo, S. J. _Chirality_**2006**, _18_, 746-753.
* (12) Burke, S. J.; Jacobs, H.; Mclean, S.; Reynolds, W. F. _Magn. Reson. Chem._**2003**, _41_, 145-146.
* (13) Debie, E.; Buttinck, P.; Nafie, L. A. _CompareVOA_, BioTools, Inc.; Jupiter, FL, 2010.
* (14) Reina, M.; Burbeneghe-Tapia, E.; Bucio, M. A.; Joseph-Nathan, P. _Photochemistry_**2010**, _71_, 810-815.
* (15) Andersen, N. H.; Christensen, N. J.; Lassen, P. R.; Freedman, T. B. N.; Nafie, L. A.; Stromgaard, R.; Hemingrissen, D. _Clirality_**2010**, _22_, 217-223.
* (16) Polavarapu, P. L.; Jejterink, N.; Walla, S. _J. Phys. Chem. A_**2009**, _113_, 5423-5431.
* (17) Freedman, T. B.; Cao, X.; Dukor, R. K.; Nafie, L. A. _Chirality_**2003**, _15_, 743-758.
* (18) Nafie, L. A. _Nat. Prod. Commun._**2008**, \(3\), 451-466.

Figure 8: On the left, experimental ECD spectra of the enantiomers of **1** assigned as \((-)\)-\((S)\) (dotted line) and \((+)\)-\((R)\) (solid line). On the right, calculated ECD spectra (B31Y/6-311+\(\zeta\)(2\(\_\)2d)/B31Y/6-31C(d)) of the Boltzmann average of the four lowest-energy conformers of the corresponding (\(R\))-**1** (red) and conformers 1-**4**; conformer 1 (blue, 46%), conformer 3 (green, 19%), conformer 2 (yellow, 18%), and conformer 4 (brown, 17%). The bars represent the rotational strengths for the weighted ECD spectrum.



