# 10.1016@j.bmc.2005.04.030.pdf

## Page 1



# New selective acetylcholinesterase inhibitors designed from natural piperidine alkaloids

Claudio Viegas, Jr., Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Luisa S. B. Pimentel, Newton G. Castro, Rafael F. Cabral, Rodrigo S. Costa, Corinne Floyd, Monica S. Rocha, Maria C. M. Young, Eliezer J. Barreiro, Carlos A. M. Fraga

# Abstract

Five new piperidine alkaloids were designed from natural (-)-3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline and (-)-spectaline that were obtained from the flowers of _Sema spectabilis_ (sin. _Cassia spectabilis_, Leguminosae). Two semi-synthetic analogues (**7** and **9**) inhibited rat brain acetylcholinesterase, showing IC50 of 7.32 and 15.1 uM, and were 21 and 9.5 times less potent against rat brain butyrylcholinesterase, respectively. Compound **9** (1 mg/kg, ip) was fully efficacious in reverting scopolamine-induced amnesia in mice. The two active compounds (**7** and **9**) did not show overt toxic effects at the doses tested in vivo.

Piperidine alkaloids; Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors; Alzheimer's disease; _Sema spectabilis_.

## 1 Introduction

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a late-onset, progressive and eventually fatal neurodegenerative disorder whose prevalence is increasing together with the life expectancy throughout the world. Because cognitive deficits in AD are associated with the disruption of central cholinergic transmission, cholinergic-boosting drugs have been the mainstay of current therapy.1 Tacrine (THA, Cognex(r), **1**) was the first synthetic drug approved by the USA Food and Drug Administration for AD treatment. This substance is a centrally-acting cholinesterase inhibitor (ChEI) that shows moderate effect in relieving AD symptoms of mild and medium intensity. However, its application became limited due to serious side effects, like hepatotoxicity that forced patients to discontinue the treatment.2 Besides THA, currently there are three other ChEI drugs available in USA and Europe for AD treatment: donepezil (**2**, Aricept(r)), rivastigmine (**3**, Exelon(r)), and galanthamine (**4**, Reminyl(r)) (Fig. 1). Of these, compounds **1**, **2**, and **4** are reversible inhibitors, while **3** acts pseudo-irreversibly. These compounds also differ with regard to selectivity for acetyl- (AChE) versus butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE) and central versus peripheral activity.3 Galanthamine (**4**) is a natural product that has the additional effect of allosterically potentiating nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, and it has been used as a prototype in anti-cholinesterase drug development.2,4

The structural diversity of known ChEIs and the possibility to explore distinct modes of action have stimulated phytochemical studies with plant and microorganism species that can furnish new anti-cholinesterase structural motifs. In this context, various species have been investigated as possible sources of ChEIs based on ethn-obotanic data or reports of their popular use.5

In the search for new bioactive agents, we have recently isolated the new piperidine alkaloid, (-)-3-_O_-acetyl

## Page 2

spectaline (**5**) along with a large amount of (-)-spectaline (**6**) from _Semna spectabilis_.6-8 A detailed analysis of the structure of **5** allows one to recognize an acetycholine moiety internalized in the molecule (Fig. 2). This observation led us to design derivatives that could be active as ChE inhibitors. In this paper we report the semi-synthetic preparation of five piperidine alkaloid derivatives (compounds 7-**11**) and the pharmacological study by using Ellman's assay,9 tests of scopolamine-induced amnesia and acute toxicity.

## Results and discussion

### Chemistry

For the preparation of the target derivatives **7-11** from _O_-acetyl-spectaline (**5**) and (-)-spectaline (**6**) we followed the synthetic route outlined in Scheme 1. Carbonate derivative **12** was obtained in 60% yield after its column chromatography purification from a 2:1 mixture with carbamate **13**, resulting from treatment of **6** with (Boc)2O/Et3N in CH2Cl2.10,11 On the other hand, chemoselective reduction of keto-carbonyl group of derivative **5** with NaBH4 in MeOH furnished the diastereomeric mixture of alcohols **14**, in 97% yield. Next, treatment of the piperidine derivatives **5**, **6**, **12**, and **14** with HCl in CH2Cl2, under anhydrous conditions, yielded almost quantitatively the corresponding hydrochlorides **7**, **8**, **9**, and **10**. Additionally, tertiary ammonium derivative **11** was prepared in 50% yield by treatment of acetate **5** with methyl iodide in acetone at reflux. Alternatively, compound **7** could be prepared in 95% yield from more abundant natural (-)-spectaline7 (**6**) through its direct treatment with acetyl chloride in anhydrous chloroform. All structures were in agreement with analytical and spectral data.12

### Pharmacology

The bioactivity of compounds **7-11** as inhibitors of mammalian central nervous system cholinesterases was investigated in rat brain tissue, as previously described.13 Concentration-response curves were obtained

Figure 1: Marketed cholinesterase inhibitors tacrine (1), donepezil (2), rivastigmine (3), and galanthamine (4).

Figure 2: Structural design of new piperidine derivatives (**7–11**) from natural _Semna_ sp. alkaloids (**5** and **6**).



## Page 3

for all new compounds **7**-**11**, and their mean inhibitory concentration (IC50) was estimated (Table 1). Compounds **7** and **9** were effective inhibitors of AChE, showing mean IC50's of 7.32 and 15.1 mM, respectively. On the other hand, compounds **8** and **10**-**11** achieved less than 50% inhibition at the highest concentration tested (200 mM), therefore their IC50's should be considered rough estimates. The presence of the acetyl group in **7** conferred a 30-times gain in potency with respect to (-)-spectaline hydrochloride (**8**), prepared from the more abundant natural alkaloid (**6**). The anti-cholines-terase activity of **7** is consistent with the hypothesis of an acetylcholine-mimicking property of the molecule (Fig. 2). Thus, the _N_-methyl substitution in the piperidine ring in **11** would be expected to increase potency, because of the greater similarity with the ammonium group in acetylcholine. However, the inhibitory potency was markedly reduced in **11**, suggesting that the methyl group introduced steric hindrance to the ionic interaction of the charged nitrogen.

This unfavorable behavior might occur with **11**, but not with acetylcholine, because of conformational constraints imposed by the ring structure. Addition of the _t_-Boc group to the acetyl moiety in **9** slightly reduced the potency in comparison with **7**. The difference between **7** and **9** may be analogous to that between acetylcholine and butyrylcholine with respect to AChE.14 Compounds **7** and **9** were then chosen for testing in a rat brain BuChE assay, in order to assess their selectivity and to further explore the analogy with the choline esters. Compounds **7** and **8** showed similar IC50 in the BuChE assay, both being less potent than in the AChE assay. Their selectivity indices (SI) of 21 and 9.5 (for **7** and **9**, respectively) are higher than that of the standard centrally acting inhibitor, THA (**1**) (Table 1) or galan-thamine (**4**).15 The observation that brain BuChE did not distinguish the compounds with and without the _t_-Boc subunit is further evidence that the choline ester-like motif may interact with the enzyme by mimicking the substrates.

The selected compounds **7** and **9** were tested in vivo for their ability to prevent scopolamine-induced amnesia in 

## Page 4

two tasks, passive avoidance and water maze.16,17 In the passive-avoidance test, the step-down latency in the training session was around 5 s in all experimental groups (4.8 +- 0.3 s for all animals). Mice were tested for retention of the avoidance task 24 h after the training procedure. The control animals showed a 15-fold increase in the step-down latency in this test session, remaining on the wooden platform for 79.3 +- 10.6 s (_n_ = 22). Animals given the centrally acting muscarinic receptor antagonist scopolamine showed amnesia, with a step-down latency of 16.8 +- 6.4 s (_n_ = 19) in the test session. This amnesia was reverted by pre-treatment with the potent cholinesterase inhibitor THA (1) (5.6 mg/kg), and animals remained on the platform for 67.5 +- 13.9 s (_n_ = 13). Compound **9** (1 mg/kg) was able to revert the amnesia induced by scopolamine, and the observed step-down latency was 41.6 +- 10.9 s (_n_ = 13) (_p_ < 0.05). Mice treated with compound **7** also showed increased step-down latency, but the effect did not reach significance at the dose tested (1 mg/kg; Table 2).

In the spatial memory test (water maze), in the fourth day of test, control animals were able to localize the hidden platform after 42.3 +- 13.2 s (_n_ = 10), and this ability was disrupted by scopolamine. Treated animals could not remember the position of the platform, showing an escape latency of 115.8 +- 17.2 s (_n_ = 8; maximum time: 150 s). Scopolamine-induced amnesia was antagonized by pre-treatment with THA (1) and compound **7**, and rats had an escape latency of 5.5 +- 4.5 s (_n_ = 4) and 32.2 +- 6.3 s (_n_ = 4), respectively (_p_ < 0.001) (Table 2). Therefore, compound **7** and **9** are effective in antagonizing the amnesia-induced by scopolamine in the water maze and passive-avoidance test, respectively, suggesting that these compounds also act as potent AChE inhibitors in tests in vivo.

Interestingly, none of the animals treated with compound **7** or **9** (up to 10 mg/kg in mice) showed cholinergic side effects like tremor, salivation, diarrhea, or lacrimation. However, we observed diarrhea in 70% of rats and mice treated with THA (1 and 5.6 mg/kg), 15 min after the administration. THA (1) in concentrations of 30 and 50 mg/kg (up to 10 times the concentration effective in reversing the amnesia in mice) also produced splayed hindlimbs and lacrimation in 100% of mice, with moderate to severe tremor and salivation, after 30 min of administration. We also found that THA (1) (30 mg/kg) was lethal to 60% of mice, showing a narrow therapeutic window.

## Conclusion

Our results show that semi-synthetic piperidine alkaloids designed from natural spectaline, such as compounds **7** and **9**, act as cholinesterase inhibitors in vivo with a significant selectivity toward brain acetylcholinesterase. Whether such selectivity is a desirable property in AD has been a matter of considerable debate, because of the evidence of a possible role of BuChE, particularly in late stages of the disease.3 However, recent pre-clinical studies support the earlier belief that AChE-selective inhibitors produce less peripheral side effects.18 The compounds described herein, which can be efficiently prepared from abundant plant material, seem worth developing as candidate drugs for treating patients with Alzheimer's disease.

## Experimental

### Chemistry

Melting points were determined with a Microquimica MQAPF-301 apparatus and are uncorrected. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were determined in dimethylsulfoxide-_d_6 and methanol-_d_4 with a Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer at 500 and 125 MHz, respectively. Splitting patterns were as follows: s, singlet; d, doublet; t, triplet; d, double quadruplet; br, broad; m, multiplet. 1H and 13C NMR assignments were confirmed by gHMQC, gCOSY, and gHMBC experiments. IR spectra were obtained with a Nicolet-1400 FTIR spectrometer using KBr pellets. Prior to concentration under reduced pressure, all organic extracts were dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate powder. The progress of all reactions was monitored by TLC performed on 2.0 x 6.0 aluminum sheets precoated with neutral aluminum oxide (HF-254, Merck) to a thickness of 0.25 mm. The developed chromatograms were viewed by spraying with iodo-chloroplatinate reagent (Merck). For column chromatography Merck neutral aluminum oxide (70-230 mesh) was used. Solvents used in the reactions were dried, redistilled prior to use, and stored over +3-4 A molecular sieves. Reaction mixtures were generally stirred under a dry nitrogen atmosphere.

2r,3r,6s)-2-Methyl-6-(13-oxotetradecyl)piperidine-3-yl acetate (5) and 13-[(2,5,6,6r)-5-hydroxy-6-methylpiperidine]-2-ylltetradecan-2-one (6)

Natural alkaloids (-)-3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (5) and (-)-specilane (6) were obtained from the ethanolic extract of flowers of _S. spectabilis_ (DC.) Irwin et Barn (Leguminosae), as previously described.3-5

### General procedure for the preparation of hydrochloride derivatives 7-10

The corresponding piperidine alkaloid substrate (0.30 mmol) was dissolved in 3 mL of dried dichloromethane, and the reaction mixture was cooled to 0 degC with an ice/NaCl/H2O bath. Then, dried gaseous HCl (generated from a keeper bottle by the mixture of con

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c}  & Passive avoidance & Water maze \\ step-down latency (s) & escape latency (s) \\ \hline Saline + saline & 79.2 ± 10.7 & 42.3 ± 13.8 \\ Saline + scopol. & 16.7 ± 6.4 & 115.7 ± 17.2 \\ THA + scopol. & 67.5 ± 13.9** & 15.5 ± 4.5* \\
**7** + scopol. & 24.8 ± 8.8 & 32.2 ± 6.3* \\
**9** + scopol. & 41.6 ± 10.9** & 123.2 ± 24.8 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Antagonism of amnesia induced by scopolaminea

## Page 5

-centred H2SO4 and 37% aq HCl) was added. The addition of gaseous HCl was maintained for 30 min at room temperature. The solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure, and the crude product was recrystallized from chloroform.

#### 4.3.1 (_2R,3R,6S_)-2-Methyl-6-(13-oxotetradecyl)piperidine-3-yl acetate hydrochloride (7).

Hydrochloride 7 was prepared by the treatment of the natural (-)-3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (5) (0.32 mmol) and anhydrous HCl. Compound 7 was obtained in quantitative yield, as a pale yellow solid, mp 143-145 degC: 1H NMR (500 MHz, CD3OD) d 1.22 (d, 3H, H-7), 1.24-1.27 (m, 18H, H-2' to H-10'), 1.49 (m, 4H, H-4a, H-5a, 2H-11'), 1.86 (m, 2H, H-1'), 1.98 (m, 1H, H-5a, 2.02 (m, 1H, H-4a, c), 2.06 (s, 3H, H-14'), 2.09 (s, 3H, H-2'), 2.41 (t, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, 2H, H-12'), 3.12 (m, 1H, H-6), 3.45 (dq, \(J\) = 2.0, 6.5 Hz, 1H, H-3), 5.04 (m, 1H, H-3); 13C NMR (125 MHz, CD3OD) d 15.5 (C-7), 20.7 (C-2''), 24.1 (C-11'), 24.8 (C-2), 26.2 (C-5), 29.8 (C-14', C-4), 30.2-30.5 (C-3'' to C-10'), 34.6 (C-1'), 44.3 (C-12'), 55.8 (C-2), 58.5 (C-6), 69.2 (C-3), 171.3 (C-1''), 209.5 (C-13'). IR (KBr) cm-1: 3340 (NH2), 1730 (C=O, ester), 1715 (C=O, ketone).

#### 4.3.2. 14-[(2S,5R,6S)-5-Hydroxy-6-methylpiperidin-2-yl]-tetradecan-2-one hydrochloride (8).

Treatment of natural (-)-specaline (6) (0.30 mmol) with anhydrous HCl, yielded compound 8 (98%) as a white solid, mp 151-53 degC: 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_b_) d 1.04 (d, \(J\) = 6.5, 3H, H-7); 1.19 (m, 18H, H-2' to H-10'); 1.28 (m, 2H, H-1'); 1.41 (m, 2H, H-4a, H-5a); 1.50 (m, 2H, H-11'); 1.81 (m, 1H, H-5a); 1.84 (m, 1H, H-4a); 2.06 (s, 3H, H-14'); 2.34 (t, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, 2H, H-12.'); 2.92 (m, 1H, H-6); 3.12 (dq, \(J\) = 1.0, 6.5 Hz, 1H, H-2); 3.69 (br, = 1H, H-3), 8.76 (br, 3H, methanes with D2O, ND3H2); 7.91 (br vs, 1H, exchanges with D2O, NH3+); 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-_d_b_) d 16.0 (C-7), 23.9 (C-11'), 25.3 (C-5), 29.2 (C-14'), 29.4-29.7 (C-2' to C-10'), 30.4 (C-4), 33.3 (C-1'), 43.4 (C-12'), 55.8 (C-2), 56.8 (C-6), 64.8 (C-3), 209.3 (C-13'); IR (KBr) cm-1: 3348 (NH2), 1725 (C=O).

3.3. _tert_-Butyl (2_R,3R,6S_)-2-methyl-6-(13-oxotetradecyl)-piperidin-3-yl carbonate hydrochloride (9).

Compound 6 (1.54 mmol) was dissolved in 15 mL of dried CH2Cl2, under stirring and N2 atmosphere. Then, Et3N (2.156 mmol) and catalytic amount of 4-DMAP were added. After 5 min, a solution of (Boc)2O (1.694 mmol) in 15 mL of dried CH2Cl2 was added and the mixture was stirred for 72 h at room temperature. After total conversion, 10 mL of H2O were added to the reaction mixture, which was next extracted with CHCl3. The organic extract was washed with 2 N HCl, brine, dried over MgSO4, and evaporated. The residue was purified by neutral alumina column chromatography using a chloroform/hexanes/methanol mixture as eluent. The piperidine carbonate derivative, 2-(_R_)-methyl-6-(_S_)-(tetradecyl-13'-one)-3-(_R_)-_O-ter_-butoxycarbonyl piperidine, was obtained in 60% yield (mp 58-60 degC). This carbonate was then reacted with anhydrous HCl to furnish the desired hydrochloride 9, in 98% yield, as a white solid, mp 126-129 degC: 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_b_) d 1.21 (d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, 3H, H-7), 1.22 (s, 9H, 3Me, Boc) 1.23-1.25 (m, 20H, H-2' to H-10'), 1.44 (m, 2H, H-11'), 1.58 (m, 2H, H-4a, H-5a, H-5a, 1.74 (m, 1H, H-5a), 1.77 (m, 1H, H-4a), 1.77 (m, 1H, H-4a), 2.06 (s, 3H, H-14'), 2.39 (t, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, 2H, H-12), 2.91 (m, 1H, H-6), 3.70 (br, 5H, H-2), 5.37 (br, 8 iH, H-3); 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-_d_b_) d 15.1 (C-7), 23.9 (C-11'), 25.3 (C-5), 29.4 (3Me-Boc), 29.5 (C-1' to C-10'), 29.5 (C-4), 30.3 (C-14'), 43.4 (C-12'), 55.8 (C-2), 56.7 (C-6), 65.0 (C-3), 82.0 (C, Boc), 153.6 (C=O, Boc), 208.6 (C-13'); IR (KBr) cm-1: 3338 (NH2), 1728 (C=O, Boc), 1715 (C=O, ketone).

#### 4.3.4. (_2R,3R,6S_)-6-(13-Hydroxytetradecyl)-2-methylpiperidine-3-yl acetate hydrochloride (10).

Natural 3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (5) (0.136 mmol) was added to a stirred solution of NaBH4 (0.272 mmol) in 2 mL of MeOH. The reaction mixture was stirred for 30 min at room temperature, and then was quenched by the addition of 2 mL of saturated NH4Cl solution. After extraction with MeOH, the organic extract was dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate and concentrated. The corresponding 3-_O_-acetyl-13'-hydroxy-specaline was obtained as a pale yellow solid (mp 61-63 degC), in 97% yield. This compound was then reacted with anhydrous HCl to furnish the title hydrochloride 10 (100%), as a pale yellow solid, mp 134-136 degC: 1H NMR (500 MHz, CD3OD) d 1.07 (d, \(J\) = 6.0 Hz, 3H, H-14'), 1.23 (d, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, 3H, H-7), 1.26 (m, 20H, H-1' to H-10'), 1.52 (m, 2H, H-4a, H-5a), 1.75 (m, 2H, H-12'), 1.86 (m, 1H, H-5a), 1.98 (m, 1H, H-4a), 2.09 (s, 3H, H-2'), 3.16 (m, 1H, H-6), 3.45 (m, 1H, H-2), 3.65 (m, 1H, H-13'), 5.03 (br s, 1H, H-3); 13C NMR (125 MHz, CD3OD) d 15.6 (C-7), 20.8 (C-2''), 23.5 (C-14'), 24.1 (C-11'), 26.3 (C-2), 26.9 (C-5), 28.1 (C-4), 30.4-30.8 (C-3' to C-10'), 34.6 (C-1'), 55.8 (C-2), 58.5(C-6), 68.6 (C-13'), 69.2 (C-3), 171.3 (C-1''); IR (KBr) cm-13334, 1726 (C=O, ester).

#### 4.3.5. (_2R,3R,6S_)-1,2-Dimethyl-6-(13-oxotetradecyl)piperidine-3-yl acetate hydroiodide (11).

Methyl iodide (3 mL) was added to a solution of 3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (5) (0.2 mmol) in 10 mL of dried acetone. The reaction mixture was refluxed for five days until complete consumption of the starting material. The solvent was evaporated and the crude product was purified by PTLC, furnishing the iodide 11, in 50% yield, as brown oil. 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_b_) d 1.19 (d, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, 3H, H-7), 1.20-1.25 (m, 18H, H-2' to H-10'), 1.43 (m, 3H, H-4a, H-5a, H-11'), 1.80 (m, 4H, H-4a, H-5a, 2H-1'), 24.0 (s, 3H, H-14'), 2.09 (s, 3H, H-2'), 2.37 (t, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, 2H, H-12), 2.86 (s, 3H, Me-N), 3.07 (m, 1H, H-6), 3.80 (m, 1H, H-2), 4.98 (br s, 1H, H1), H-3, 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-_d_b_) d 14.9 (C-7), 24.4 (C-11'), 26.2 (C-2''), 26.4 (C-5), 28.5-28.7 (C-2' to -10'), 28.8 (C-4), 29.7 (C-14'), 32.6 (C-1'), 42.7 (C-12'), 50.1 (CH3-N), 53.3 (C-2), 55.8 (C-6), 69.5 (C-3), 169.3 (C-1''), 208.5 (C-13'); IR (KBr) cm-1: 3338, 1725 (C=O, ester).

#### 4.3.6. One-pot preparation of acetyl hydrochloride 7 from natural spectaline (6).

Compound 6 (0.44 mmol) was dissolved in 10 mL of AcOEt and then, 0.6 mL of 

## Page 6

concentrated HCl were added. The reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h at room temperature. The solvent was evaporated, the hydrochloride formed was dried under vacuum and dissolved in 8 mL of CHCl3. An excess of acetyl chloride was added, and the reaction was kept at 60 degC overnight. The reaction mixture was concentrated, furnishing the acetyl hydrochloride **7** in 95% yield.

### Pharmacology

#### 4.4.1 Cholinesterase activity assays

Ellman's colorimetric method9 was adapted for determination of total cholesteraserase and butyrylcholinesterase activities in rat brain homogenates. Brain tissue from adult Wistar rats was homogenized at 8% w/v (or 40%, for butyrylcholinesterase) in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with added NaCl 58.5 g/L and Triton X-100 0.05% v/v. Aliquots of homogenate (5-20 mL) were incubated with anti-cholinesterase compounds for 10 min in phosphate buffer pH 7.4 before addition of 5,5'-dithibois2-nitrobenzoic acid and either acetylthicholine iodide or butyrylthicholine iodide (0.5 or 10 mM final, respectively). The reaction was run at room temperature (22-25 degC) in a final volume of 200 mL in 96-well microplates and was followed at 412 nm for 5 min with a plate reader (SpectraMAX 250, Molecular Devices, USA). In every experiment, cholinesterase-independent (nonspecific) substrate hydrolysis was determined by including one experimental group treated with THA 20 mM; appropriate tissue and reagent blanks were also included. Reaction velocities were determined in three replicates per condition; these were averaged and expressed as percent activity relative to control (solvent), after subtracting the rate of nonspecific hydrolysis. All compounds were tested in nine concentrations from 0.5 to 200 mM. The IC50 based on a single-site model was determined by nonlinear regression. Results are reported as mean +- SEM of IC50 obtained independently from 2 to 4 animals.

### Behavioral studies

#### 4.5.1 Animals and drugs

The study was performed on 80 adult male Swiss albino mice (25-30 g), and 30 adult three-month old Wistar rats (200-250 g) for the passive avoidance and water maze tests, respectively. Animals were obtained from our facility center following approved guidelines for animal care. Animals were allowed to acclimate to the behavioral experimental room for at least four days before procedures began, in a temperature-controlled environment (20 +- 2 degC), relative humidity, with lights on from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. (12 h-diurnal light/12 h-dark cycles) and ad libitum access to food and water, 15 per cage for mice and 4 per cage for rats. Injection volumes were 10 mL/kg for mice and 1 mL/kg for rats. THA and (--)-scopolamine hydrobromide were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (Saint Louis, MO).

#### 4.5.2 Passive-avoidance test

The methods used were a modification of those outlined by Cumin et al.16 Briefly, in the first day of testing, mice were individually transferred from plastic cages to the passive avoidance box (20 x 20 cm), where they could freely explore it during 10 s and immediately removed to the cage (acclimation session). After 24 h, animals were injected ip with saline, THA (5.6 mg/kg), compound **7** (1 mg/kg), or compound **9** (1 mg/kg), and after 15 min, saline or scopolamine (1 mg/kg) was injected ip. After 30 min of the scopolamine administration, animals were placed at a wooden platform (4 x 4 x 4 cm) inside the passive avoidance box, and the step-down latency computed when touching a grid floor with their four paws and receiving an aversive stimulus, an electric shock of 0.6 mA/3 s. This session was called training session, and the animals, which had shown a step-down latency superior to 15 s were not included in the experiment. After 24 h of the training session, the pharmacological procedure was repeated with selected mice, and the step-down latency once more obtained (test session).

#### 4.5.3 Spatial memory test

Spatial memory test
Spatial memory in rats was assessed using an adaptation of the Morris water maze,17 carried out in the same behavioral room in which the rats were acclimated under the conditions of temperature, humidity, and light cycle described above. A circular pool (180 cm in diameter, 50 cm high) was filled to a depth of 30 cm with opaque water at a temperature of 20 +- 2 degC, and divided into four quadrants of equal area. A platform with 8 cm diameter was placed 1 cm below the water surface, midway between the center and the rim of the pool in one of the quadrants. The rat was placed into the pool facing the rim, and its escape latency, time taken by the rat to find the platform, measured by an observer. If the rat failed to find it with in 150 s, the animal was placed on the platform for 20 s and then removed from the pool. The rat was given two trials a day for four days with an inter-trial interval of 15 min. The location of the escape platform remained unchanged, but the point of entry of the rat into the pool was different on each day. During the four days of spatial memory testing, rats were injected ip with saline, THA (1 mg/kg), compound **7** (1 mg/kg), or compound **9** (1 mg/kg), and after 15 min, were treated ip with saline or scopolamine (1 mg/kg). After 30 min of the last ip injection, animals were challenged to localize a hidden escape platform (first trial).

#### 4.5.4 Evaluation of cholinergic side effects and toxicity

THA (**1**), compound **7**, or compound **9** was injected ip in doses up to 10 times higher than those capable of reversing the amnesia in rodents in our study. Animals were placed in novel individual cages, and the presence or absence of signs of cholinergic hyperactivity was observed 10, 30, and 60 min after injection of the choline-esterase inhibitors. At these times, the intensity of whole body tremor and salivation was scored from 0 to 3 (0 = absent; 1 = mild; 2 = moderate; 3 = severe). Splayed hindlimbs, diarrhea, and lacrimation were evaluated as percentage of animals showing those symptoms.

#### 4.5.5 Statistical analysis

Results were expressed as mean +- SEM and differences in means were estimated using ANOVA followed by Dunnet's post-hoc test. Results were considered significant at \(p\) < 0.05.



## Page 7



## Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the FAPESP (Grant 98/05074-0, Brazil), the CNPq (Grants 500185/2003-4 and 302231/2003-0, Brazil), the FAPERJ (Grants 'Bolsa Cientista do Nosso Estado', 'Primeiros Projetos', and PRONEX E-26/171162/2003) and the FUJB for financial support and fellowships.

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.bmc.2005.04.030.

## References and Notes

* Terry et al. 2003 Terry, A. V., Jr.; Buccafusco, J. J. _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther._**2003**, _306_, 821.
* Rufani et al. 1997 Rufani, M.; Filocamo, L.; Lappa, S.; Maggi, A. _Drugs Future_**1997**, _22_, 397.
* Weinstock 1999 Weinstock, M. _CNS Drugs_**1999**, _12_, 307.
* Michaelis 2003 Michaelis, M. L. _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther._**2003**, _304_, 897.
* Atta-ur-Rahman 2001 Atta-ur-Rahman; Choudhary, M. I. _Pure Appl. Chem._**2001**, _73_, 555.
* Bolzani et al. 1995 Bolzani, V. S.; Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; Kingston, D. G. I. _Tetrahedron_**1995**, _21_, 5929.
* Viegas et al. 2004 Viegas, C., Jr.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Tomazela, D.; Eberlin, M. N. _J. Nat. Prod._**2004**, _67_, 908.
* Alexandre-Moreira et al. 2003 Alexandre-Moreira, M. S.; Viegas, C., Jr.; Miranda, A. L. P.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J. _Planta Med._**2003**, _69_, 795.
* Ellman et al. 1961 Ellman, G. L.; Courtney, K. D.; Andres, V.; Featherstone, J.; Featherstone, R. M. _Biochem. Pharmacol._**1961**, \(7\), 88.
* Greene et al. 1999 Greene, T. W.; Wuts, P. G. M. _Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis_, 3rd ed.; John Wiley & Sons: New York, 1999.
* Furstner and Thiel 2000 Furstner, A.; Thiel, O. R. _J. Org. Chem._**2000**, _65_, 1738.
* 12 See Supplementary data.
* Barreiro et al. 2003 Barreiro, E. J.; Camara, C. A.; Verli, H.; Brazil-Mas, L.; Castro, N. G.; Cintra, W. M.; Aracava, Y.; Rodrigues, C. R.; Fraga, C. A. M. _J. Med. Chem._**2003**, _46_, 1144.
* Taylor et al. 1995 Taylor, P.; Radic, Z.; Hosea, N. A.; Camp, S.; Pascale, M.; Berman, H. A. _Toxicol. Lett._**1995**, _82/83_, 453.
* Giacobini 2004 Giacobini, E. _Pharmacol. Res._**2004**, _50_, 433.
* Cumin et al. 1982 Cumin, R.; Bandle, E. F.; Gamzu, E.; Haefely, W. E. _Psychopharmacology_**1982**, _78_, 104.
* Morris 1984 Morris, R. G. M. _J. Neurosci. Methods_**1984**, _11_, 47.
* Liston et al. 2004 Liston, D. R.; Nielsen, J. A.; Villalobos, A.; Chapin, D.; Jones, S. B.; Hubbard, S. T.; Shalaby, I. A.; Ramirez, A.; Nason, D.; White, W. F. _Eur. J. Pharmacol._**2004**, _486_, 9.



