# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000800018.pdf

## Page 1

Biosynthetic Origins of the Isoprene Units of 4-Nerolidylcatechol in _Potomorphe umbellata Debora Cristina B. Bergamo\({}^{a}\), Massuo Jorge Kato\({}^{b}\), Vanderlan da S. Bolzani\({}^{a}\) and Maysa Furlan\({}^{\ast,a}\)

\({}^{a}\) Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14801-970 Araraquara - SP, Brazil

\({}^{b}\) Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 26077, 05599-970 Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

A origem biossithetica das unidades isopernicas do 4-nerolidilcatecol (**1**), principal metabolito secundario de _Potomorphe umbellata_, foi investigada atraves da incorporacao de glicose macrada com [\({}^{14}\)C] e [\({}^{13}\)C], e com precusores das vias mevalonofidica e triose/piruvato, incluindo mevalonolactona-[2-\({}^{14}\)C] e 3-fosfato de gliceraledido-[U-\({}^{14}\)C], respectivamente. O padrao de incorporacao de glicose-[1-\({}^{13}\)C] em **1** foi determinado por experimentos de RMN \({}^{13}\)C quantitativos. O padrao de macracao revelou que o precursor foi especificamente incorporado, e que as unidades isopernicas presentes no 4-nerolidilcatecol sao derivadas tanto do acido mevalonico, quanto da via triose/piruvato. Os resultados tambem indicaram que tanto a via plastidica quanto citoplasmatica sao capazes de gerar unidades de difosfato de isopentenila para a biosinfese de **1**.

The biosynthetic origins of the isoprene units of 4-nerolidylcatechol (**1**), the major constituent of _Potomorphe umbellata_, have been studied through feeding experiments with [\({}^{14}\)C]- and [\({}^{13}\)C]-glucose, and with precursors of the mevalonic acid and triose/pyruvate pathways, namely, [2-\({}^{14}\)C]-mevalonolactone and [U-\({}^{13}\)C]-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, respectively. The pattern of incorporation of label from [1-\({}^{13}\)C]-glucose into **1** was determined by quantitative \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectroscopy. The labelling pattern revealed that the additive was specifically incorporated, and that the isoprene units of the sesquiterpenoid moiety of 4-nerolidylcatechol were derived from both the mevalonic acid and the triose/pyruvate pathways. The results indicate that both plastidic and cytoplasmic pathways are able to provide isopentenyl diphosphate units for the biosynthesis of **1**.

**Keywords:**_Potomorphe umbellata_, Piperaceae, 4-nerolidylcatechol, biosynthesis, sesquiterpenoid, isopentenyl diphosphate

## Introduction

The terpenoids represent one of the largest classes of secondary metabolites comprising, together with the steroids, more than 30,000 compounds to date.[1] Whilst the terpenoids are known to play important roles in the development and survival of every living organism,[2] many compounds of the class have been found to accumulate at high levels in a number of plant species. They possess, as a common building block, the isoprene unit that is formally derived from isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP). Originally, the well-studied mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway was considered to be the unique biosynthetic route to IPP and was believed to operate in all organisms. However, an alternative pathway has been shown to be involved in the formation of the hopane triterpenes in bacteria[3] and, more recently, the widespread occurrence of this route within the plant kingdom has been demonstrated.[4, 5] The reaction sequence of the alternative pathway involves condensation of pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate leading to the formation of 1-desoxyxylulose-5-phosphate, the first C\({}_{\text{s}}\) intermediate. Several subsequent steps, including an intramolecular rearrangement, lead to IPP.[4]

There is some reason to believe that the triose/pyruvate pathway is compartmentalised in the plastids of plant cells and is involved in the formation of mono-, di-, and tetraterpenoids, whilst the MVA pathway is located in the cytoplasm and is responsible for the synthesis of sesquiterpenes and sterols.[9] However, substantial evidence indicates that this hypothesis of subcellular compartmentation of plant terpenoid biosynthesis may be simplistic as it does not take into account the exchange of plastidic and cytoplasmic metabolites. For example, early 

## Page 2

studies involving chamomile flowers (_Chamomilla recuita_) demonstrated an efficient incorporation of label from [1-13C]-glucose into sesquiterpenes, but revealed an heterogeneous labelling pattern in the accumulated farnesyl pyrophosphate. Thus, whilst the two initial isoprene units clearly originated from the triose/pyruvate route, the third unit was derived from both the MVA and the triose/pyruvate pathways.10

The major constituent of leaves and roots of _Potomorphe umbellata_ is the powerful antioxidant, 4-neroidylcatechol (**1**).11,12 Currently, no information is available concerning the biosynthesis of either the sesquiterpene or the catechol portion of this type of compound. The aim of the present study was, therefore, to determine the route of formation of the C15 moiety of **1** in leaves of _P. umbellate_ through feeding experiments involving appropriately labelled precursors. Determination of the 13C-enrichment pattern in **1** following the incorporation of label from [1-13C]-glucose revealed that the sesquiterpene portion was derived from both the MVA and the triose/pyruvate pathways.

## Results and Discussion

Labelled, putative precursors of the sesquiterpene portion of 4-neroidylcatechol (**1**), namely, [3-14C]-_R.S_-mevalonolactone and [U-14C]-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, were administrated to the leaves of _Potomorphe umbellata_, together with [U-14C]-glucose, which is a precursor of both mevalonolactone and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Freshly harvested leaves were incubated, separately, with 2 _m_Ci of each of these precursors for 6, 24, 48 and 72 h, after which time the leaf material was extracted with ethanol and analysed by HPLC. Radiolabel from all precursors was incorporated into **1** (Table 1). Specific and/or non-specific incorporations of >=1% were obtained within 72 h of feeding with [3-14C]-_R.S_-mevalonolactone and [U-14C]-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate but, as would be expected, a considerably lower percentage incorporation (0.1 - 0.3%) was attained with [U-14C]- glucose.

In order to determine the specificity of incorporation, and hence the possible biosynthetic origin of the isoprenoid moieties, experiments involving the incorporation of [1-13C]-glucose into 4-neroidylcatechol (**1**) were carried out. Different patterns of 13C-enrichment in **1** would be expected depending on the pathway followed.10,13,14 Thus, the conversion of [1-13C]-glucose into IPP _via_ the MVA pathway would lead to the incorporation of label at positions 2, 4 and 5 of each isoprene unit. On the other hand, if [1-13C]-glucose is converted into pyruvate, the resulting C5 units derived from the triose/pyruvate pathway should be labelled at positions 1 and 5 (Figure 1). Whichever of the two pathways is extant, no label should appear at position 3 of any of the isoprene units if [1-13C]-glucose is specifically incorporated into **1**.

In feeding experiments involving [1-13C]-glucose as a putative precursor, eight young leaves of _P. umbellata_ were fed for 72 h with 100 _m_L of a 10% solution of [1-13C]-glucose, and then extracted with ethanol. The ethyl acetate soluble portion of the ethanol extract was fractioned by column chromatography over silica gel followed by TLC to afford 4-neroidylcatechol (**1**). The 13C NMR spectra of this sample of **1** and of 4-neroidylcatechol at natural abundance sample were measured in CDCl3 under identical conditions. The relative abundances of 13C at individual carbon atoms were calculated by comparison of the integration values for the peaks in the labelled sample with those in the natural abundance sample. The values were normalised to a reference value of 1.1% for 13C abundance at the carbon with the lowest 13C-enrichment (Table 2). Enhancement of the signals was

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Incubation time (h) & [3-14C]-Mevalonolactone & [U-14C]-Glyceraldehyde -3-phosphate & [U-14C]-D-Glucose \\
6 & 0.2 & 0.6 & 0.1 \\
24 & 0.6 & 0.7 & 0.2 \\
48 & 0.7 & 0.9 & 0.2 \\
72 & 1.0 & 1.2 & 0.3 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Percentage incorporations of activity from radiolabelled compounds into 4-neroidylcatechol (**1**) by leaves of _Potomorphe umbellata_

Figure 1: Predicted labelling patterns in the sesquiterpenoid moiety of 4-neroidylcatechol following incorporation of [1-13C]-D-glucose according to the mevalonic acid pathway □, and to the triose/pyruvate pathway •.



## Page 3

significant and varied in the range 2.9 - 6.9%. Most importantly, no enrichment of the signals at C-3', C-7' or C-11' of **1** was observed indicating that label was not incorporated into position 3 of any of the isoprene units (Figure 1). This demonstrates that the label from [1-13C]-glucose was incorporated specifically into **1**, and not _via_ catabolic processes followed by re-incorporation, within the time period of incubation. Furthermore, a significant enrichment of the remaining carbons (C-2, 4-6) was found (relative 13C abundance of 1.5%). This general labelling might be due to complex metabolic turnover of [1-13C]-glucose with following statistical distribution of the carbon atoms in various positions of intermediates of carbohydrate metabolism.

As shown in Table 2, feeding experiment with [1-13C]-glucose resulted in clear enhancements of the signals at positions 1, 2, 4 and 5 of all of the isoprene units of the nerolidol moiety. Such a pattern of specific incorporation is consistent with the simultaneous operation of the MVA and triose/pyruvate pathways in the biosynthesis of the sesquiterpenoid portion of 4-nerolidylcatechol (**1**) in _P. umbellata,_ and suggests an exchange of plastidic and cytoplasmic IPP units. These results corroborate previous studies9 that provided evidence of significant differences in the degree of IPP exchange depending on the type and developmental stage of the tissue, thus giving rise to flexible compartmentalisation of terpenoid biosynthesis in plants.

## Experimental

### General

[3-14C]-_R,S_-Mevalonolactone (100.5 _m_Ci mL-1) was purchased from Dupont, [U-14C]-glyceraldehyde (50.0 _m_Ci mL-1) and [U-14C]-D-glucose (1000 _m_Ci mL-1) were obtained from American Radiolabeled Chemicals, and [1-13C]-D-glucose (99%) was from Aldrich. All solvents were of reagent grade and redistilled prior to use. HPLC separations were performed on a Waters 991 system equipped with a photodiode array detector and a Supelco LC-18 reverse phase column (250 x 4.6 mm i.d.; 5 _m_m). The measurement of radioactivity was carried out using a Tri-Carb(r) model 2100TR liquid scintillation analyser. The 13C NMR spectra of samples at natural abundance and 13C-labelled samples were measured under identical conditions (125 MHz, 26 degC, repetition time 0.955 s, 45deg pulse angle) using a Varian Unity 500 spectrometer.

### Plant material

Leaves of _Potomorphe umbellata_ employed in the feeding experiments with 14C-labelled precursors were collected from plants grown under a 16 h day regime in greenhouses at the Institute of Biological Chemistry (WSU) in Pullman, USA. Plants used in experiments involving [1-13C]-glucose were grown under a natural day-night regime in greenhouse at the Institute of Chemistry (UNESP) in Aranaquara, Brazil.

### Administration of [14C]-labelled compounds to leaves of P. umbellata

Young leaves of _P. umbellata_ were excised and fed for 6, 24, 48 and 72 h with 100 _m_L of a solution containing 2 _m_Ci of either [3-14C]-_R,S_-mevalonolactone, [U-14C]-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate or [U-14C]-D-glucose using one leaf for each feeding experiment. The leaf was frozen in liquid nitrogen, dried overnight under vacuum and extracted, with sonication, for 15 min with ethanol (2 x 10 mL). The solvent was evaporated, the residue was resuspended in methanol (1 mg mL-1) and a 10 _m_L aliquot analysed by HPLC (elution programme - linear gradient of methanol : water from 65:35 to 85:15 in 10 min, followed by isocratic elution with 85:15 for a further 10 min; flow rate - 1 mL min-1; detection - 280 nm). Fractions (1 mL) of the eluate were collected over a 44 min period and submitted to liquid scintillation counting.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Carbon & _δ_ (ppm) \({}^{\ast}\) & Relative enrichment(r) (\%) \\ C-1 & 141.3 & 1.1 \\ C-2 & 143.0 & 1.5 \\ C-3 & 114.8 & 1.1 \\ C-4 & 140.8 & 1.5 \\ C-5 & 119.0 & 1.5 \\ C-6 & 114.1 & 1.5 \\ C-1’ & 111.4 & **3.3** \\ C-2’ & 147.0 & **2.9** \\ C-3’ & 43.7 & 1.1 \\ C-4’ & 41.



## Page 4

_Administration of [1-13C]-D-glucose to leaves of P. umbellata_

Eight young leaves (13.70 g) of _P. umbellata_ were excised and fed for 72 h with 100 \(\mu\)L of a 10% solution of [1-13C]-D-glucose. The leaves were frozen in liquid nitrogen and extracted, with sonication, for 15 min with ethanol (2 x 25 mL). The solvent was evaporated and the extract (0.52 g) fractioned by partition between ethyl acetate and water. The ethyl acetate fraction (0.20 g) was applied to a column chromatography of silica gel (20.00 g; 230 - 400 mesh; Merck) and eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of ethyl acetate (up to 50%) to yield six fractions. The third and fourth fractions were combined, and the resultant residue (0.09 g) chromatographed on silica gel GF254 (Merck) TLC layers eluted with hexane:ethyl acetate (7:3) to yield 4-nerolidyl-catechol (**1**) (0.03 g).

The 'H and 13C NMR spectra of **1** obtained from an incorporation experiment with [1-13C]-glucose and reference sample of **1** from field-grown plants were recorded in CDCl3 under identical conditions with a VARIAN 500 spectrometer (relative to CDCl3 at th 7.24 ppm and \(\delta_{\text{c}}\) 77.0 ppm). Evaluation of relative 13C-enrichment was made by calculation from the relative intensities of both spectra as reported for 4-nerolidyl-catechol (**1**).3

## References

* [1] Rohdich, F.; Kis, K.; Bacher, A.; Eisenreich, W.; _Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol._**2001**, \(5\), 535.
* [2] Macgaryev, D. J.; Croteau, R.; _Plant Cell_**1995**, \(7\), 1015.
* [3] Rohmer M.; Knani, M.; Simonin, P.; Sutter, B.; Sahm, H.; _Biochem. J._**1993**, _295_, 517.
* [4] Rohmer, M.; Seemann, M.; Horbach, S.; Bringer-Meyer, S.; Sahm, H.; _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**1996**, _118_, 2564.
* [5] Knoss, W.; Reuter, B.; _Pharm. Acta Helv._**1998**, _73_, 45.
* [6] Asada, Y.; Li, W.; Yoshikawa, T.; _Pytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 323.
* [7] Eisenreich, W.; Sagner, S.; Zenk, M. H.; Bacher, A.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1997**, _38_, 3889.
* [8] Schwender, J.; Seemann, M.; Lictenthaler, H. K.; Rohmer, M.; _Biochem. J._**1996**, _316_, 73.
* [9] McCaskill, D.; Croteau, R.; _Trends Biotechnol._**1998**, _16_, 349.
* [10] Adam, K-P.; Zapp, J.; _Pytochemistry_**1998**, _48_, 953.
* [11] Kijoa, A.; Giesbrecht, A. M.; Akiuse, M. K.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Gottlieb, H. E.; _Planta Med._**1980**, _39_, 85.
* [12] Desmarchelier, C.; Barros, S.; Repetto, M.; Latorre, L. R.; Kato, M. J.; Cousiio, J.; Ciccia, G.; _Planta Med._**1998**, _63_, 561.
* [13] Seto, H.; Watanabe, H.; Furihata, K.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1996**, _37_, 7979.
* [14] Barlon, A. J.; Becker, H.; Adam, K. P.; _Pytochemistry_**2001**, _57_, 7.



