# 10.1021@np060254j.pdf

## Page 1



# Anxiolytic Effects of Erythrinian Alkaloids from _Erythrina mulungu_

Otavio Flausino, Jr., Luciana de Avila Santos, Hugo Verli, Ana Maria Pereira, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani,

# Abstract

One new erythrinian alkaloid derivative, (+)-11a-hydroxyerythrinavine (**1**), and the known (+)-erythravine (**2**) and (+)-\(\alpha\)-hydroxyerysorting (**3**) were isolated from the flowers of _Erythrina mulungu_. Their structures were determined by spectroscopic/spectrometric data interpretation of 1H, 13C, and 2D NMR and MS experiments. The relative configuration was established by NOESY analysis, while the conformation adopted by these molecules was evaluated through molecular modeling studies and coupling constants obtained by NMR analysis. Furthermore, the anxiolytic effects of the _E. mulungu_ aqueous alcoholic crude extract and of the purified alkaloids were evaluated using the elevated T-maze test.

## Introduction

The Drosophila melanogaster (1-1)-11a-hydroxyerythrin

## Page 2

demonstrate all coupling constants of H-11 with H\({}_{\rm{\alpha}}\),H\({}_{\rm{\alpha}}\)-10 (Table 1), which is completely compatible with an \(\alpha\)-OH position at C-11. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR (Table 1) data also were comparable with those of the alkaloid **3**, which possesses C-11 with the same configuration. When we analyzed the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra of **1** and **3**, the signal due to C-11 in both was observed at higher fields, \(\Delta\delta\approx 10\) ppm, when comparable to the same carbon of (+)-11\(\beta\)-hydroxyeystorine (also named (+)-erythrarine), which is a C-11 epimer.[3, 14] The total assignment of **1** was done by examination of the COSY, HMQC, NOESY, and HMBC (Figure 1) data of this compound. To confirm the relative configuration of C-3 and C-11 and to establish the conformation of **1**, the structure of (+)-\(\alpha\)-hydroxyeystorine (**3**) was used as a model for a conformational analyses approach with the introduction of dihedral angle constraints obtained from the coupling constants between H11\(-\)H10 and H3\(-\)H4. On the basis of \({}^{1}\)H NMR data, the structure of compound **3** was build with an \(\alpha\)-OH at C-11 (similar to compound **1**) and submitted to conformational analysis using the semiempirical methods AM1 and PM5 in the gas phase, with CHCl\({}_{3}\) and pyridine solvents, as previously described.[15, 16] The semiempirical methods were applied to compound 3 since it was previously identified as the 11a-epimer,[14] and our studies demonstrated that **3** has an 11a-hydroxyl, similar to that of the new derivative **1**. Four conformers were evaluated for this compound, obtained through inversion of ring B (two half-chairs) and of ring C (two envelopes). One of the half-chairs of ring B was not stable and changed to a twist-boat-like conformation (Figure 2C). This twist-boat, together with the conformational restraining induced by ring D, avoided the inversion of the envelope in ring C, allowing us to obtain only three minimum energy conformations for compound **3**, named **3a**, **3b**, and **3c** (Figure 2). The Haasnot\(-\)Altona parametrization of the Karplus equation[18] estimates the \(\mathcal{Y}_{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{\rm{ \rm{ \rm{ \rm{ }}}}}}}}}}}}}}}}}}}\)\) the \({}^{13}\)H coupling constants from the electronegativity of the substituents and from the H\(-\)C\(-\)C\(-\)H dihedral angle geometry. The obtained theoretical coupling constants for conformations **3a**, **3b**, and **3c** are presented in Table 1, and their energies are shown in Table 2. The comparison between theoretical and experimental coupling constants allowed characterization of the conformation of the erythrina alkaloids as represented by conformation **3c** in Table 1 and Figure 2. As already described by us,[16] this Hamiltonian presents better agreement with experimental data when compared to AM1.



## Page 3

(\(F\)(12,132) = 2.42; \(P<0.01\)). Individual comparisons revealed that latencies to leave the enclosed arm were decreased with both **1** (10 mg/kg) and DZP treatments. Different from CE, one-way ANOVA did not reveal any effect of **1** or DZP on the latency to leave the open arms (\(F\)(3,33) = 0.71; \(P\) = 0.54).

The effects of **2** in the ETM measurements are shown in Figure 3 C. Two-way ANOVA showed significant effect of treatment (\(F\)(3,55) = 13.40, \(P<0.0001\)), trials (\(F\)(4,220) = 44.23; \(P<0.0001\)), and treatment versus trials interaction (\(F\)(12,220) = 6.33; \(P<0.0001\)) in the inhibitory avoidance measurements. Duncan's post hoc test revealed that animals treated with **2** (3 and 10 mg/kg) or DZP exhibited lower latencies to leave the enclosed arm of the ETM when compared with the control group (\(P<0.05\)). Neither **2** nor DZP significantly changed escape latencies (one-way ANOVA: \(F\)(3,55) = 0.61, \(P<0.60\)).

Figure 3D shows the effects of **3** on the inhibitory avoidance and escape latencies in the ETM test. Two-way ANOVA showed effects of treatment (\(F\)(3,31) = 7.65; \(P<0.0001\)), trials (\(F\)(4,124) = 18.38; \(P<0.0001\)), and treatment versus trials interaction (\(F\)(12,-124) = 2.14; \(P<0.001\)) on inhibitory avoidance acquisition. Duncan's post hoc test revealed that the doses of 3 and 10 mg/kg of **3** significantly impaired the inhibitory avoidance task, an effect also shown with DZP (\(P<0.05\)). One-way ANOVA showed that neither **3** nor DZP produced significant effects on latency to leave the open arm (\(F\)(3,31) = 0.24; \(P=0.86\)).

Additionally, one-way ANOVA revealed no treatment effects of CE, **1**, **2**, **3**, or DZP on the number of rearing and crossings (locomotor activity) in the arena test (see Table 3).

The present study demonstrated that acute po treatment with CE attenuated anxiety-related responses in mice submitted to an animal model of anxiety, i.e., the ETM. These results corroborate a previous study,[12] in which the aqueous alcoholic extract of _E. mulungu_, at a dose of 200 mg/kg, produced anxiolytic-like effects in the inhibitory avoidance in the ETM in rats. These authors also reported an antianxiety effect with a lower dose of CE (100 mg/kg) in the light-dark transition model. In that study CE increased both the number of transitions between light and dark compartments and the time spent in the illuminated area, measures considered as anxiety indices.[12] Similar effects have been reported with chronic treatment with an equivalent range of doses (50\(-\)200 mg/kg) of CE on inhibitory avoidance in the ETM as well as on the number of transitions between compartments, and in the time spent in the illuminated compartment in the light-dark transition model.[13]

This study demonstrated that the erythrinian alkaloids isolated from _E. mulungu_ provoked anxiolytic-like effects in the ETM. The new erythrinian alkaloid **1** and the two known alkaloids **2** and **3** impaired the inhibitory avoidance task, and these effects were similar to that produced by DZP, a classical anxiolytic drug.

The underlying mechanisms involved in the anxiolytic effects of the erythrinian alkaloids were not in the scope of the present study and remain to be determined. However, it has been demonstrated that the dihydro-\(\beta\)-erythroidine, an erythromycin alkaloid, antagonizes the excitatory effects of serotonin (5-HT) at the 5-HT3 receptor.[24] Thus, it is likely that the anxiolytic effects of the erythrinian alkaloids from _E. mulungu_ involve antagonism at 5-HT3 receptors, as shown for dihydro-\(\beta\)-erythroidine.[24] Although attractive, this hypothesis remains to be empirically tested. It was demonstrated that the crude extract of _E. vespertilio_ inhibited platelet 5-HT release.[23] Platelets have been used as a useful model for studying Ca2+-dependent 5-HT release,[23] the main action of serotonin at 5-HT3 receptors.

It is interesting to note that the highest dose (400 mg/kg) of the crude extract decreased escape latency (i.e., the latency to leave the open arm) in the ETM. Similar effects obtained with other classes of drugs have been previously interpreted as anxiolytic, instead of anxiogenic.[19] It has been suggested that drugs that diminish risk-assessment behavior, such as buspirone and the serotonin releaser fenfluramine, also decrease escape latencies in the ETM.[19] Curiously, the pure alkaloids did not alter escape latencies. It is likely that synergistic interactions with other compounds of the crude extract are important to provoke the anxiolytic effects observed in the escape task.

Taken together, these results suggests that the new erythrinian alkaloid (+)-11a-hydroxy-erythravine (**1**) and the known (+)-erythravine (**2**) and (+)-a-hydroxyerysorting (**3**) are, in part, responsible for the anxiolytic effects observed with the crude extract of _E. mulungu_.

## Experimental Section

### General Experimental Procedures.

Optical rotations were measured on a Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter using a quartz cuvette (length 1 cm). UV spectra were recorded on a HPLC system Varian PRO STAR 240, UV-diode-array 330 detector. The IR spectrum was recorded on a Perkin-Elmer 1600 or Nicolet EMACT-40 FTIR spectrophotometer. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian INOVA 500 MHz NMR spectrometer operating at 500 MHz for \({}^{1}\)H and 125 for \({}^{13}\)C nuclei, respectively. Solvent peaks were used as a reference standard. For chromatographic procedures, silica gel PF 254 and silica gel (230

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline  & vacuum & CDCl3 & pyridine \\ \hline conformation & AM1 & PM5 & AM1 & PM5 & AM1 & PM5 \\ \hline
**3a** & \(-\)81.4 & \(-\)99.8 & \(-\)89.5 & \(-\)112.4 & \(-\)91.6 & \(-\)115.4 \\
**3b** & \(-\)81.0 & \(-\)98.6 & \(-\)89.3 & \(-\)111.7 & \(-\)91.8 & \(-\)114.7 \\
**3c** & \(-\)81.2 & \(-\)102.0 & \(-\)89.7 & \(-\)114.2 & \(-\)91.7 & \(-\)117.5 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Heats of Formation (kcal/mol) for the Conformations Obtained from Conformational Analysis Using the AM1 and PM5 Semiempirical Methods

Figure 2: Structure of the obtained conformations for compound **3**: (A) conformation **3a,** (B) conformation **3b,** and (C) conformation **3c**. With the exception of hydrogen atoms attached to carbon atoms C-3, C-4, C10, and C-11 the nonpolar hydrogen atoms were omitted in order to clarify the image. This computer-generated 3D interpretation also can be applied to compound **1**, since the difference between these structures does not change significantly the values calculated for energy minimization.



## Page 4

Figure 3.— Effects (mean \(\pm\) SEM) of CE (A), I (B), **2** (C), and **3** (D) (\(n=9\)–\(17\)) on the behavior of mice submitted to the inhibitory avoidance and escape tasks in the elevated T-maze. *_P_\(\leq\) 0.05 vs control group (Duncan post hoc test).



## Page 5

400 mesh or 60\(-\)230 mesh) (Merck) were used. Molecular modeling calculations were performed using the BioMedCAChe program version 6.1.2 (BioMedCAChe, 2001).

**Plant Material.** Influences of _E. mulungu_ were collected in September 2002, at Rifania, Sao Paulo, Brazil. A voucher specimen is deposited in the herbarium of the Departament of Vegetal Biotechnology, at the University of Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, under the reference number HPM-0032.

**Extraction and Isolation.** Fresh inflorescences (3 kg) were macerated with EtOH/H3/O (70:30) at 30\(-\)50 U cover a period of 10 days. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure to afford a humid crude extract (CE) (120 g) that was oxidized with a 10% HOAc solution. This solution was extracted with CHCl3 and was then made alkaline (pH 9\(-\)10) with NHOH and re-extracted with CHCl3 to afford a mixture of crude alkaloids (670 mg).

The alkaloidal fraction was separated by flash chromatography on Si gel, exiting with CHCl3/CHOH (100:0 \(\rightarrow\) 70:30), to yield 60 fractions of 20 mL each, grouped into five (1\(-\)2 mA; 3\(-\)5 m = 8; 6\(-\)20 m = C; 21\(-\)30 = D; 31\(-\)60 = E). Additional preparative TLC on Si gel of the fractions B, D, and E using Et2O/acetone/EtOH/NH4OH (50:43:43) afforded (+1)-11-a-hydroxythyrrazine (**1**) (48 mg), (+)-erythraine (**2**) (95 mg), and (+1)-11-a-hydroxystyrrazine (33 6 mg).

**(+)-110-Hydroxystyrrazine (1): amorphous powder; [\(\alpha_{\rm 2}\)]\({}^{25}_{25}\)\(+\)**8.7 (\(c\) 1.0, MeOH); UV (CDCl3) \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (log \(\epsilon\)) 283 (3.45), 234 (4.3) nm; IR (KBr) \(\gamma_{\rm max}\) 3640, 1650, 1500, 1465, 1250 cm\({}^{-1}\); \({}^{1}\)H NMR, Table 1; \({}^{1}\)NO NMR, Table 1; \({}^{1}\)NO NMR, Table 1; HRMS-MS _m_/2 316.3681 (caled for C18 H12-NO4, 316.3741).

**(+)-Erchyrrazine (2):** white powder; \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data were consistent with those previously reported.\({}^{17}\)

**(+)-\(\alpha\)-Hydroxystyrating (3):** white, amorphous powder; [\(\alpha_{\rm 2}\)]\({}^{25}\)\(+\)8.8 (\(c\) 1.0, MeOH); \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)NMR data were in agreement with those previously reported.\({}^{3,14}\)

**Molecular Modeling.** The system composed by rings A\(-\)D was constructed and submitted to conformational analysis. Each of the obtained conformations was further submitted to full geometry optimization using AM1 and PMS semiempirical methods in both gas and solvent phases. For representation of CDCl3 and pyridine solvents the COSMO solvation model was used. The relative permittivity value for CDCl3 was adjusted to \(\epsilon\) = 4.9 and for pyridine to \(\epsilon\) = 12.5, while the effective VVD radius of the solvent molecules was adjusted to 2.81 A for CDCl3 and to 2.9 A for pyridine. Hessian matrix analyses were employed to unequivocally characterize the obtained conformations as true potential energy surface minima. All calculations were performed using BioMedCAChe program version 6.1.2\({}^{25}\) in order to obtain theoretical \({}^{1}\)J\({}_{\rm H,H}\) coupling constants for the minimum energy conformations produced in conformational analysis, we applied the Haasnot\(-\)Altona parametrization of the Karplus equation\({}^{18}\) to the endocytic angle geometries.

**Behavioral Studies. Animals.** Male Swiss mice (Sao Paulo State University/UNESP, SP, Brazil), weighing 25\(-\)35 g, were housed in groups of 10 per cage (41 cm x 34 cm x 16 cm) and maintained under a normal 12 h light cycle (lights on 070-00 h) in a temperature/humidity controlled environment (23 +- 1 V/55 +- 5%). Food and water were freely available. All mice were experimentally naive. Experimental procedures were in compliance with the U.S. National Institutes of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Local Ethical Committee (no. 35/2004).

**Compound Administration.** CE and alkaloids were suspended in saline (NaCl 0.9%) and diazepam (DZP) in saline at \(\sim\) 2% Tween 80. Animals were orally treated with CE (50, 100, 200, and 400 mg/kg) and with a range of doses (3\(-\)10 mg/kg) of each isolated alkaloid, or vehicle (saline), and intraperitoneally with DZP (2 mg/kg). All compounds were administered 30 min before the experimental session.

**Apparatus. Elevated T-Maze (ETM).** The ETM was positioned 38.5 cm above the floor with three arms of equal dimensions (30 cm \(\times\) 5 cm). One arm was enclosed by transparent glass walls (15 cm) and stored perpendicular to two open arms. To avoid falls, the open arms were surrounded by a Plexiglas rim 0.25 cm high.

**Locomotor Activity Test (LAT).** To assess locomotor activity, animals were exposed to a plastic rectangular box (40 cm x 48 cm x 30 cm) with its floor divided into 30 squares (8 cm\({}^{4}\)).

A standard procedure was used for both tests.\({}^{19}\)

**Statistics.** All results were initially submitted to Levene's test for homogeneity of variance. Where this test yielded significance, results were log transformed and again submitted to Levene's test, before being submitted to ANOVA. The inhibitory avoidance measures obtained in the ETM were submitted to two-way ANOVA with treatment as the independent factor and trial as the dependent factor. Where significant main effects or interactions were obtained, data were further analyzed by Duncan's post hoc test. The escape latency in the ETM and LAT results were submitted to one-way ANOVA, followed by Duncan's post hoc test when significant. In all cases a \(P\) value \(<\) 0.05 was considered significant.

**Acknowledgment.** This work was funded by grants of the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) as part of the Biota-FAPESP\(-\)The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.wi.biotas.org/.br), grant no. 03/2176-7 awarded to V.S.B. V.S.B. and O.F.J. acknowledge CNPq and CAPES for researcher and Ph.D. scholarships. We also thank Prof. Dr. J. Almeida Guimaraes (Centro

## Page 6

de Biotecnologia-UFRGS) for the use of BioMedCAChe software, O.F. was the recipient of a CAPES scholarship and R.L.N.S. received a CNPq research fellowship (302035/2003).

## References

* (1) Nei, D. A. _Annals of Missouri Bot. Garden_**1988**, _75_, 886-969.
* (2) Garcia-Mateos, R.; Soto-Hernandez, M.; Vibrans, H. _Econ. Bot._**2001**, _55_ (3), 391-400.
* (3) Sarragiota, M. H.; Leitao, Filho, H.; Marsaidi, A. J. _Can. J. Chem._**1981**, _59_, 2771-2775.
* (4) Soto-Hernandez, M.; Jackson, A. H. _Planta Med._**1994**, _60_, 175-177.
* (5) Nkengfack, A. E.; Vouffo, W.; Vardamides, J. C.; Kouam, J.; Fomun, Z. T.; Meyer, M.; Sterner, O. _Pytochemistry_**1997**, _46_ (3), 573-578.
* (6) Saidu, K.; Onah, J.; Orisadipe, A.; Olusola, A.; Wambebe, C.; Gamaaniel, K. _J. Ethiophemar._**2000**, _71_, 275-280.
* (7) Vasconcelos, S. M.; Oliveira, R. G.; Carvalho, M. M.; Rodrigues, A. C.P.; Silveira, R. R.; Fonteles, M. M. F.; Sousa, F. C. L.; Viana, G. S. B. _Biol. Pharm. Bull._**2003**, _26_, 946-949.
* (8) Hargreaves, R.; Jonson, D.; Millington, D.; Mondal, M.; Beavers, W.; Becker, L.; Young, C.; Rinehart, K. L. _Lloydia_**1974**, _37_, 569-580.
* (9) Garin-Aguilar, M. A.; Luna, J. E. R.; Soto-Hernandez, M.; Valencia, del Toro, G.; Vasquez, M. M. _J. Ethinopharmacol._**2000**, _69_, 189-196.
* (10) Lourenzi, H. _Arvores Brasileras: Manual de Identificacao e Cultivo de Planaris_; Plantarum: Sao Paulo, 1992.
* (11) Rodigues, V. E.; Carvalho, D. A. _Plantas Medicinais do Cerrado_; Universidade Federal de Lavras: Lavras, 2001.
* (12) Onusic, G. M.; Nogueira, R. L.; Pereira, M. S.; Viana, M. B. _Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res._**2002**, _35_, 473-477.
* (13) Onusic, G. M.; Nogueira, R. L.; Pereira, M. S.; Flausino, O. A., Jr.; Viana, M. B. _Biol. Pharm. Bull._**2003**, _26_ (11), 1538-1542.
* (14) Juma, B. F.; Majinda, R. R. T. _Pytochemistry_**2004**, _65_, 1397-1404.
* (15) Pequanha, E. P.; Verli, H.; Rodrigues, C. R.; Barreiro, E. J.; Fraga, C. A. M. _Tetrahedron Lett._**2002**, _43_, 1607-1611.
* (16) Cardoso, C. L.; Silva, D. H. S.; Tomazela, D. M.; Verli, H.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Eberlin, M. N.; Bolzani, V. S. _J. Nat. Prod._**2003**, _66_, 1017-1021.
* (17) Millington, D. S.; Steinman, D. H.; Rinehart, K. L., Jr. _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**1974**, _96_ (6), 1099-1917.
* (18) Hasanch, C. A. G.; de Leeuw, F. A. A. M.; Altona, C. _Tetrahedron_**1980**, _36_, 2783-2792.
* (19) Carvalho-Netto, E. F.; Nunes-de-Souza, R. L. _Behav. Brain Res._**2004**, _148_, 119-132.
* (20) Viana, M. B.; Tomaz, C.; Graeff, F. G. _Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav._**1994**, _49_, 549-554.
* (21) Graeff, F. G.; Ferreira, Neto, C.; Zangrossi, H., Jr. _Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev._**1998**, _23_, 237-246.
* (22) Oliver, B.; Wijngaarden, I.; Soudijn, W. _Eur. Neuropyschopharmacol._**2000**, _10_, 77-95.
* (23) Rogers, K. L.; Grice, I. D.; Griffiths, L. R. _Life Sci._**2001**, _69_, 1817-1829.
* (24) Eislek, J.; Bertrand, S.; Gaizi, J.; Devillers-Thiery, A.; Changeux, J.; Bertrand, D. _Nature_**1993**, _366_, 479-483.
* (25)_BioMedCAChe 6.1.2_; Fujitsu Ltd. and Oxford Molecular Ltd., 2001. NP060254J

