# 10.1021@jo00200a028.pdf

## Page 1

to -30 degC by means of a dichloroethane-dry ice slush. _trans_-1,3,5,7-Tetraintros-1,3,6,7-tetraazadecalin was added to this solution over 10 min. The dichloroethane-dry ice bath was replaced with an ice-water bath. After being stirred at 0 degC for 30 min, the mixture was stirred at 50 degC for 10 min. The solution was then poured onto 30 g of ice. After the ice had melted, the product was collected by vacuum filtration and was washed well with water. After drying, the crude product weighed 0.66 g. It was purified by dissolving in warm DMF (60 degC) and by adding water until turbid. After cooling to 0 degC, the crystals were collected. The purified product weighed 0.41-0.45 deg and melted at 252-254 degC: 'H NMR (MeSO-_d_d_) 4.10 (m, 2 H, H4,_d_), 4.50 (m, 2 H, H4,_d_), 4.80 (m, 2 H, H4,_d_), 4.80 (m, 2 H, H4,_d_), 4.80 (m, 2 H 

## Page 2

substances. The first substance was deep blue in color and was easily identified as guayazulene by comparison of its spectral data (MS, IR, and 1H NMR) with those reported in the literature.6-7 The second was colorless and formed readily upon treatment with an ethanolic solution of picric acid a picrate of mp 95-98 degC. The substance, named marmelerin (1), [a]2b, -63.0deg (c 1.0, CHCl3), gave a positive Erlich test for a furu*sn and showed a characteristic UV spectrum, _l_max.Moff 222, 255, 279, 289 nm (log \(e\) 4.32, 4.18, 3.51, 3.42), for benzofuranol compounds similar to dihydropyrocurzerenone.9 The molecular ion at _m/z_ 214 as well as analysis of the 13C NMR spectrum, 15 peaks in the PND spectrum, suggested C13H18O for the molecular formula. With residual coupling (SFORD), the 13C spectrum showed seven sp3 (four methyls, two methylenes, and one methine) and eight sp2 (seven nonprotonated and one CH) carbons (Table I). The 1H NMR spectrum showed a sharp singlet at \(d\) 6.90 (1 H, H-4) very similar to the expected position of a proton located at the ortho position to the oxygen in a benzofuran system related to pyrocurzerenone (4).9 The same spectrum presented a multiplet centered at \(d\) 3.60 (1 H, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, H-8), one singlet at \(d\) 2.30 (6 H, H-3 and H-10), and another singlet at \(d\) 2.20 (3 H, H-11) followed by a doublet at \(d\) 1.20 (3 H, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, H-12). Double resonance experiments showed coupling between the protons located at \(d\) 3.60 and \(d\) 1.20 (Table I). The absence of any absorption below \(d\) 7.00 eliminated the possibility of protons located at \(a\) positions in a furan system, suggesting a terusubstituted furan ring.

The 13C NMR spectrum of marmelerin displayed a protonated aromatic carbon absorption at \(d\) 109.1, consistent with an unsubstituted aromatic carbon ortho to an oxygen substituent. This signal appeared as a double quartet (_J_ = 159, 5.8 Hz) in the fully coupled 13C spectrum, suggesting the existence of a methyl group attached to the other ortho position. Selective decoupling by low-field single-frequency irradiation at the frequency of absorption of H-4 caused the appearance of C-4 as a single quartet while irradiation at the methyl hydrogens' absorption frequency caused the appearance of a C-4 as a doublet. This establishes the relative position of the aromatic methyl to the protonated carbon of the benzofuran system.

The remaining two positions must be occupied by the five-membered carbocyclic ring with its substituent methyl accounting for all the carbons, hydrogens, and double-bond equivalents.

Hydrogenation of marmelerin for 56 h over PtO2 in MeOH yielded a dihydroderivative (3), M+ = 216, with UV absorptions in agreement with a dihydrobenzofuran. The

\({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum shows only the six expected sp2 carbons (five singlets and one doublet in the SFORD spectrum) and nine sp3 carbons (two additional doublets in the SFORD spectrum at \(d\) 39.2 and \(d\) 82.9 for the two sp3 carbons of the dihydrobenzofuran). A remarkable de-shielding effect is seen on the two methyl resonances (attached to C-1 and C-2) which appear at \(d\) 15.1 and \(d\) 15.4 (Table I). The 1H NMR of the dihydro derivative displayed two new multiplets at \(d\) 4.70 (1 H, H-2) and \(d\) 3.25 (2 H, H-1 and H-8) and the furan methyls now appeared as doublets at \(d\) 1.30 (3 H, \(J\) = 8 Hz, H-9) and \(d\) 1.45 (3 H, \(J\) = 8 Hz, H-10). The aromatic proton, \(d\) 6.50 (1 H, H-4), now absorbs at a more shielded position. Similar resonance shift behavior was also observed for the dihydrobenzofuran analogue prepared from _e_-caesalpin.10

From this analysis it was possible to propose two structures for marmelerin, (1 and 2), where the position of C-12 could not be directly inferred from the spectral data. Structure 1 was supported as the isomer which follows the isoprene rule, making possible a biogenetic route for 1 through a normal head-to-tail linkage of the isoprene units depicted on structure 3.

Structure 1 was confirmed by a two-dimensional "INADEQUATE" experiment for 13C NMR analysis of marmelerin where carbon-carbon connectivities were de 

## Page 3

termined by the technique described by Bax, Freeman, and Frenkiel11 as modified by Mareci and Freeman12 in which the signal arising from spin-coupled pairs of \({}^{13}\)C nuclei (in natural abundance) are separated according to their double quantum frequencies. A connectivity plot was obtained which is shown in Figure 1. This plot is a contour plot of the NMR data in which the peaks are viewed from above. The doublets arising from the spin-coupled nuclei appear as two pairs of spots on the same horizontal level at the chemical shift frequencies of the coupled nuclei. All of the signals are symmetrically located about a diagonal line through the plot, which aids in distinguishing them from noise or other artifacts. In a few cases, only one peak of the doublet was strong enough to detect, but this resulted in no loss of information in view of the symmetry property described above.

Multiplicities of each of the 15 \({}^{13}\)C peaks were determined by the APT technique.13 Spin-lattice relaxation times for the carbon atoms without a directly bonded proton were measured and found to fall in the range from 20 to 30 s. Since this would have required an excessively long delay between pulses in the connectivity experiment, a few milligrams of chromium acetyl acetonate were added to the solution of 250 mg of marmelerin in 1 mL of CDCl5.

Connectivities determined by inspection of Figure 1 are listed in Table 1.

The connectivities, multiplicities, and chemical shifts not only allow an unequivocal choice between structures 1 and 2 but also completely specify the structure of marmelerin as 1. The unobserved connectivity C-2 to C-1 cannot represent the position of the heteroatom, since the chemical shift of C-1 is incompatible with an sp\({}^{2}\) carbon bonded directly to oxygen, while the chemical shifts of C-3a and C-2 are both compatible with the benzofuranoid portion of the structure.

As marmelerin is the first natural sesquiterpene containing a tetrasubstituted furan, and thus is the first example of a new structural class of sesquiterpenes, we were concerned that it had not been generated as a result of the heating during distillation. That it is, indeed, a natural constituent of the plant was shown by its isolation from the hexane extract of the roots by simple silica chromatography. Evaluation of the biological activity of marmelerin as an antimicrobial showed that it is lacking in activity. Work on identification of those substances present in the extracts with antimicrobial activity continues.

## Experimental Section

1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian EM-390 spectrometer operating in a CW mode, using CDCl5 solution and MeSi as internal standard. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR experiments were recorded on a JEOL JN-YFX06 (15.03 MHz) or on a Varian XL-300 (75.0 MHz) spectrometer, which were operated in PT mode, using CDCl5 solutions. Chemical shifts are expressed in parts per million (ppm) relative to MeSi as internal standard. Proton noise decoupled (PND) and fully coupled (GATED decoupled: decoupler of during acquisition time) were obtained with the FX60 by centering the decoupler frequency 500 Hz below MeSi with a noise bandwidth of 1.0 kHz, a pulse angle of 45deg, a pulse repetition of 6.0 s, a sweep width of 4000 Hz, and SK data points. Single-frequency off-resonance decoupled (SFORD) spectra were obtained with the proton decoupler set at 1000 Hz downfield from the signal for MeSi. Low-power selective proton decoupling was accomplished with a decoupler power of 26 dB. The two-dimensional \({}^{13}\)C INADEQUATE experiment was performed with the XL-300 spectrometer at 75 MHz, using 250 mg of marmelerin in 1.0 mL of CDCl5. A few milligrams of chromium acetyl acetonate was added to the solution to bring the \(T_{1}\) values for the non-protonated carbons from 20-30 s down into the range of 1-2 s. The solution was placed in a 10-mm sample tube and prevented from vortexing upon rotation by a Teflon-brand plug. The length of the liquid column was a good match to the 2-cm length of the receiver coil. The \({}^{13}\)C spectral width was 12 kHz (160 ppm) with an aquisition time of 0.085 s (2048 data points). Data was accumulated for 320 repetitions of the pulse sequence, with a 3-s recovery delay between sequences. After weighting with an exponential function (5-Hz line broadening), the weighted FID was Fourier transformed. A total of 128 separate spectra were obtained in this way with an incremental increase in the delay between the 90deg pulse which created the double quantum coherence and the 135deg pulse which reconverted it to observable magnetization. The evolution of the double quantum frequency appeared as a modulation of the two pairs of \({}^{13}\)C doublets arising from bonded \({}^{12}\)C nuclei and could be observed by Fourier transformation of the 128-point interferogram formed by each data point in the spectrum. The resulting two-dimensional array was plotted as a contour plot (looking down from above) with the \({}^{13}\)C chemical shift as the \(x\) axis and the double quantum frequency the \(y\) axis. The spectral width in the double quantum dimension was 12 kHz. For both \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra, the descriptions are s = singlet, d = doublet, t = triplet, q = quartet, and m = multiplet. Infrared spectra were taken on a Perkin-Elmer 281B infrared spectrometer. Mass spectra were recorded by using a Finnigan 3200 GC/MS mass spectrometer coupled to an INCOS data system. CD spectra were obtained on a JASCO 3-4 automatic recording spectropolarimeter using methanol solutions. UV spectra were recorded on a Beckman spectrometer Acta III with methanol solutions. Specific rotation was obtained on a Perkin-Elmer 141 polarimeter using chloroform solutions.

Silica gel column chromatography employed MN silica gel 60 (70-270 mesh) or MN silica gel G/UV284 for thin-layer chromatography. TLC analysis was performed by utilizing MN precoded plates and detection of compounds was achieved by spraying with a prepared solution of EtOH/_p_-anisaldehyde/AcOH (90:5:1) to which 5% by volume of concentrated H2SO4 had been added immediately before use. All solvents used for chromatography purposes were A.R. grade or distilled before use. The melting point of the picrate was determined in a Fisher digital melting point analyzer Model 355 and was not corrected.

### Plant Material.

The whole plant was collected in Sobral, Ceara, Brazil, and identified by Prof. Aftranio G. Fernandes. The voucher specimens representing the collection are deposited at the herbarium of the Departamento de Botanica, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Fortaleza-CE, 60.000, Brazil. The fresh leaves

Figure 1.:



## Page 4

were steam distilled to give a blue essential oil (0.33%) which was distilled at reduced pressure (15 mmHg) to produce different fractions of clear oil and a residue (bp 260-265 degC). This residue (120 mL) was mixed with 300 g of silica gel 60 packed into a cylindrical decantanen funnel and eluted with 1.5 L of hexane. The eluent was combined into 12 fractions based on TLC comparison. The column was then washed with EbOac/MeOH (5%) to yield a brown, viscous oil. Fractions 1-4 (60 g) yielded a mixture of terpenes which was analyzed by the method of Craveiro et al.14.14 The following terpenes were identified: \(a\) - and b-pinene, camphene, myrene, limonene, _g_-terpinene, camphor, terpinene, 4-ol, copene, _b_-elemene, _a_-gurjunene, cyperen, _b_-caryophyllene, thuluposene, _trans_-_b_-farmesene, _g_- and _c_-adenosine, _g_-muroulene, and palstrol.

Fractions 5-9 (2.5 g) yielded a dark blue oil that was rechromatographed on a column of silica gel G (25 g) using hexane as eluent and nitrogen pressure to produce a convenient flow rate. Guayanzuene (50 mg) and 240 mg of pure marmerlein (1), as a clear, colorless oil were obtained. An additional 140 mg of 1 were also obtained from the less polar fraction of the neutral part of the hexane extract of roots by elution with hexane of a similar type of silica gel column.

Marmerlein (1): colorless, mobil oil, positive Ethcit test; [_a_2Hb - d35 (c 1.0, CHCl); CD (c 5.0, MeOH) \(a\)200 - d6.5; \(a\)200 - d7.8; \(a\)200 - d1.7, \(a\)200 + d1.0, \(a\)200 + d1.1, UV \(a\)200 + d289 (3.42), 278 (3.51), 255 (4.18), 222 (4.32); IR (nest, cm3) 3040-2850, 1658, 1626, 1585, 1453, 1298, 1216, 1146, 1040, 850; MS, _m_/_z_ (relative intensity) 214 (M+, 51), 199 (100), 184 (13), 171 (21), 153 (11), 143 (15), 141 (15), 129 (11), 128 (18), 115 (18), 105 (11), 91 (21), 77 (12).

The antimicrobial metabolites of _Plakina_ sp., a marine sponge that overgrows coral heads, are the steroidal alkaloids plakinamine A (1) and plakinamine B (2). The structures were elucidated by interpretation of spectral plakinamine A (1) and plakinamine B (2) (Chart I). The structures of the two steroidal alkaloids were elucidated by interpretation of spectral data and comparison with model compounds synthesized from ergosterol.

The sponge, _Plakina_ sp., was collected in shallow waters (~5 m) at Mant Island, Pouge, where it was observed to overgrow and kill corals. A methanolic extract of the freeze-dried sponge was found to possess antimicrobial activity. Solvent partition was followed by chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 (methanol) and Sephadex G-15 (water) to obtain an active fraction containing one major and one minor component. The minor metabolite, plakinamine B (2, 0.1% dry weight), was obtained as a hydrochloride salt by fractional crystallization from methanol. The major metabolite, plakinamine A (1, 0.3% dry weight), was separated from the residue by taking advantage of its solubility in aqueous acid.

The steroidal nature of plakinamine A (1) was suggested by the molecular formula, C2H48N2, and by 1H NMR signals at 0.59 (s, 3 H) and 0.77 (s, 3 H) and two 13C NMR signals at \(\delta\) 12.0 (q) that could be assigned to the C-18 and C-19 methyl groups of a steroid. A striking feature of the 13C NMR spectrum was the presence of five signals at \(\delta\) >100; the signals at \(\delta\) 117.7 (d) and 139.2 (s) were in good agreement with literature values for C-7 and C-8 of a \(\Delta\)3 sterol2 while the signals at \(\delta\) 173.2 (s), 137.1 (s), and 129.0 (s) could be assigned to a fully substituted double bond and an imine group. The ultraviolet chromophore at 246 nm nm (_t_ 7100) implied the presence of an \(a\), _b_-unsaturated amine. A major fragmentation in the mass spectrum gave peaks at _m_/_z_ 123.05 (C2H3N, base peak), 299.2645 (C2H38N), and 300.2721 (C2H34N) that could be explained

