# 10.1016@0031-9422(93)80055-W.pdf

## Page 1



# 3-Methoxyfurocoumarins from _Pilocarpus fiedelianus_

Adolfo H. Muller, Luis R. O. Degaspari, Paulo C. Vieira, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes Jose R. Pirani

# Abstract

The stems of _Pilocarpus fiedelianus_ have afforded the new angular furocoumarins 3-methoxyangelicin and 3,6-dimethoxyangelicin, in addition to the known sphondin, pimpinellin, scopoletin, aurapten, osthol and meranzin hydrate. Their structures were elucidated on the basis of spectral data.

## INTRODUCTION

The genus _Pilocarpus_ has long been known as the most important source of the alkaloid pilocarpine, a useful medicine for the treatment of glaucoma and other diseases [1]. Recent reports reveal the presence of aliphatic ketones, pilocarpamide and (-)-episesamine in _P. trachylolipus_ [2], damamare triterpenes in _P. spicatus_ [3] and coumarins in _P. goudotianus_ [4].

In this paper, we report the isolation and structural elucidation of the new coumarins 3-methoxyangelicin (**1**) and 3,6-dimethoxyangelicin (**2**) in addition to the known sphondin, pimpinellin, scopoletin, aurapten, osthol and meranzin hydrate from a dichloromethane extract of the stems of _P. riedelianus_. Their structures were elucidated on the basis of spectral data.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Compound **1** gave a blue fluorescent spot on TLC. Its 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) revealed the presence of five resonances, corresponding to five protons, in the aromatic region (d6.9-7.7) besides a singlet (d3.92) for the three protons typical of a methoxyl group. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed the presence of 12 signals. These data, together with the [M]+ (_m_/_z_ 216), d1517.7 (13C NMR) and 1727 cm-1 (IR) suggested a coumarin with the molecular formula C12H8O4. Further analysis of the 1H NMR for **1** showed signals characteristic of a disubstituted furan ring, an AB coupling system (_J_ = 8.9 Hz) and a singlet. These data together with the long-range coupling observed between H-3' and H-6 allowed us to propose an angular arrangement for the

## Page 2

furan ring [5]. On the other hand, the absence of a pair of doublets characteristic of H-3 and H-4 indicated that either H-3 or H-4 is substituted. This is in agreement with the placement of the methoxyl in one of those positions. The placement of the methoxyl at C-3 was revealed by NOE experiments where irradiation of either H-5 or the methoxyl caused an effect in the signal (66.95). This experiment also led unequivocally to the assignment of H-4 to the signal at d6.95.

Through several experiments such as DEPT and 1H-13C COSY it was also possible to assign the carbons in the 13C NMR. The other resonances were assigned through comparison with model compounds [6, 7]. All the evidence above is in agreement with the structure of 3-methoxyangelicin for 1.

The 1H NMR spectrum of 2 (Table 1), together with the [M]+ (_m_/_z_ 246) suggested that this compound was a 3-methoxyangelicin derivative. The placement of the additional methoxyl group (d4.07) at C-6 was confirmed by both NOE experiments and the absence of long-range coupling between H-3' and the benzene protons. This evidence supports the structure of 3,6-dimethoxy-angelicin for 2.

The known coumarins were identified by comparison of their spectral data with those reported in the literature [8-13]. Coumarins are widely distributed in plant species, but the occurrence of 3-methoxycoumarins in the Rutaceae has not been reported previously.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_General._ UV and IR were recorded in MeOH and CHCl3, respectively. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, in CDCl3 with TMS as int. standard. MS were obtained at 70 eV (probe).

_Plant material. Pilocarpus riedelanus_ was collected in the State of Espirito Santo, Brazil, in June 1986. A voucher specimen is deposited at Herbarium of the Instituto de Biociencias da Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

_Extraction and isolation._ Stems (750 g) were ground and extracted with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH, respectively. The CH2Cl2 extract (8.8 g) was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH as eluents. The EtOAc fr. (6.9 g) subjected to CC over silica gel using hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH at different ratios of increasing polarity, furnished 22 frs. Fr. 12 was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-EtOAc, 4:1) to yield aurapten (12 mg) and osthol (8 mg). Frs 13 and 14 were submitted to CC over silica gel el eluting with hexane-Me2CO (9:1) affording 1 (8 mg). Fr. 16 after CC over silica gel eluting with CH2Cl2-MeOH (19:1) afforded 45 new frs. Fr. 16/I was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-Me2CO, 7:3) to yield spindon (9 mg) and pimpinellin (8 mg). Fr. 16/L was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; CH2Cl2-MeOH, 4:1) to yield 2 (5 mg). Fr. 16/M was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-Me2CO, 1:1) to yield scopoletin (4 mg). Frs 19-21 were submitted to CC over silica gel eluting with CH2Cl2-MeOH (19:1) affording 46 new frs. Frs 19-21/N were purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; hexane-Me2CO, 1:1) to yield meranin hydrate (8 mg).

3-_Methoxyangelicin_ (1). Crystals, mp 138-140deg. UV _l_max nm (log _g_): 220 (3.28), 248 (3.24), 267 (2.79), 305 (3.05). IR _v_max cm-1: 1727, 1634, 1541. 1H and 13C NMR (see Table 1). MS, _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 216 [M]+ (59), 186 (20), 172 (100), 145 (21), 117 (16), 89 (46), 63 (34), 62 (17), 51 (17), 50 (12).

3,6-_Dimethoxyangelicin_ (2). Amorphous solid. UV _l_max nm (log _e_): 219 (2.73), 245 (2.54), 252 (2.51), 271 (2.14), 305 (2.15). IR _v_max cm-1: 1720, 1642, 1528. 1H NMR (see Table 1). MS, _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 246 [M]+ (62), 202 (100), 187 (18), 159 (19), 89 (10), 66 (32), 63 (16), 62 (22), 57 (75), 55 (47), 50 (24).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors thank FAPESP, CNPq and FINEP for financial support, and Instituto de Fisica e Quimica de Sao Carlos, SP, for 1H and 13C NMR. A.H.M. acknowledges CAPES-PICD for the award of a scholarship.

## References

* [1] Cordell, G. A. (1981) _Introduction to Alkaloids: a Biogenetic Approach._ John Wiley, New York.
* [2] Silveira, E. R., Andrade Neto, M. and Braz Filho, R. (1989) Data presented at the _Simposio Brasil-China de Quimica e Farmacologia de Produtos Naturais._ Abstr. Proc., p. 91.
* [3] Silveira, E. R., Andrade Neto, M. and Braz Filho, R. (1990) Data presented at the 13_a. Reuniao Anual da Sociedade Brasileira de Quimica._ Abstr. Proc., p. 46.
* [4] Amaro-Luis, J. M., Massanet, G. M., Pando, E. and Rodrigues-Luis, F. (1990) _Planta Med._**56**, 304.
* [5] Lassak, E. V. and Pinhey, J. T. (1967) _J. Chem. Soc._ (C) 2000.
* [6] Cussans, N. J. and Huckerby, T. N. (1975) _Tetrahedron_**31**, 2719.
* [7] Bose, A. K., Fujiwara, H., Kamat, V. S., Trivedi, G. K. and Bhattacharyya, S. C. (1979) _Tetrahedron_**35**, 1.
* [8] Munoz, M. A., Torres, R. and Cassels, B. K. (1982) _J. Nat. Prod._**45**, 367.
* [9] Harkar, S., Razdan, T. K. and Waight, E. S. (1984) _Phytochemistry_**23**, 419.
* [10] Tatum, J. H. and Berry, R. E. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18**, 500.
* [11] Dreyer, D. L. (1970) _J. Org. Chem._**35**, 2294.
* [12] Ashkenazy, D., Friedman, J. and Kashman, Y. (1983) _Planta Med._**47**, 218.
* [13] Chatterjee, A. and Gupta, S. S. (1964) _Tetrahedron Letters_**29**, 1961.



