# 10.1021@jf00030a035.pdf

## Page 1



# Antitumor Agents from the Cashew (_Anacardium occidentale_) Apple Juice

Isao Kubo, Masamitsu Ochi, Paulo C. Vieira, and Sakae Komatsu

Division of Entomology and Parasitology, College of Natural Resources, University of California,

Berkeley, California 94720

###### Abstract

Three anacardic acids (1-3) have been isolated as cytotoxic agents against BT-20 breast carcinoma cells from the cashew _Anacardium occidentale_ (Anacardiaceae) apple juice. In addition to these anacardic acids, the cytotoxicity of their 13 congeners (4-16) isolated from the cashew nut and nut shell oil has also been examined. Anacardic acids (1-4), cards (5-8), and methylacardols (9-12) have been found to exhibit moderate cytotoxic activity against both BT-20 breast and HeLa epithelial cervix carcinoma cells.

## INTRODUCTION

We now control many tumors with available antitumor agents. However, the need for new antitumor agents still exists, especially against solid tumors. The unacceptable and undesired side effects of many antitumor agents are a major problem that needs to be improved, due to the need for the antitumor agents to be used for long durations. It seems that edible plants may be a good source of new antitumor agents. With this in mind, we have screened for new antitumor agents from various tropical fruits and vegetables that have been continuously consumed by many people for many years.

In recent years the cashew (_Anacardium occidentale_ L.) (Anacardiaceae) apple has increased in value, especially in the countries where it is grown, such as Brazil. There is no doubt that the nut is the most important product of the cashew tree. However, this tree also yields the pear-shaped "apple" to which the nut is attached. The cashew apple is very sour and stringent until fully ripe, when it becomes edible. In contrast to the nut, the apple was neglected until recently, although it is available in far greater tonnage. A number of processes have now been developed for converting the cashew apple into various products such as juice, jam, syrup, chutney, and beverage (Winterhalter, 1991). Cashew apple juice is, in fact, one of the most popular juices in Brazil today.

In our continuing search for prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors from tropical plants (Kubo et al., 1987) we began to test their antitumor activity, since many prostaglandin-related compounds exhibited potent antitumor activity (Zenser et al., 1980; Powles et al., 1982). Our preliminary screening has found the cashew (_A. occidentale_) apple juice to show significant (ED50 <20 mg/mL) in vitro cytotoxicity against BT-20 breast carcinoma cells. The active principles from a regularly imbibed beverage such as cashew apple juice may be superior as antitumor agents as compared to many nonnatural products. This paper deals with the identification of cytotoxic principles of cashew apple juice.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

General. UV spectra were recorded on a Hitachi 100-80 spectrophotometer in ethanol. IR spectra were acquired on a Perkin-Elmer 1310 IR in KBr. NMR spectra were recorded on a.rEOL GX-400 (400 MHz for 10 and 100 MHz for 150 mCDi). EINS were acquired on a JEOL DX-303H by direct inlet 100 F.Reeycle HPLC (R-HPLC) was performed on a LC-09 (Japan Analytical Industry, Tokyo, Japan) (Kubo and Nakatsu, 1991).

Chemicals. The phenolic compounds 1-16 (Figure 1) used for bioassay were from our previous study (Kubo et al., 1986). However, the repurification of some of them was achieved by R-HPLC. Anethole was isolated from the seeds of _Pimpinella anisum_ (Umbellifera) as previously described (Kubo and Himejima, 1991). Iadole, butylated hydroxymisole (BHA), vitamin C, and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl-2,5-diphenyltriazo-lium bromide (MTT) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO).

Plant Materials. Suco de Caju, a commercial cashew apple juice (Maguary and Milan) was purchased at market places in Sao Paulo, Sao Carlos, and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Cell Lines and Media. The cell lines BT-20 ATCC HTB 19, breast carcinoma isolated from human, and HeLa ATCC CCL 219, epithelioid cervix carcinoma cell from human, used for the assay were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). Both cell lines were maintained on minimum essential medium (Eagle) with nonessential amino acids supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal calf serum and incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air at 37 degC. The human monolayer culture were subcultured with a 0.25% trypsin/EDTA solution.

Cytotoxic Assay. The cytotoxic assays were performed according to a microculture tetrazolium (MTT) method (Carmichael et al., 1987). Briefly, cells were harvested and inoculated into 96-well microtiter plates at 4000-6000 cells/well, with various concentrations of the samples. After incubation, 50 mg/mL MTT (3 mg/mL in PBS, pH 7.2) was added. The formazan dye was solubilized by adding 100 mg/mL DMSO to each well, followed by gentle shaking. The extinction coefficient was measured for each well using a Uniskan I Photometer Labsystem, at a wavelength of 620 nm.

Combination Study. The combination data were obtained according to the checkerboard method (Nordeen et al., 1979). Thus, a series of the 2-fold dilutions of anacaric acid (1) was tested in combination with 2-fold dilutions of the other (anethole, indole, BHA, and vitamin C) (Figure 2). Each compound was tested at least twice.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The cytotoxicity-guided fractionation using BT-20 breast carcinoma cells has led to the isolation of three active principles from the cashew (_A. occidentale_) apple by R-HPLC using an ODS C1a column. The active compounds were identified by means of spectroscopic methods as anacardic acids, more specifically, 6-[8(Z),11(Z),14-pentadecatrienyl]salicylic acid (1), 6-[8(Z),11-(Z)-pentadecadienyl]salicylic acid (2), and 6-[8(Z)-pentadecenyl]salicylic acid (3). These nonisproach alky side chain phenolic compounds were previously isolated from the cashew (_A. occidentale_) nut shell oil together

## Page 2

with other similar phenolic compounds such as cardols, methylacradi, and cardanols, with properties as molluscicides (Kubo et al., 1986), prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors (Kubo et al., 1987; Grazzini et al., 1991), and antimicrobial agents (Gellerman et al., 1969; Himejima and Kubo, 1991). Similar nonisoprenoid long-chain phenols including anacaridic acid (3) were isolated as antitumor agents against Sarcoma ascites in mice from the sarrotesta of _Ginkgo biloba_ L. (Ginkgoaceae) (Itokawa et al., 1987).

In addition to the 3 above-mentioned anacaridic acids (1-3) isolated from the cashber apple, 13 additional phenolic compounds (4-16) isolated from the cashew nut and cashew nut shell oil (Tyman, 1979) were also examined for comparison purposes. They were first assayed against BT-20 breast carcinoma cells at 10 _m_g/mL. As a result, anacaridic acids (1-4), cardols (5-8), and methylacradi (9-12) exhibited significant cytotoxicity. Interestingly, cardanols (13-16) did not demonstrate significant activity against BT-20 breast carcinoma cells, although 5-[(8(_Z_),-11(_Z_),14-pentadecatrienyl)resorcinol (5) was previously reported to exhibit potent antitumor activity against Sarcoma 180 ascites in mice (Itokawa et al., 1987).

The ED50 values of the phenolic compounds (1-12) were first obtained against BT-20 breast carcinoma cells (Table I). Then, only the active compounds (ED50 < 10 _m_g/mL) were tested against HeLa epithelial-devi carcinoma cells. The most effective cytotoxicity was observed for the cardols, followed by the anacaridic acids and then the

Figure 1.: Structures of 16 phenolic compounds isolated from the cashew (apple, nut, and nut shell oil), salicylic acid, (17), and resorcinol (18).



## Page 3

methylcards. In addition to the natural phenolic compounds (1-16), salicylic acid (17) and resorcinol (18) were also tested. Neither salicylic acid nor resorcinol exhibited any activity against these two carcinoma cells at this concentration. By comparison of salicylic acid (17) and resorcinol (18) with the corresponding anacardic acids (1-4) and cards (5-8), it seems that the addition of a C18 alkyl side chain plays an important role in increasing the cytotoxicity. In fact, \(P\) (as the hydrophobic parameter) of long-chain phenols was found to be one of the most important factors for the ED50 values against Chinese hamster V-79 cells (Itokawa et al., 1989).

Moreover, all of the phenolic compounds isolated from the cashew (nut, apple, and nut shell oil) have a C18 alkyl side chain with up to three double bonds. In the previous investigation of their molluscicidal and antimicrobial activities, an increase in the number of double bonds in the side chain, in general, increases the biological activity (Gellerman et al., 1969; Himejima and Kubo, 1991; Kubo et al., 1986). However, this seems not to be the case in the cytotoxic activity, although the phenolics possessing a C18 saturated alkyl side chain were found to be somehow less cytotoxic than the ones with a C18 unsaturated alkyl group.

Although the cytotoxicity of these phenolics may not be potent enough to use them as a leading compound for drug design, they are worthy of further investigation as natural products isolated from a daily beverage. Therefore, the enhancement of their cytotoxicity by combining them with other substances was studied. The procedure for selecting these "other substances" is, however, still in a preliminary stage. The initial selection of other substances was based largely on our previous combination studies of antimicrobial agents. For example, the antifungal activity of polyyodial against a filamentous fungus _Candida albicans_ was enhanced 32-fold by combining it with sublethal amounts of anethole (Kubo and Himejima, 1991). Similarly, the antibacterial activity of criinid against a cariogenic bacterium _Streptococcus mutans_ was increased 64-fold by BHT (Kubo et al., 1992a), and that of b-cadinene was enhanced 128-fold by indole (Kubo et al., 1992b). Vitamin C was also added for the combination study because of its high content in the cashew apple. Thus, the ascorbic acid (vitamin C) content in the cashew apple is reported to be greater than 6 times that for oranges (Cecchi and Rodriguez-Amaya, 1981). Moreover, vitamin C (anti-oxidant) was found to increase the antifungal activity of both polyyodial and warburganal 16-fold against a dermatomycotic fungus _Pityosporum ovale_ (Kubo and Himejima, 1992). Since these four compounds have been used as food additives, we can assume that their safety has been established.

For the combination study, 6-[8(Z),11(Z),14-pentadecatrienylsalicylic acid (1), otherwise known as anacardic acid, was selected for the following reasons: (1) it has been isolated from the edible cashew apple; (2) its ED50 values against the two human solid tumor (BT-20 breast and HeLa epithelial cervix) cells are less than 4 mg/mL, that is, it satisfies the NCI requirement to warrant further investigation; and (3) most importantly for conducting this experiment, it is available in quantity.

Anacardic acid (1) was, therefore, combined with anethole, BHA, indole, and vitamin C, respectively. The combination study was carried out against BT-20 breast carcinoma cells by the checkerboard method (Norden et al., 1979). In contrast to the antimicrobial activity, none of these four compounds dramatically increased the cytotoxicity of anacardic acid (1). Their effect was only additive. As an example, the combination study of anacardic acid (1) with BHA by the checkerboard method is shown in Figure 2.

The total yield of the antitumor anacardic acids (1-3) in the freeze-dried cashew apple juice was reported at about 0.05% (Kubo et al., 1986). In addition to these anacardic acids, the high content of vitamin C in the cashew apple is described above (Cecchi and Rodriguez-Amaya, 1981). Together with previous papers (Kubo et al., 1987; Itokawa et al., 1987), these data suggest that consuming the cashew apple and/or its products continuously for long durations may be advantageous in controlling tumors.

## Acknowledgment

We are grateful to Dr. S. Kurozumi and Mr. J. Huang for technical assistance in the cytotoxicity assay, Dr. K. Tsujimoto for measuring NMR and MS data, and Mr. T. Matsuo for obtaining the cashew apple juice.

## References

- Carmichael, J.; DeGraff, W. G.; Gazdar, A. F.; Minna, J. D.; Mitchell, J. B. Evaluation of a tetrazolium-based semiautomated calorimetric assay: Assessment of chemosensitivity testing. Cancer Res. 1987, 47, 986-942.

- Cecchi, H. M.; Rodriguez-Amaya, D. B. Carotenoid composition and vitamin A value of fresh and pasteurized cashew-apple (_Anacardimum occidentale L_). Juice. J. Food Sci. 1981, 46, 147-149.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c}  & BD50, mg/mL \\ phenolic tested & BT-20 & HeLa \\
1 & 3.23 & 3.84 \\
2 & 3.08 & 3.91 \\
3 & 4.02 & 2.69 \\
4 & 7.42 & 4.94 \\
5 & 2.08 & 2.56 \\
6 & 2.63 & 3.01 \\
7 & 1.72 & 2.74 \\
8 & 6.25 & 4.02 \\
9 & 3.73 & 5.05 \\
10 & 2.64 & 7.38 \\
11 & 6.23 & 6.06 \\
12 & 7.



## Page 4

Gellerman, J. L.; Walsh, N. J.; Werner, N. K.; Schlenk, H. Antimicrobial effects of anaccharide acids. _Can. J. Microbiol._ 1989, _15_, 1219-1223, and references cited therein.
* Grazzini et al. (1991) Grazzini, R.; Hesk, D.; Heininger, E.; Hildenbrandt, G.; Reddy, C. C.; Cox-Foster, D.; Medford, J.; Craig, R.; Mumma, R. O. Inhibition of lipoxygenase and prostaglandin endperoxide synthetase by anacaridic acids. _Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun._ 1991, _176_, 775-780.
* Himejima and Kubo (1991) Himejima, M.; Kubo, I. Antibacterial agents from the cashew _Anocardium occidentale_ (Anacardiacaeae) nut shell oil. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1991, _39_, 418-421.
* Itokawa et al. (1987) Itokawa, H.; Totsuka, N.; Nakahara, K.; Takeya, K.; Lepoittevin, J. P.; Asakawa, Y.; Antitumor principles from _Ginkgo biloba_ L. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._ 1987, _35_, 3016-3020.
* Itokawa et al. (1989) Itokawa, H.; Totsuka, N.; Nakahara, K.; Maezuru, M.; Takeya, K.; Kondo, M.; Inamatsu, M.; Morita, H. A quantitative structure-activity relationship for antitumor activity of long-chain phenols from _Ginkgo biloba_ L. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._ 1989, _37_, 1619-1621.
* Kubo and Himejima (1991) Kubo, I.; Himejima, M. Anethole, asynergist of polyogdial against filamentous microorganisms. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1991, _39_, 2290-2292.
* Kubo and Himejima (1992) Kubo, I.; Himejima, M. Potentiation of antifungal activity of sesquiterpene dialdehydes against _Candida albicans_ and two other fungi. _Experientia_ 1992, _48_, 1162-1164.
* Kubo and Nakatsu (1991) Kubo, I.; Nakatsu, T. Recent examples of preparative-scale recycling high performance liquid chromatography in natural products chemistry. _LC-GC_ 1991, \(8\), 938-939.
* Kubo et al. (1986) Kubo, I.; Komatsu, S.; Ochi, M. Molluscicides from the cashew _Anocardium occidentale_ and their large-scale isolation. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1986, _34_, 970-973.
* Kubo et al. (1987) Kubo, I.; Kim, M.; Naya, K.; Yamagiwa, Y.; Ohashi, K.; Sakamoto, Y.; Hirakawa, S.; Kamikawa, T. Prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors from an African medicinal plant _Ozoroa muronata_. _Chem. Lett._ 1987, 1101-1104.
* Kubo et al. (1992) Kubo, I.; Himejima, M.; Tsujimoto, K.; Muroi, H.; Ichikawa, N. Antibacterial activity of crimitol and its potentiation. _J. Nat. Prot._ 1992a, _55_, 780-785.
* Kubo and Himejima (1992b) Kubo, I.; Muroi, H.; Himejima, M. Antimicrobial activity of green tea flavor components and their combination effects. _J. Agric. Food Chem._ 1992b, _40_, 245-248.
* Norden et al. (1979) Norden, C. W.; Wentzel, H. W.; Keleti, E. Comparison of techniques for measurement of in vitro antibiotic synergism. _J. Infect. Dis._ 1979, _140_, 629-633.
* Powles et al. (1982) Powles, T. J.; Bockman, R. S.; Honn, K. V.; Ramwell, P. _Prostaglandins and Related Lipids_; Liss: New York, 1982; Vol. 2.
* Tyman (1979) Tyman, J. H. P. Non-isoprenoid long chain phenols. _Chem. Soc. Rev._ 1979, \(8\), 499-537, and references cited therein.
* Winterhalter and Fruits (1991) Winterhalter, P. Fruits IV. In _Volatile Compounds in Foods and Beverages_; Maarse, H., Ed.; Dekker: New York, 1991; pp 389-409.
* Zenser et al. (1980) Zenser, T. V.; Mattammal, M. B.; Armbrecht, H. J.; Divis, B. B. Benzidine binding to nucleic acids mediated by the peroxidative activity of prostaglandin endoperoxide synthetase. _Cancer Res._ 1980, _40_, 2839-2845.

Received for review October 22, 1992. Revised manuscript received March 8, 1993. Accepted March 8, 1993.



