# 10.1016@S0040-4039(00)94036-X.pdf

## Page 1

Tetrahedron Letters,Vol.24,No.46,pp 5043-5046,1983 0040-4039/83 $3.00 +.00 Printed in Great Britain (c)1983 Pergamon Press Ltd.

TWO NEW DITERPENES WITH A ROSANE SKELETON FROM VELLOZIACEAE.

ANGELO C. PINTOa, TEREZA CRISTINA V. SCOFIELDa, and RAIMUNDO

BRAZ FILHOb.

aNucleo de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, Universidade Federal

do Rio de Janeiro, CCS, Bloco H, 21941, Rio de Janeiro, RJ,

Brazil. (b)Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal Rural

do Rio de Janeiro.

SUMMARY: Two new rosane diterpenes, epoxicorcovadin and epoxivellozin,

have been isolated from Vellozia candida Mikan: their structures were

stablished by spectroscopic data and chemical transformations.

Vellozia candida Mikan grows on the hillside of Corcovado mountain

and on the rocky mountains of the coast of State of Rio de Janeiro. We
have previously reported the isolation of velloziolide (1)1 and of three

rosane diterpenes2 from the hexane extract of the stem, roots and leaf

sheaths of this plant. The present paper describes the structural

elucidation of two new diterpenoids, epoxicorcovadin (2a) and epoxivellozin (3a),

isolated as minor components from the same plant.

Epoxicorcovadin (2a) was purified and characterized as its acetate

derivative (2b). 2b [C22H30O4; m.p. 168-69degC, [a]D= 0.00 (c = 1.00 CHC13)]3

possesses as a characteristic feature an a,3-unsaturated kctonc moiety

(vc= 0 at 1668cm-1 and \(\frac{\text{EtOH}}{\text{max}}\) at 253 nm). The 1H NMR spectrum, in CDCl3,

showed signals for four tertiary methyl groups (0.98, 1.10, 1.18 and 1.26 ppm),

a methyl group of an acetate (2.09 ppm) and one tertiary vinyl group at

5.67 ppm ( 1H, dd, J=17 and 10 Hz). The multiplet signal (3H) between at 4.98

and 5.31 ppm (CH2,m) corresponds to the methylene of the vinyl residue and

the acetyl carbonicic proton. Two doublets at 5.9 (1H, J=9 Hz) and 7.45

ppm (1H, J=9 Hz) are due to the two olefinic protons a,3-conjugated to the

carbonyl group, with the 3 carbon linked to a quaternary carbon. Double

irradiation experiments demonstrated that these two protons are mutually

spin coupled. The absence of absorptions in the IR spectrum for hydroxyl

groups and the presence of two singlct signals at 64.3 and 68.4 ppm in

13C NMR spectrum of 2b indicated that the remaining oxygen atom belongs to

an epoxide function. These data, in combination with the comparative

analysis of the proton noise decoupled and single frequence off-resonance

decoupled 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1), allowed expansion of the molecular

formula C22H30O4 to (CO-CH=CH-m) (CHOAC) (-CH=CH2) (-C-C-m) (C)3(CH)(CH2)4

(CH3)4 and to deduce the structure 2b, which was confirmed by chemical 

## Page 2

transformation. Thus, epoxidation of 42 with m-CPBA at 10degC, in CH2Cl2', afforded the 5a,10a-epoxide 5 as the main product by attack of the bulky reagent from the less hindered a-face. Stereochemical assignment of the epoxy ring of 5 can be made by comparative 13C NMR analysis of 2 and 4. Thus in 2b, C-8 appears at a more shielded position (32.7 ppm) than in 4 (37.7 ppm, Table 1). This can be explained by a shielding effect due to the "g-gauche like" relaticnship between the C-8-H and the 5a,10a-oxirane ring in 2. Treatment of epoxide 5 with LDA and phenylselenyl bromide" in dry THF at -78degC followed by addition of hydrogen peroxide at room temp, furnished a product that upon acetylation was identical in all aspects with natural 2.

Epoxivellozin [3a; \(C_{20}\)H28O4; m.p. 142-4degC; \([a]_{D}^{25}\) = + 14.9 (c = 0.77 CHCl3) ] revealed in the IR spectrum the presence of a conjugated ketone (1630 cm-1, broad band), hydroxyl (3420cm-1, broad band), and vinyl (900 cm-1) groups. The UV spectrum presented bands at \(\lambda_{\text{H}}^{\text{EtOH}}\) 228 and 291 nm, which were shifted to \(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{EtOH}}\) 229 and 338 nm after addition of one drop a NaOH solution, indicating the presence of a diosphenol chromophore.5

Table 2 lists the \({}^{1}_{\text{H}}\) NMR spectral data of 3b assigned to the corresponding protons by integration, multiplicity and nuclear magnetic double resonance techniques. The smaller value of the coupling constant of one of the protons at C-14 (J= 2.5Hz) indicates its equatorial position (W-type coupling with Heq-12). The presence of two hydroxyl group was confirmed by acetylation of 3a (Ac2O/DMAP) to yield a diacetyl derivative 3b showing two methyl singlets at 2.02 and 2.24 ppm (acetyl groups) and a double doublet at 5.24 ppm which corresponds to a carbonic ionic proton deshielded.by acetylation (4.04 ppm in 3). The UV spectrum of 3b showed \(\lambda_{\text{H}}^{\text{EtOH}}\) at 252 nm. The hypsochromic shift observed in the conversion of 3a to 3b confirmed the presence of the diosphenol chromophore in 3a.5

The remaining oxygen atom in 3a was assigned to a tetrasubstituted epoxide moiety on the basis of 13C NMR peaks observed at 66.9 (s) and 72.3 (s) ppm. Reduction of 3b with NaBH4 in MeOH at room temp gave mono acetate (3c) (\(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{EtOH}}\) 228 and 291 nm). The 13C NMR spectral data of 3a and 3b (Table 2) in combination with biogenetic considerations allowed postulation of structure 3a for epoxivellozin.

The fact that compound 3a occurs in the same plant with velloziolide 1 allows us to consider 3a as a possible biogenetic precursor for the former diterpenoid.



## Page 3



## Page 4

We are grateful to Profa. Nanuza L. de Monezes (Department of Botany, USP, Brazil) for the identification of Vellozia candida Mikan, SARSA for optical rotation data and Prof. Gabor Lukacs (Gif-sur-Yvette) for the 400MHz 1H NMR spectrum of epoxivelozin 3.

1. A.C. Pinto, M.L.A. Goncalves, R. Braz F9, A. Neszmelyi and G. Lukacs, J. Chcm. Soc. Chcm. Commun., 293, 1982.
2. A.C. Pinto, W.S. Garcez, M.L.G. Ficara, T.C. Vasconcelos, A.L. Perei-ra, L.N.L.F. Gomes, M.C. Frechiani and M.L. Patiutcci, An. Acad. brasil. Cienc., 54, 103 (1982).
3. [a]\({}_{25}^{\lambda}\)o = 589 578 546 436 365 (c= 1,0 CHCl3) 0.00 0.002 0.011 0.21 1.69
4. P.A. Grieco and M. Myashita, J. Org. Chem., 39, 120 (1974).
5. A.I. Scott, "Interpretation of the Ultraviolet Spectra of Natural Products", Pergamon Press, Oxford, New York, p.60 (1974). (Received in USA 19 August 1983)

