# 10.1016@0031-9422(81)80027-1.pdf

## Page 1



# Amides of _Ottonia_ _corcovadensis_

Sonia Soares Costa

Walter B. Mors

Nucleo de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, Centro de Ciencias da Saude, Bloco H, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 21941 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

# Abstract

Five amides were isolated from the roots of _Ottonia corcovadensis_. Two are the known piperlonguminine and piperoravine. The other three are new and their structures are: (22,42)-_N_-isobutyl-5-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-penta-2,4-dienoic amide for isopiperlonguminine; (22,42)-_N_-(2-methyl-2-acetoxypropyl)-5-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-penta-2,4-dienoic amide for corcovadine; and (22,42)-_N_-(2-methyl-2-acetoxypropyl)-5-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-penta-2,4-dienoic amide for isocorcovadine.

## INTRODUCTION

_Ottonia corcovadensis_ Máiq, a herbaceous shrub of the Piperaceae, is known in Brazilian folk medicine under the name of 'false' aboardn'. * Its roots and, to a lesser extent, the stems are chewed to alleviate toothache, due to their anesthetic action on the mucous membranes of the mouth. Extraction of the roots with petrol followed by extensive column chromatography yielded five amides. Piperlonguminine (1) and piperovatine (5) were identified by direct comparison with authentic samples. Piperovatine is the sole substance responsible for the anesthetic activity and was obtained pure by crystallization in a system of solvents at low temperature. The remaining three amides are new, having been named isopiperlonguminine (2), corcovadine (3) and isocorcovadine (4). Piperlonguminine-isopiperlonguminine and corcovadine-isocorcovadine are shown to be pairs of _cis_-_trans_ isomers.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The work was performed with two batches of roots of _O. corcovadensis_ collected at the same site with a 1 year interval. Different extraction procedures were applied to the two batches. In the first process the ground roots were extracted exhaustively with petrol at room temperature; the resulting oily extract was fractionated on a column of silica gel and fractions eluted with solvents of increasing polarity. Piperlonguminine (1) and corcovadine (3) were isolated in this way. With the second batch, extraction was done in a Soxhlet, the extract being chromatographed repeatedly on a series of silica gel columns. By this procedure, all five amides could be isolated. Separation on silica gel proved to be effective, although extremely delicate due to the closeness of the bands. All five amides were eluted with hexane-EtOAc mixtures of composition close to 7:3, thus calling for frequent rec

## Page 2

crystals, mp 140-143, is herewith described as the corresponding _cis,cis_ isomer. The mass spectra of the compounds are identical; IR and UV spectra are similar. The IR spectra differ notably at 985 cm-1, where only **1** shows a strong absorption peak due to the _trans_ configuration. Comparison of the UV spectra shows essentially a hyposochromic shift of the main absorption band, of the order of 10 nm. Significant differences appear in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra, where signals in the region of the olefinic protons appear much less complex for **2** than for **1** (see Table 1).

The positions of the signals agree with those reported for synthetic _cis,cis_-piperic acid [2] and for _cis,cis_-piperine (chavicine) [3]. Doubts about the precise assignments for protons B and C [3] could be dispelled with the aid of the'spin tickling' technique of double resonance. Irradiating the proton corresponding to the most upfield signal (H_A_, d_ \(S\) 6.69, \(d\), \(J\) = 11 Hz) determines splitting of the signal at d 6.85 (_t_, \(J\) = 11 Hz), which must therefore be assigned to Hb. Conversely, irradiation of the most downfield signal (presumably the desibelided Hc, (d 7.45, \(t\), \(J\) = 11 Hz) determines splitting of two signals, as would have to be expected, one being due to Hb (already identified) and the other one Hb (d 6.66, \(d\), \(J\) = 11 Hz). The observed differences between the spectra of the isomers with respect to the protons b to the amide carbonyl group are consistent in that the uniform shielding in the _trans,trans_ structures suffers a deshielding effect in the _cis,cis_ structures.

### The pair corcovadine-isocorcovadine

Corcovadine (**3**), C18H21O5N, crystals, mp 141-144, exhibits the typical UV absorptions of a piperic acid derivative (see Experimental). The IR spectrum is similar to that of piperidinuminine with respect to the amide function (_v_max 3225 and 1640 cm-1), the _trans_ configuration of the olefinic double bonds (1000 cm-1) and the methylenedioxy group (925 cm-1). A second carbonyl function is revealed by a strong absorption at 1710 cm-1, which can be attributed to the presence of an acetoxy group. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum also very much resembles that of piperidinuminine with respect to the pipette acid moiety (see Table 1). In addition, there are signals for geminal methyl groups (6 H, _s_) at d 1.46; methylene protons (2 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 6 Hz) at d 3.59, coupled with the proton at the nitrogen (1 H, _br._), at d 6.23. A single signal (3H, _s_) at d 2.02 is again indicative of an acetoxy group, which was also confirmed by the mass spectrum: with a fragmentation pattern similar to that of piperidinuminine, it shows an additional significant peak at _m_/_z_ 271 (M+ - 60; 14 %), corresponding to the loss of one acetic acid molecule from the molecular ion. Other fragments were typical of amides derived from piperic acid. On the basis of these data, structure **3** was assigned to corcovadine. Chemical confirmation was obtained through alkaline hydrolysis, producing the amide **6**, with a tertiary hydroxyl group, and piperic acid.

Spectral comparisons analogous to those discussed for piperidinuminine and isoperlopenynimine allowed for correlation of corcovadine (**3**) with its isomer, isocorcovadine (**4**), C18H21O5N, crystals, mp 80-85deg. The absence, in the IR spectrum of the latter, of an absorption in the region of 970-990 cm-1 points to the absence of double bonds in a _trans_ configuration. The _cis_ configuration receives support from similarities in the UV and \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra to those of isoperlopenynimine (**2**) (see Table 1 and Experimental). Mass spectral fragmentations of **3** and **4** are identical.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Mps were determined on a Kofler hot stage and are uncorr. UV spectra were obtained in MeOH and IR spectra in KBr unless otherwise stated. \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra were measured at 100 MHz and MS at 70eV. Column chromatography was performed on Si gel, and TLC on Si gel H and GF254 (Merck). The identity of compounds, whenever stated, was established by direct comparison with authentic samples through mp, mmp, UV, IR, \({}^{1}\)H NMR and MS, as well as TLC.

_Plant material._ Two batches of _O. corcovadensis_ were collected at the hillside of the Corcovado Mountain in Rio de Janeiro, in December, at a 1 year interval.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c} R Compound & Configuration & A & B & C & D & E & F \\ CH2CHMe2 & Piperlonguminine (**1**) & _trans_, _trans_ & 5.90 (_d_) & 7.38 (_m_) & —* & — & — & 5.94 (_s_) \\ \(J\) = 15 & & & & & & & \\ CH2CHMe2 & Isopiperlonguminine (**2**) _cis,cis_ & 5.69 (_d_) & 6.85 (_t_) & 7.45 (_t_) & 6.66 (_d_) & 6.78 (_s_) & 5.96 (_s_) \\ \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & & \\ CH2CMe2OAc & Corcovadine (**3**) & _trans,trans_ & 5.94 (_d_) & 7.40 (_m_) & — & — & — & 5.95 (_s_) \\ \(J\) = 15 & & & & & & & \\ CH2CMe2OAc & Isocorcovadine (**4**) & _cis,cis_ & 5.69 (_d_) & 6.91 (_t_) & 7.44 (_t_) & 6.64 (_d_) & 6.76 (_s_) & 5.93 (_s_) \\ \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & \(J\) = 11 & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectral data of the two pairs of isomeric piperic acid amides from _O. corcovadensis_ (100 MHz, solvent CDCl3, chemical shifts in ppm, d units, \(J\) in Hz)

## Page 3

_Extraction and separation_ I. The dried, powdered roots (1600 g) were exhaustively extracted by maceration with petrol. The combined extracts (221) were coned under red. pres. to give a dark green viscous mass (7.09 b). The material was treated with Me2CO and the soluble portion was again evapd to dryness under red. pres. The dark oily residue (5.86 g) was chromatographed on a Si gel column (350 g) and developed with solvent mixtures of increasing polarity. Toluene-EtOAc (19:1) eluted piperlongumine (I, 36 mg). Elution with toluene-EtOAc 9:1 and 4:1 afforded fractions which were combined and submitted to the same procedure. Repeated chromatography followed by five recrystallizations from MeOH yielded corcovadine (3, 58 mg). Although these last fractions were strongly anesthetizing to the tongue, separation of the active material could not be achieved.

_Extraction and separation_ II. The dried, powdered roots (1900 g) were extracted with petrol in a Soxhlet until the extract was clear (72 hr.) The filtered extract was coned under red. pres., yielding a dark green viscous oil (22 g). The material was chromatographed on a column of Si gel (300 g) and developed first with hexane, followed by solvent mixtures of increasing polarity, through toluene, EtOAc and MeOH. This procedure resulted in the separation of four crude fractions, of which only one, the one eluted with EtOAc, showed anesthetic activity. The fractions were repeatedly rechromatographed, monitoring the procedure by means of TLC. In this, visualization of all the compounds in UV light was very helpful: the _trans_ compounds showed intense, blue fluorescence, while the _cis_ compounds were detached from the background as dark spots. Eventually, all five amides were separated in this way. Solvents for crystallization were: toluene for piperonguminine; hexane-EtOAc (2:1) for isopiperlonguminine; MeOH for corcovadine; hexane-EtOAc (4:1) for isocorcovadine; MeOH for piperovatine. All were obtained as colourless crystals.

_Piperolongumine_ (I). Mp 167-169* (lit. [1] 166-168*). IR _V_max cm\({}^{- 1}\): 3280, 1640, 1615, 1550, 1495, 1470, 1430, 1360, 1240, 1185, 1030, 985, 920, 850. UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{MOH}}\)nm (\(\log e\)): 342 (4.54), 307 (4.34), 253 (4.17), 245 (4.17). \({}^{\text{H}}\)NMR : 60.92 (6 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz), 1.80 (1 H, _m_), 3.16 (2 H, \(t\), \(J\) = 6 Hz), 5.58 (1 H, _br_), 5.90 (H, \(d\), \(J\) = 15 Hz), 5.94 (2 H, s), 6.60-6.98 (6 H, _m_), 7.38 (H, _m_). MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 273 (M\({}^{+}\), 34), 216 (10), 201 (50), 173 (46), 172 (25), 152 (4), 143 (27), 135 (8), 115 (100), 96 (16). Found: 273.1348; C16H169O3N requires: 2731359.

_Isopiperlonguminine_ (Z). Mp 140-143*, IR _V_max cm\({}^{- 1}\): 3250, 2875, 1640, 1620, 1605, 1550, 1500, 1485, 1435, 1263, 1250, 1040, 920, 825. UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{MOH}}\)nm (\(\log e\)): 332 (4.51), 312 (4.40), 255 (4.33), 245 (4.33). \({}^{\text{H}}\)NMR : 60.95 (6 H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7 Hz), 1.80 (1 H, _m_), 3.16 (2 H, \(t\), \(J\) = 7 Hz), 5.69 (H, \(d\), \(J\) = 11 Hz), 5.69 (H, \(d\), \(J\) = 11 Hz) and NH_, br_, \(d\), 5.96 (2 H, s), 6.66 (H, \(d\), \(J\) = 11 Hz), 6.78 (3 H, \(d\), \(S\) 65 (H, \(d\), \(J\) = 11 Hz), 7.45 (H, \(t\), \(J\) = 11 Hz), MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 273 (M\({}^{+}\), 30), 2

