# 10.1007@s00044-008-9161-9.pdf

## Page 1



# Piperamides and their derivatives as potential anti-trypanosomal agents

Fernando Cotinguiba

11 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

Luis Octavio Regasini

121 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

13 January 2009

Hosana Maria Debonsi

11 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

Gabriela Duo Passerini

11 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

Regina Maria Barretto Cicarelli

11 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

Massuo Jorge Kato

11 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

Maysa Furlan

11 October 2008 / Accepted: 10 December 2008 / Published online: 13 January 2009

###### Abstract

We describe herein an evaluation of the trypanocidal effect of eight piperamides (**1**-**8**) isolated from _Piper tuberculatum_ bearing dihydropyridone, piperidine, and isobutyl moieties against epimastigotes forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_, the causative agent of Chagas' disease. Based on such results, three hydrogenated and two hydrolyzed derivatives (**10**-**14**) were prepared and evaluated as well. The dihydropyridone amides (**1**-**3**) displayed higher anti-trypanosomal activity. The (\(Z\))-pipilartine (**1**) showed higher activity with a 50% inhibition concentration (IC\({}_{50}\)) value of 10.5 mM, almost four times more potent than the positive control, benznidazole (IC\({}_{50}\) = 42.7 mM), and should be further evaluated as a suitable hit for the design of new antiprotozoan agents.

Piperamides Anti-trypanosomal _Trypanosoma cruzi_ _Piper tuberculatum_  Piperaceae

F. Cotinguiba L. O. Regasini V. da Silva Bolzani M. Furlan (11)

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Prof. Francisco Degni, s/n, 14801-970 Araraquara, SP, Brazil

e-mail: maysaf@iq.unesp.br

F. Cotinguiba

e-mail: fernando@iq.unesp.br

H. M. Debonsi

Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Universidade de Sao Paulo (USP), Via do Cafe, 14040-903 Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil

G. Duo Passerini R. M. B. Cicarelli

Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Rodovia A.Araquara-Jau, 14801-902 Araraquara, SP, Brazil

M. J. Kato

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo (USP), Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 748, 05508-900 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

## Page 2



## Introduction

Discovery and development of new drugs from natural sources is not a new phenomenon. Natural products have long been used as templates for the design of new lead compounds which may be useful against infectious diseases, such as _b_-lactams, tetracyclins, echinocandins, and macrolytes (Newman and Cragg, 2007). In this context, several metabolites of different structural patterns have proven active against microorganisms, and screening of extracts is a valid strategy being exploited to discover novel antimicrobial agents (Acharya _et al._, 2008; Singh _et al._, 2008; Tripathi _et al._, 2004; Viswanathan _et al._, 2004; Wang _et al._, 2007).

Chagas' disease (or American trypanosomiasis) is caused by the intracellular parasite _Trypanosoma cruzi_ and affects an estimated 16-18 million people. About 30-40% of infected patients develop chronic chagasic cardiomyopathy, which represents a major public health problem concern in Latin America (Dias _et al._, 2002). Current chemotherapy for this disease involves two drugs, nitrofurans (nifurtimox) or nitroimidazoles (benznidazole), which are efficient only during the acute and short-term chronic phase. Unfortunately, the usefulness of these drugs is limited by their narrow therapeutic windows, strong side-effects, and variable susceptibilities among _T. cruzi_ strains, resulting in low clinical efficacies. Efforts are thus urgently necessary to identify, design, and develop new anti-chagasic drug candidates (Castro _et al._, 2006).

As part of our ongoing screening program for new anti-trypanosomal compounds in Brazilian _Piper_ species, we have previously reported the occurrence of chromenes in _P. aduncum_ and _P. gandichaudianum_ (Batista-Junior _et al._, 2008). Additionally, hydroquinones and flavonones from leaves of _P. crassinervium_ have been described (Lopes _et al._, 2008). In this context, we found that the crude extracts obtained from seeds and leaves of _P. tuberculatum_ Jacq. (Piperaceae) showed remarkable proliferation inhibition of _T. cruzi_, showing a high activity, with IC50 values of 25.0 and 46.0 mg/ml, respectively.

Therefore, the main aim of this work was to evaluate the trypanocidal activity of natural piperamides and piperamides derivatives in the search for new potential hits for Chagas' disease treatment, as well as to investigate preliminary structure-activity relationship for anti-_Trypanosoma cruzi_ effects exhibited.

## Materials and methods

### General

All reagents were of analytical grade. The structures of all natural compounds (**1**-**9**) and the semisynthetic derivatives (**10**-**14**) were confirmed by 1H-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and 13C-NMR spectral data and were compared with those described in literature. NMR experiments were recorded by Varian INOVA 500 spectrometer (11.7 T) at 500 MHz (1H) and 125 MHz (13C) using the solvents as an internal standard. Benznidazole was purchased from Roche (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil).



## Page 3



### Plant material

The plant material was collected in September of 2005 from a specimen of _P. tuberculatum_ growing under greenhouse conditions at the Institute of Chemistry (UNESP, Araraquara-SP, Brazil), and was identified by Dr. Guillermo E. D. Paredes (Universidad Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Lambayeque, Peru). The voucher specimen (Kato-163) was deposited at the Herbarium of the Institute of Biosciences, USP, Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of compounds 1-9

Shade-dried and powdered leaves (147.0 g) and seeds (22.0 g) of _P. tuberculatum_ were extracted with ethyl acetate:methanol (2:1) during 2 weeks at room temperature. The crude extracts from leaves (3.6 g) and seeds (1.2 g) were fractionated on silica-gel chromatographic column followed by preparative thin-layer chromatography (TLC) as previously described (Navickiene _et al._, 2000; Silva _et al._, 2002), and resulted in the isolation of seven piperamides from seeds, namely (_Z_)-piplartine (7.0 mg, **1**) (Silva _et al._, 2002), (_E_)-piplartine (45 mg, **2**) (Duh _et al._, 1990), 8,9-dihydropyilartine (19.0 mg, **3**) (Maxwell and Rampersad, 1991), piperine (46.0 mg, **4**) (Araujo-Junior _et al._, 1997), 10,11-dihydropyiere (22.0 mg, **5**) (Bernard _et al._, 1995; Parmar _et al._, 1997), 5,6-dihydropyilonguminine (45 mg, **6**) (Bernard _et al._, 1995; Parmar _et al._, 1997), and pellitorine (88 mg, **8**) (Rosario _et al._, 1996). Further phytochemical studies carried out on leaves of _P. tuberculatum_ afforded two compounds, fagaramide (35.0 mg, **7**) (Isao, 1984) and methyl (_E_)-6,7,8-trimethoxyscinnamate (42.0 mg, **9**) (Settimj _et al._, 1976).

### Preparation of derivatives 10-14

Piperamide derivatives 10-14 were prepared according to modified procedures described in literature (Nozoe _et al._, 2001; Ribeiro _et al._, 2004).

An aliquot of 10 mg natural piperamides **3**, **5**, and **8** was dissolved in 20 ml chloroform containing 50 mg activated charcoal (10% Pd). Then, the reaction mixture was maintained stirring overnight at atmospheric H2 pressure. After usual work-up the crude product was fractionated by preparative TLC using hexane:dichloromethane:acetone (3:1:1) yielding tetrahydropiplartine (**10**) (77%) (Joshi _et al._, 1968), tetrahydropierine (**11**) (81%) (Madhusudhan and Vandana, 2001), and tetrahydropellitorine (**12**) (83 %) (Molina-Torres _et al._, 2004).

For alkaline hydrolysis, **4** (25 mg) and **9** (30 mg) were dissolved in 3 ml alcoholic potassium hydroxide (20 %), and then stirred at 90degC for 48 h. The ethanol solution was concentrated to dryness, and resulting solid was dispersed in water acidified with HCl (pH 2.0), filtrated, and washed with water. Finally, the solid was purified by recrystallization in ethanol to yield piperic acid (**13**) (88%) (Mishra _et al._, 2005) and (_E_)-6,7,8-trimethoxyscinnamic acid (**14**) (75 %) (Lebedev _et al._, 2005).

The molecular structure of natural compounds (1-9) and their semisynthetic derivatives (10-14) are showed in Fig. 1.



## Page 4



### Trypanocidal activity in vitro

All experiments were performed with the Y-strain epimastigote forms of _T. cruzi_. They were grown axenically at 28degC in liver-infusion Tryptose (LIT) medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and harvested during exponential phase of growth (7-day-old culture forms). Compounds **1**-**14** were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and further added to a 96-well tissue culture plate (TPP) in different final concentrations. _T. cruzi_ (1 x 107 parasites/ml) were added to each well and the same quantity of LIT medium was added into the controls wells. These plates were maintained at 28degC for 72 h. Thus, an aliquot of 10 mL 2.5 mg/ml 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide-phenazinemethodsulfate (MTT-PMS) solution was added to each well and the plates were incubated for 75 min in the dark at 28degC. A solution of 10% (100 mL) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added to the anterior solution and maintained at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Absorbance of the samples was read at 595 nm. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) values were determined by linear regression analysis after a 72-h incubation period. The IC50 values of compounds **1**-**14** and benznidazole (positive control) were determined. For the statistical analysis, probit's method was employed (Muelas-Serrano _et al._, 2000).

Fig. 1: Chemical structures of compounds **1**–**9** isolated from _Piper tuberculatum_ and derivatives **10**–**14**

## Page 5



## Results and discussion

Piperamides are among the secondary metabolites of interest since many of these compounds display a broad range of biological activities. Kapil reported an investigation of piperine (**4**) activity against promastigote forms of _Leishmania donovani_ (Kapil, 1993). More recently, Ribeiro described the highly significant anti-trypanosomal activity of piperine and its toxic effects on epimastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (Freire-de-Lima _et al._, 2008; Ribeiro _et al._, 2004). Raay _et al._ (1999) related in vivo testing in hamsters infected with _L. donovani_ with piperine incorporated into liposomes. Piperlongumine (**2**) displayed in vitro and in vivo activities towards amastigotes of _L. donovani_, antiproliferative effect against tumor-cell lineages, and in vivo growth inhibition of Sarcoma 180 (Bezerra _et al._, 2006; Bodiwala _et al._, 2007). To pellitorine (**8**), an antibacterial activity has been attributed and it is known to be effective against _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ (Reddy _et al._, 2004; Rukachaisirikul _et al._, 2004).

The natural piperamides bearing dihydropyridone (**1**-**3**), piperidine (**4**-**5**), and isobutyl (**6**-**8**) moieties as well as methyl (_E_)-6,7,8-trimethoxyscinnamate (**9**) isolated from _P. tuberculatum_ were evaluated against epimastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (Table 1). These results encouraged us to prepare a series of derivatives (**10**-**14**) in order to determine the chemical features responsible for the anti-trypanosomal activity observed.

Dihydropyridone amides (**1**-**3**) showed a concentration-dependent trypanocidal effect with IC50 values (mM) ranging from 10.5 to 30.0. Both geometric isomers of piplarine (**1** and **2**) displayed potent activity when compared with the positive control, benznidazole (IC50 = 42.7 mM). The (_Z_)-piplarine (**1**) was twice as active as isomer \(E\) (**2**, IC50 = 21.0 mM) and four times as active as benznidazole, evidencing a key role of configuration pattern in the antiprotozoan activity observed.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} Compounds & IC50 (μM) \\
1 & 10.5 \\
2 & 21.0 \\
3 & 30.0 \\
4 & 233 \\
5 & NAa \\
6 & NA \\
7 & NA \\
8 & 57.1 \\
9 & NA \\
10 & NA \\
11 & NA \\
12 & NA \\
13 & NA \\
14 & NA \\ Benznidazoleb & 42.7c \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Results of the in vitro assay of natural compounds isolated from _Piper tuberculatum_ (**1**–**9**) and their derivatives semisynthetic derivatives (**10**–**14**) against _Trypanosoma cruzi_ epimastigotes Y-strain

## Page 6

The hydrogenated derivatives (**10-12**) were also assayed and allowed some insights. Reduction of the double bonds of the piplartines interferes with the antiparasitic activity, suggesting that conjugations are critical for trypanocidal activity. It is noteworthy that derivatives of piplartine lacking either one or both double bonds were seen to be less active. 8,9-Dihydropyilartine (**3**, IC50 = 30.0 mM), lacking one double bond, was slightly less active than piplartines **1** and **2**, whereas tetrahydropiplartine (**10**, IC50 > 250.0 mM), lacking both double bonds, was seen to be even less active than **3**. Results are summarized in Table 1.

Recently, the a,b-unsaturated carbonyl moiety has already been implicated in the biological activity of other natural products such as cytostatin and fostriecin. This behavior is most probably due to its susceptibility to 1,4-addition nucleophilic (Michael's acceptor) by attachment from amino-acid residues (e.g., cysteine, lysine, serine or threonine) present in the biological receptors, which interact with these compounds via Michael's addition (Bialy and Waldmann, 2003; Buck _et al._, 2003). Furthermore, it has been possible to recognize a Michael's acceptor on the molecular structure of the piplartines (**1-3**), which is presented as an a,b-unsaturated carbonyl at dihydropyridone ring (C-2/C-3/C-4) (Fig. 2).

Similar to piplartines, the reduction of the double bonds of the piperine (as in compounds **5** and **11**) gave rise to a significant decrease in toxicity, indicating their essential role in trypanocidal activity. Finally, these findings suggest that double bonds conjugated with a carbonyl group are critical for the highest anti-_Trypanosoma cruzi_ activity.

Fagaramide (7) and its analogue, 5,6-dihydropyilonguminine (**6**), with a five-carbon extended side-chain were also shown to be inactive against _T. cruzi_ at the concentration tested (IC50 > 250.0 mM). On the other hand, ester **9** and acid compounds **13** and **14** did not show any activity at the maximum concentration tested (IC50 > 250.0 mM), which is evidence that a nitrogen-containing functional group is required for significant anti-trypanosomal activity.

Pellitorine (**8**, IC50 = 57.1 mM) showed similar activity when compared with benzmidazole and piperine (**4**, IC50 = 233.0 mM), which suggests that exchange of the piperidine moiety of the a,b,g,d-unsaturated amides (**3**) for the isobutyl group enhanced potency. To confirm the requirement for the a,b,g,d-unsaturated carbonyl

Fig. 2: Hypothetical pharmacophores of (Z)-piplartine (**1**) identified by their trypanocidal activity against epimastigote forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_

## Page 7

system for anti-trypanosomal activity, piperamide **8** was subjected to hydrogenation, furnishing tetrahydropellitorine (**12**), an alkylamide, which was not active (IC50 > 250.0 mM).

In conclusion, we have isolated a series of piperamides (**1-3** and **8**) from _P. tuberculatum_ seeds, which potential inhibit proliferation of _T. cruzi_ parasites and may be considered suitable as template compounds for the design of novel and more potent hit compounds for the treatment of Chagas' disease.

###### Acknowledgements.

 This work was funded by grants provided by FAPESP (03/11524-9) and also supported within the BIOTA/FAPESP--Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br). M.F., M.J.K., and V.S.B. are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships. F.C. (07/56140-4) and L.O.R. (03/00886-7) wish to thank FAPESP for providing scholarships.

## References

* Acharya et al. (2008) Acharya AN, Saraswat D, Kaushik MP (2008) Antimalarial activity of _Gomphotensmia crinitum_ leaf extracts. Med Chem Res 17:530-540. doi:10.1007/s00044-008-9096-1
* Araujo-Junior et al. (1997) Araujo-Junior JX, Cunha EVL, Chaves MCO, Gray AI (1997) Piperdardine, a piperidine alkaloid from _Pipper tuberculatum_. Phytochemistry 44:559-561. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(96)00503-1
* Batista-Junior et al. (2008) Batista-Junior JM, Lopes AA, Ambrosio DL, Regasini LO, Kato MJ, Bolzani VS, Cicarelli RMB, Furlan M (2008) Natural chromes and chromene derivatives as potential anti-trypanosomal agents. Biol Pharm Bull 31:538-540. doi:10.1248/bbb.31.538
* Bernard et al. (1995) Bernard CB, Krishnamurty HG, Chauret D, Dursi T, Philogene BJR, Sanchez-Vindas P, Hasbun C, Poveda L, San Roman L, Arnason JT (1995) Insecticidal defenses of Piperaceae from the neotropics. J Chem Ecol 21:801-814. doi:10.1007/BF02033462
* Bezerra et al. (2006) Bezerra DP, Castro FO, Alves APNN, Pessoa C, Moraes MO, Silveira ER, Lima MAS, Elmiro FJM, Costa-Lotufo LV (2006) In vivo growth inhibition of sarcoma 180 by piperlonguminine, an alkaloid amide from the _Pipper_ species. Braz J Med Biol Res 39:801-807. doi:10.1590/S0100-879X200600060014
* Bialy and Waldmann (2003) Bialy L, Waldmann H (2003) Synthesis and biological evaluation of cytostatin analogues. Chem Commun (Camb) 15:1872-1873. doi:10.1039/b305308n
* Bodiwala et al. (2007) Bodiwala HS, Singh G, Singh R, Dey CS, Sharma SS, Bhutani KK, Singh IP (2007) Antileishmanial amides and lignans from _Pipper cubeba_ and _Pipper retrofractum_. J Nat Med 61:418-421. doi:10.1007/s11418-007-0159-2
* Buck et al. (2003) Buck SB, Hardouin C, Ichikawa S, Soenen DR, Gauss CM, Hwang I, Swingle MR, Bonness KM, Honkanen RE, Boger DL (2003) Fundamental role of the fostirecin unsaturated lactone and implications for selective protein phosphatase inhibition. J Am Chem Soc 125:15694-15695. doi:10.1021/ja038672n
* Castro and Mertel (2006) Castro JA, Merec MM, Bartel LC (2006) Toxic side effects of drugs used to treat Chagas' disease (American Trypanosomiasis). Hum Exp Toxicol 25:471-479. doi:10.1191/0960327106het653oa
* Dias et al. (2002) Dias JCP, Silveira AC, Schofield CJ (2002) The impact of Chagas disease control in Latin America--a review. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 97:603-612. doi:10.1590/S0074-02762002000500002
* Duh et al. (1990) Duh CY, Wu YC, Wang SK (1990) Cytotoxic pyridone alkaloids from _Pipper aborescens_. Phytochemistry 29:2689-2691. doi:10.1016/0031-9422(90)85215-2
* Freire-de-Lima et al. (2008) Freire-de-Lima L, Ribeiro TS, Rocha GM, Brandao BA, Romeiro A, Mendonca-Previato L, Previato JO, Lima MEF, Carvalho TMU, Heise N (2008) The toxic effects of piperine against _Trypanosoma cruzi_: ultrastructural alterations and reversible blockage of cytokinesis in epimastigotes forms. Parasitol Res 102:1059-1067. doi:10.1007/s00436-008-0876-9
* Isao (1984) Isao K (1984) Molluscicidal and insecticidal activities of isobutylamides isolated from _Fagara macrophylla_. Experientia 40:340-341. doi:10.1007/BF01952540
* Joshi et al. (1968) Joshi BS, Kamat VN, Saksena AK (1968) On the synthesis of piplartine and a synthesis of dihydropyplartine. Tetrahedron Lett 20:2395-2400. doi:10.1016/S0040-4039(00)76140-5

## Page 8

* Kapil (1993) Kapil A (1993) Piperine: a potent inhibitor of _Leishmania donovani_ promastigotes in vitro. Planta Med 59:474. doi:10.1055/s-2006-959737
* Lebedev et al (2005) Lebedev AV, Lebedeva AB, Sheludyakov VD, Kovaleva EA, Ustinova OL, Kozhevnikov IB (2005) Synthesis of 3-substituted arylpyrazole-4-carboxylic acids. Russ J Gen Chem 75:1113-1124. doi:10.1007/s11176-005-0377-9
* Lopesa et al (2008) Lopesa AA, Lopez SN, Regasini LO, Batista-Junior JM, Ambrosio DL, Kato MJ, Bolzani VS, Cicarelli RM, Furlan M (2008) _In vitro_ activity of compounds isolated from _ Piper crasinservium_ against _Trypanosoma cruzi_. Nat Prod Res 22:1040-1046. doi:10.1080/14786410802243271
* Madhusudhan and Vandana (2001) Madhusudhan P, Vandana KL (2001) Tetrahydropyiene, the first natural aryl pentanamide from _ Piper longum_. Biochem Syst Ecol 29:537-538. doi:10.1016/S0305-1978(00)00083-1
* Maxwell and Rampersad (1991) Maxwell A, Rampersad D (1991) A new dihydropyiplartine and piplartine dimmer from Piper rugosum. J Nat Prod 54:1150-1152. doi:10.1021/np50076a044
* Mishra et al (2005) Mishra S, Narain U, Mishra R, Misra K (2005) Design, development and synthesis of mixed bioconjugates of pipette acid-glycine, curcumin-glycine/alanine and curcumin-glycine-piperic acid and their antibacterial and antifungal properties. Bioorg Med Chem 13:1477-1486. doi:10.1016/j.bmc.2004.12.057
* Molina-Torres et al (2004) Molina-Torres J, Salazar-Cabrera CJ, Armenta-Salinas C, Ramirez-Chavez E (2004) Fungistatic and bacteriostatic activities of alkalamides from _Heliopsis longipes_ roots: affinin and reduced amides. J Agric Food Chem 52:4700-4704. doi:10.1021/jf034374y
* Muelas-Serrano et al (2000) Muelas-Serrano S, Nogal-Ruiz JJ, Gomez-Barrio A (2000) Setting of a colorimetric method to determine the viability of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ epimastigotes. Parasitol Res 86:999-1002. doi:10.1007/PL00008532
* Navickiene et al (2000) Navickiene HMD, Alecio AC, Kato MJ, Bolzani VS, Young MCM, Cavalheiro AJ, Furlan M (2000) Antifungal amides from _ Piper hspidum_ and _ Piper tuberculatum_. Phytochemistry 55:621-626. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(00)00226-0
* Newman and Cragg (2007) Newman DJ, Cragg GM (2007) Natural products as sources of new drugs over the last 25 years. J Nat Prod 70:461-477. doi:10.1021/np068054v
* Nozoe et al (2001) Nozoe T, Tanimoto K, Takemitsu T, Kitamura T, Harada T, Osawa T, Takayasu O (2001) Non-solvent hydrogenation of solid alkenes and alkynes with supported palladium catalysts. Solid State Ion 141:695-700. doi:10.1016/S0167-2738(01)00781-0
* Parmar et al (1997) Parmar VS, Jain SC, Bish KS, Jain R, Taneja P, Jha A, Tyagi OD, Prasad AK, Wengel J, Olsen CE, Boll PM (1997) Phytochemistry of the genus _Piper_. Phytochemistry 46:597-673. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(97)00328-2
* Raay et al (1999) Raay B, Medda S, Mukhopadhyay S, Basu MK (1999) Targeting of piperine intercalated in mannose-coated liposomes in experimental leishmaniasis. Indian J Biochem Biophys 36:248-251
* Reddy et al (2004) Reddy SV, Srinivas PV, Praveen B, Kishore H, Raju BC, Murthy US, Rao JM (2004) Antibacterial constituents from the berries of _ Piper nigrum_. Phytomedicine 11:697-700. doi:10.1016/j.phymed.2003.04.004
* Ribeiro et al (2004) Ribeiro TS, Freire-de-Lima L, Previato JO, Mendonca-Previato L, Heise N, de Lima MEF (2004) Toxic effects of natural piperine and its derivatives on epimastigotes and amastigotes of _Trypanosoma cruzi_. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 14:3555-3558. doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.04.019
* Rosario et al (1996) Rosario SL, Silva AJR, Parente JP (1996) Alkamides from _Cissampelos glaberrima_. Planta Med 62:376-377. doi:10.1055/s-2006-957913
* Rukachaisrikul et al (2004) Rukachaisrikul T, Siriwattanakit P, Sukcharoenphol K, Wongvein C, Ruttanaweang P, Wongwattanavuch P, Suksamrram A (2004) Chemical constituents and bioactivity of _ Piper sarmetosum_. J Ethnopharmacol 93:173-176. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2004.01.022
* Settimi et al (1976) Settimi G, Simone L, Giudice MR (1976) A new gas chromatographic method for the estimation of reserpine and rescinamine. J Chromatogr A 116:263-270. doi:10.1016/S0021-9673(00)89897-0
* Silva et al (2002) Silva RV, Navickiene HMD, Kato MJ, Bolzani VS, Meda CI, Young MCM, Furlan M (2002) Antifungal amides from _ Piper arboreum_ and _ Piper tuberculatum_. Phytochemistry 59:521-527. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(01)00431-9
* Singh et al (2008) Singh V, Tripathi CKM, Bihari V (2008) Production, optimization and purification of an antifungal compound from _Streptomyces capoamus_ MTCC 8123. Med Chem Res 17:94-102. doi:10.1007/s00044-007-9040-9
* Tripathi et al (2004) Tripathi CKM, Praveen V, Singh V, Bihari V (2004) Production of antibacterial and antifungal metabolites by _Streptomyces violaceusinger_ and media optimization studies for the maximum metabolite production. Med Chem Res 13:790-799. doi:10.1007/s00044-004-0118-3

## Page 9

* Viswanathan et al. (2004) Viswanathan MB, Ramesh N, Ahilan A, Lakshmanaperumalsamy P (2004) Phytochemical constituents and antimicrobial activity from the stems of _Jatropha maheshwarii_. Med Chem Res 13:361-368. doi:10.1007/s00044-004-0041-7
* Wang et al. (2007) Wang T, Zhang Y, Pei Y (2007) Two novel trichothecenes from _Myrothecium__roridum_. Med Chem Res 16:155-161. doi:10.1007/s00044-007-9012-0

