# 10.1016@j.bse.2003.09.006.pdf

## Page 1



# 2-Quinolone alkaloids from the rare species of Rutaceae _Andreadoxa flava_ Kallunki

Sandra Virginia Alves Hohlemwerger, Waldir Tavares, Andre Mauricio de Carvalho, Paulo Cezar Vieira, Eudes da Silva Velozo

euevolozo@ufba.br Laboratorio de Pesquisa em Materia Medica (LAPEMM), Faculdade de Farmacia, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Rua Barao de Jeremoabo, \(s/n\)-Campus Universitario de Ondina, 170-110 Salvador, BA 40.170-290, Brazil Laboratorio de Pesquisa em Produtos Naturais, Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Carlos, Brazil Departamento de Botanica, Instituto de Biologia (in memoriam), Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil

20 June 20032 September 20032 September 20032 September 2003

###### Abstract

We present a new analysis of the rare species of Rutaceae _Andreadoxa flava_, which is based on the fact that the rare species of Rutaceae _Andreadoxa flava_, is based on the fact that the rare species of Rutaceae

## Page 2



## 2 Previous work

No previous chemical studies on _A. flava_ have been reported. However, alkaloids derived from anthranilic acid occur in abundance in plants belonging to the subtribe Galipeinae (Rutaceae). Some examples are fluoroquinoline alkaloids in _Adiscanthus fusciformis_ (Vieira et al., 1980), dihydrofuroquinolines in _Almeidea guyanensis_ (Moulis et al., 1983), acridones in _Almeidea lilacina_ (Velozo et al. 1997), pyranoquinoline alkaloids in _Euxylophora paraensis_ (Waterman and Grundon, 1983) and fluoroquinoline alkaloids in _Ticorea longiflora_ (Toro et al., 1997).

## 3 Present study

The hexane extract (5.4 g) obtained from the stems of _A. flava_ was fractionated by chromatography on silica gel with hexane/ethyl acetate. This procedure yielded oligofiline (18.1 mg) (Ali et al., 2001) and 8-methoxy-_N_-methylflindersine and _N_-methylflindersine (3.6 mg), isolated as a mixture (Funayama et al., 1994; Kamperdick et al., 1999). The methanolic extract (30.0 g) of the stems of _A. flava_ was submitted to an acid-basic extraction. The acid fraction was neutralized and fractionated by chromatographic methods, yielding 4-methoxy-_N_-methylquinolone (2.7 mg) (Hifnawy et al., 1977), dictamnine (6.8 mg) (Brown et al., 1980) and almeine (4.7 mg) (Moulis et al., 1983). Chromatographic fractionation of the hexane extract of the leaves (14.0 g) allowed the isolation of the alkaloids xanthophylline (1.6 mg) (Stermitz and Sharif, 1977) and 8-methoxyflindersine (1.2 mg) (Hifnawy et al., 1977). The methanolic extract of the flowers (4.2 g) was partitioned with hexane/MeOH (5% H2O). The hexane phase (1.7 g) was submitted to chromatography on silica gel with chloroform/methanol to give the alkaloids xanthophylline (6.8 mg) (Stermitz and Sharif, 1977) and 8-methoxyflindersine (15.6 mg) (Hifnawy et al., 1977). These structures were identified by \({}^{1}\)H NMR, \({}^{13}\)C NMR, DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\), COSY, HETCOR, infrared and mass spectrometry and by comparison with data in the literature.

## 4 Chemotaxonomic significance

This is the first report on the chemical composition of this rare species growing in the Atlantic Forest of Southern Bahia and in the risk of extinction. The presence of 2-quinolone alkaloids is in accordance with the chemical composition of other species of the subtribe Galipeinae (Rutaceae).

## References

* Ali et al. (2001) Ali, M.S., Pervez, M.K., Saleem, M., Tareen, R.B., 2001. Phytochemistry 57, 1277.
* Brown et al. (1980) Brown, N.M.D., Grundon, M.F., Harrison, D.M., Surgenor, S.A., 1980. Tetrahedron 36, 3579.
* Funayama et al. (1994) Funayama, S., Murata, K., Nozoe, S., 1994. Phytochemistry 36, 525.
* Hifnawy et al. (1977) Hifnawy, M.S., Vaquette, J., Sevenet, T., Pousset, J., Cave, A., 1977. Phytochemistry 16, 1035.



## Page 3

Kallunki, J.A., 1998. Britonia 50 (1), 59.
* [1999] Kamperdick, C., Van, N.H., Sung, T.V., Adam, G., 1999. Phytochemistry 50, 377.
* [1983] Moulis, C., Wirasutisna, K.R., Gleye, J., Loiseau, P., Stanislas, E., Moretti, C., 1983. Phytochemistry 22, 2095.
* [1977] Stermitz, F.R., Sharifi, I.A., 1977. Phytochemistry 16, 2003.
* [1997] Toro, M.J.U., Muller, A.H., Arruda, M.S.P., Arruda, A.C., 1997. Phytochemistry 45, 851.
* [1997] Velozo, E.S., Oliveira, D.J., Arruda, A.C., Vieira, P.C., Fernandes, J.B., da Silva, M.F.D.F., et al., 1997. Natural Product Letters 9, 237.
* [1980] Vieira, P.C., Alvarenga, M.A., Gottlieb, O.R., Mcdougall, M.N.V., Reis, F.A.M., 1980. Phytochemistry 19, 472.
* [1983] Waterman, P.G., Grundon, M.F., 1983. Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales. Academic Press, London.



