# 10.1016@0031-9422(76)90000-5.pdf

## Page 1



# Neoligans from a _Licaria_ species*

Ottro R. Gottlieb, Tomas G. S. Maia, and Jamil C. Mourko

# Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo; 1 Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia,

Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, Manaus; 5 Instituto de Ciencias Exatas,

Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

###### Abstract

The wood of a _Licaria_ species (Lauraceae) contains two neoligans, eusiderin, _rel_-(2R,3R)-7-allyl-5-methoxy-2-(3,4,5-methoxyphenyl)-3-methylbenzodioxan, and aurenin, 2-(4-allyloxy-3,5-methoxyphenyl)-1-(3,4,5-trimethyl-2

## Page 2

representation of eusiderin. The _trans_-arrangement of the substituents on this benzodioxane, compatible with the relatively low field Me-3 signal (+8.77) and the relatively large \(J\)2,3 (8.0 Hz) of the PMR spectrum [5], was inferred from the 13C NMR spectrum. This showed, by comparison with model neoligan spectra, that the methyl group must be beyond non-bonded interaction range of the neighbouring aryl substituent [11].

The formula C18H1,O(OMe)3, determined for auren by HR MS and PMR, suggested its structural relation to eusiderin (1a). It became clear immediately, however, that here the two C9-moieties cannot be linked by an oxygen bridge. While dihydrousiderin (1c) is cleaved into 1,2,3-trihydroxy-5-n-propylbenzene by HI/AcOH at reflux temperature [24], dihydrousienz (later formulated 3b) leads to a phenol C13H10(OH)3 (3c). The PMR spectrum of this phenol and of its hexadecate (3d) are devoid of signals due to an _n_-propyl group, and, hence, the allyl group of aurein must eherify the undefined oxygen of its formula given above. Indeed, pyrolysis (to 3e 56% yield) and acid treatment (to 3g 76% yield) of aurein easily cleave this O-allyl. The former reaction is relevant, since loss of the allyl group shows that the _o_- and _p_-positions relative to the O-allyl group are substituted. In the latter reaction, comparison of the PMR spectrum shows that the O-allyl group (OCH2, +5.53) of aurein is replaced in the rearrangement product (3g) by a C-allyl group (CCH2, +6.75) which generates a C-n-propyl group (CCH2, +8.44) after hydrogenation (3). In 3g, one of the two pairs of equivalent aromatic protons (+3.68, _s_) in aurein is reduced to one lone proton (+3.56, _s_), while the other pair (+3.80) gives rise again to a 2H-singlet (+3.75). The 1:2 relation of the aromatic signals is evidence of the purity of the rearranged product.

Six OR-groups and two pairs of equivalent protons can only be accommodated on two phenyl units, containing the phloroglucinol or pyrogall oxygenation patterns. As a further consequence of symmetry, the O-allyl group must be located on the _para_-carbon of one of the units. At least for this ring, the phloroglucinol pattern can be immediately disregarded as a plausible alternative, since acetylation of the pyrolysis product (3e - 3f) causes a negligible PMR shift of the ArH signals. Thus, the corresponding protons cannot be located on the _ortho_-carbons. The other ring must possess an identical oxygenation pattern. PMR shifts of identical magnitude for the ArH signals due to both rings are observed (_r_ - 0.57 and -0.53 ppm) upon comparing the spectra of the pyrolysis product (3c) and the hexacetate (3d). The three-carbon moiety which bridges the two rings comprises a CH2CH group (+8.77, \(d\), \(f\) 6.0 Hz). The CH PMR band for this unit was included in a signal representing a total of three. benzylic (+7.1-7.3) protons. Neither in the 220 MHz spectrum of aurein itself, nor in the 60 MHz spectra of the series of derivatives 3b-3j was this signal resolvable. Although thus, _a priori_, the -CH2CHMe- bridge may be inserted between the two phenyl units in two ways, only structure 3a is compatible with the masses of the two most abundant MS fragment ions (_nye_ 181 and 221), resulting from cleavage of the doubly benzylic C-C bond.

Clearly, eusiderin (1a) and aurein (3a) stem from an identical pair of precursors, a trioxygenated propenylbenzene and a trioxygenated allybenzene. Assuming that their oxidative coupling involves radical pairs, 4 and 5 could lead to eusiderin (1a) [6], whose synthesis patterned on this postulate was achieved [7], while 4 and 6 would give an intermediate which, upon hydrogen addition and retro-Claisen rearrangement, would lead to aurein (3a). This singular process recalls the biosynthesis of thyroxin [8] where, however, the final dienone-phenol rearrangement causes the loss of a three-carbon fragment. The retro-Claisen reaction was postulated previously to rationalize the biosynthesis of another neoligan type [9,10].

## EXPERIMENTAL

### Isolation of the constituents.

A specimen of _Licarta_ sp. (voucher: Herbarium INPA, Manaus 42209) was collected at the Ducek Forest Reserve, near Manaus. Its trunk wood (8 kg) was freed from bark, ground and extracted successively with C6H8 and EtOH. The C6H6-extract (150 _g_) gave crystals of 1a(17.2 g) which were separated by filtration from an oil. This was chromatographed on a SiO2 column. Eluiton with C6H8 gave a (4 g) and with C6H6-EtOAc (7:3) gave 3a (74 g). SiO2-Chromatography of the EtOH extract gave additional quantities of 3a.

Eusiderin (1a), mp and UV spectrum as required by lit [2] (M* found: 386.1720; C23H23O8 requires: 386.1729), was (cm-1); 1590. 1500, 1240, 1225, 1150, 1135, 1100. PMR (CDCl3, + J. 40, 2(ArH), 351 (_d_, \(J\) 20 Hz: -8.33 (_d_, \(J\) 20 Hz: -H), 3.8-4.3 (_m_, _c_H), 4.75-5.15 (_m_, _c_H), 5.46 (_d_, \(J\) 8.0 Hz: -H), 5.7-6.3 (_m_, _H_-3), 6.15 (_d_, \(J\) 0 Hz, CH2), 6.73 (_d_, \(J\) 6.0 Hz, CH2), 8.77

## Page 3

2-(4-Hydroxy-3,5-dimethyloxybenzyl)-1-(3,4,5-trimethyloxy-phenyl)-propane (3d), 3a (100 mg) in C4H3Ni2 (0.5 ml) under 1N3 was heated under reflux (4 hr). The cooled reaction mixture was treated with excess 2N HCl and extracted with CHCl3. Evaporation of solvent gave a residue which was purified by SiO2 column chromatography to give an oil (50 mg) (M+ found: 362; C20H3O4 requires: 362), 7/4/4 (m-1): 340, 1335, 1240, 1220, 1130. PMR (CC1, 3:63 (2 ArH), 3.77 (6, 2 ArH), 4.55 (58, 0.6H), 6.20 (6.3 OMe), 6.25 (5 Ozd), 7.1-7.3 (_m_, ArCH13, ArCH), 8.77 (_J_ 6, 7.6 Hz, CdMe). _Acetate_ (3H, mp 119-228 M+ found: 40; C4H

