# 10.1016@j.phytochem.2005.04.043.pdf

## Page 1

Benzopyrans from _Curvularia_ sp., an endophytic fungus associated with _Ocotea corymbosa_ (Lauraceae)

Helder Lopes Teles

Corresponding author. Tel.: +55 016 3301 6658; fax: +55 016 3322 7932.

Geraldo Humberto Silva

Nan Castro-Gamboa

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Jose Odair Pereira

Claudio Miguel Costa-Neto

Renato Haddad

Marcos Nogueira Eberlin

Maria Claudia Marx Young

Angela Regina Araujo

NuBBE-Nucleo de Bioensaio, Bioissintese e Ecfistiologia de Produtos Naturais, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, CEP 14801-970, Aaraquara, SP, Brazil Faculdade de Ciencias Agrarias, Universidade do Amazonas, CEP 69077-000, Manaus, AM, Brazil Departamento de Bioquimica e Humanologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Thompson Mass Spectroscopy Laboratory, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, CP 6154, CEP 13083-970, Campinas, SP, Brazil Seccao de Fisologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Boimica, CP 4009, CEP 01061-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

21 January 200521 January 200521 January 200521 January 200521 January 200521 January 2005201 January 2005

## Page 2

Those species were submitted for isolation of endophytic fungi and 82 pure isolates were obtained, preserved, cultivated in liquid media and extracted with ethyl acetate to obtain crude extracts.

The extract of a _Curvularia_ sp. isolated from _Ocotea corymbosa_ (Meissen.) Mez. showed moderate antifungal activity against _Cidasopporum sphaerospermum_ and _C. cladasoporioides_, triggering further studies. The crude EtOAc extract afforded two new benzopyran derivatives (**2** and **4**) and the known compounds **1** and **3**, which were tested in cell proliferation and antifungal assays. Compound **2** caused a potent proliferative stimulus to two mammalian cell lines and a weak antifungal activity. The dualistic activities described in this study (stimulatory mammalian cell proliferation and antifungal) might be of special interest in what concerns to species specificity action.

## Results and discussion

The known compounds 2-methyl-5-methoxy-benzopyran-4-one (**1**) and (2_R_)-2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-5-methoxy-benzopyran-4-one (**3**), were identified by comparing their physical and spectroscopic data with literature values (Nagasawa et al., 1988; Wu et al., 1999). A positive optical rotation displayed by compound **3**, further allowed the assignment of the absolute configuration at C-2 as \(R\).

Compound **2** was isolated as a white amorphous powder and its HRESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C12H13O4 ([M + H]+ at _m/z_ 221.0917). Analysis of the NMR, IR and UV spectra, suggested the presence of a chromane derivative (Saengchantara and Wallace, 1990). The 1H NMR spectrum of **2** (Table 1) showed a signal at \(d\) 12.70 (1H, _s_) attributed to a chelated phenolic OH. Spin-systems corresponding to a 1,2,3-trisubstituted benzene ring and a 2-hydroxypropyl group were also observed, along with an isolated olefin proton signal. The 13C NMR spectrum showed 12 signals (Table 1) consistent with these units and with the presence of a carbonyl group. The 13C NMR chemical shifts indicated that the benzene ring is 1,3-dioxygenated and that the carbonyl group is part of a benzopyran unit. Data from the _g_HMBC experiment (Table 1) supported these conclusions and enabled completion of structure **2**. For example, correlations of the H-1a' proton with olefinic carbons C-2 and C-3 enabled location at the 2-hydroxypropyl group at C-2. In addition, the selected irradiation 1D-NOESY experiment was conducted on H-3 and showed NOE correlations with H-1a' and H-2'. The absolute configuration of analogue (2'S)-7-hydroxy-2-(2'-hydropropyl)-5-methyl-chromone has been determined as \(S\) (Kashiwada et al., 1984) and showed a positive optical rotation. Since **2** also exhibited positive specific rotation, C-2' was assigned the _sinister_ configuration. Based on these and other data and \(d\) values, the structure of **2** was defined as (2'S)-2-(propan-2'-ol)-5-hydroxy-benzopyran-4-one.

Compound **4** was obtained as a brown amorphous powder. Its HRESI mass spectrum exhibited a [M - H2O + H]+ at _m/z_ 163.0757 corresponding to a molecular formula C10H11O2. The absence of a carbonyl band in the IR spectrum suggested reduction at this position relative to **3**. The 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopic data (Table 1) revealed the presence of the same 1,3-dioxygenated; 1,2,3-trisubstituted aromatic system for **2** along with a spin-system corresponding to the C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-1' portion of structure **4**. The equatorial and axial orientations of H-4, H-2, H-3 and H-1' were

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c} Position & **2** & **4** \\
1H (Δ) & 13C (Δ) & _g_HMBC & NOESY & 1H (Δ) & 13C (Δ) & _g_HMBC \\
2 & – & 170.0 & – & – & _α_4.24 \(m\) & 66.6 & C-9 \\
3 & 6.32 \(s\) & 109.5 & C-1′, C-10 & H-1′a, H-2′ & _α_1.50 _ddd_ (14.7, 14.7, 4.0) & 38.0 & – \\  & & – & – & _α_71.88 _ddd_ (14.7, 4.0, 4.0) & – \\
4 & – & 182.0 & – & – & _α_74.72 _br s_ & 57.1 & C-10 \\
5 & – & 159.9 & – & – & – & 156.8 & – \\
6 & 6.79 \(d\) (8.0) & 110.7 & C-10 & – & 6.20 _dd_ (8.0, 1.0) & 106.9 & – \\
7 & 7.63 \(t\) (8.0) & 135.6 & C-5, C-9 & – & 6.92 \(t\) (8.0) & 128.7 & – \\
8 & 7.03 \(d\) (8.0) & 107.3 & C-10 & – & 6.33 _dd_ (8.0, 1.0) & 106.5 & – \\
9 & – & 156.3 & – & – & – & 156.0 & – \\
10 & – & 109.9 & – & – & – & 112.4 & – \\
1′_a_ & 2.68 \(d\) (8.5) & 43.5 & C-2, C-3 & H-3 & _α_71.32 \(d\) (6.0) & 21.2 & C-2, C-3 \\
1′_b_ & 2.76 \(d\) (4.5) & – & – & – & – & – \\
2′ & 4.10 \(m\) & 64.2 & – & H-3 & – & – & – \\
3′ & 1.18 \(d\) (6.0) & 23.4 & C-1′ & – & – & – & – \\
5-OH & 12.70 s & – & – & – & – & – & – \\
2′-OH & 4.92 \(d\) (4.5) & – & – & – & – & – & – \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: 1H (500 MHz) and 13C (125 MHz) NMR spectroscopic data for compounds **2** and **4** in DMSO-_d_a

## Page 3

deduced from their coupling constants. Small _J_-values showed by H-4 suggested _vicinal eq-eq_ and _eq-ax_ couplings with H2-3. The H-3_eq_ showed constants that suggested a _vicinal_ coupling _eq-eq_ (4.0 Hz) with H-2 and _eq-ax_ (4.0 Hz) with H-4 and a _geminal_ coupling (14.7 Hz) with H-3_ax_. The 14.7, 14.7 and 4.0 Hz _J_-values for H-3_ax_ indicated a _geminal_ coupling, a _vicinal ax-ax_ coupling with H-2 and an _ax-eq_ coupling with H-4, respectively. Based on the conformational preference of methyl group over hydroxyl, the methyl group at C-2 was assumed to be in an equatorial position on a half-chair ring, which is the preferred conformation for benzopyrans (Joshi and Merchant, 1984). Therefore, due to equatorial position determined for H-4, compound **4** was characterized as the _trans_-isomer at H-4-H-2. All NMR signals were assigned by analysis of _g_HMQC and _g_HMBC experiments (Table 1) and \(d\) values. Compound **4** was thus identified as the previously unreported 2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-benzopyran-4,5-diol.

Compounds **1**-**4** (see Scheme 1) were evaluated against _Cladosporium phaerosgpermann_ and _C. cladosporiides_ using direct bioautography (Rahalison et al., 1991). Compounds **1** and **2** exhibited a weak antifungal activity, showing a detection limit of 10 mg for both substances. Compound **3** and **4** did not show any antifungal activity. Nystatin was employed as a positive control showing a detection limit of 1 mg. The reduction at \(\Delta^{2,3}\) in **3**, changing the conformation of the pyrane ring, may be the cause of the loss of the activity.

Biological evaluation of **1**-**4** was also carried out using HeLa (human cervix tumor) and CHO (Chinese hamster ovary) cell lines. Compound **2**, at 20 mmol/L was able to induce 70% increase in cell proliferation to HeLa and 25% to CHO cells, when compared to the DMSO treated cells. The compounds **1**, **3** and **4** were inactive in CHO and displayed a weak stimulatory effect in HeLa cells. When cisplatin, a well known antineoplastic agent, was used as a control, a clear inhibition of cell proliferation was observed.

The biological activity of **1** and **2** seems to be differentially specific to fungi or mammalian cells, and also to different mammalian cell lines. The indication of a possible specific mechanism of action is of great interest and deserves further investigation.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedure

Optical rotations were measured in MeOH using a Perkin-Elmer polarimeter with a sodium lamp operating at 598 nm and 25 degC. UV spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2401 PC spectrophotometer. IR spectra were run on a Nicolet Impact-400 spectrophotometer. 1H (500 MHz) and 13C (125 MHz) NMR spectra were recorded on a VARIAN DRX-500 spectrometer, using TMS as an internal standard. HRESI mass spectra were obtained on an Autospec-Micromass mass spectrometer. Analytical HPLC was performed on a Varian Pro Star 230 using a Phenomenex C-18 column (250 mm x 4.6 mm). Column chromatography (CC) was performed over reversed-phase silica gel 230-400 mesh (Merck). TLC was performed using Merck silica gel 60 (>230 mesh) and precoated silica gel 60 PF254. Spots on TLC plates were visualized under UV light and by spraying with anisaldehyde-H2SO4 reagent followed by heating at 120 degC. Preparative HPLC was performed on a Varian Prep-Star 400 system using a Phenomenex C-18 (250 mm x 21.2 mm) preparative column.

### Plant material

Authenticated _O. corymbosa_ plant material was collected in "Estacao Experimental de Araraquara", Araraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 2001. The botanical identification was made by Professor Maria Claudia Marx Young and a voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Brazil (Voucher No MCMY-1314).

### Isolation of the endophytic fungus

For the isolation of the endophytic fungus, adult and healthy leaves were selected and submitted to surface sterilization. They were first washed with water and soap, and immersed in a 1% aqueous sodium hypochlorite solution for 5 min and 70% aqueous ethanol for 1 min. A second washing with water and soap was performed and finally the leaves were immersed in sterile water for 10 min. The sterilized leaves were cut into 2 x 2 cm pieces and deposited on a Petri dish containing PDA (potato-dextrose-agar) and anthamicine sulfate

## Page 4

(50 mg/mL) with approximately three to four pieces on each dish. The material was incubated at 25 degC for 10 days and the endophyte _Curvularia_ sp. was isolated by replication and preserved in sterile water (Maier et al., 1997). The fungus was identified by Dr. Jose Odair Pereira (UFA) and deposited in NuBBE's collection with culture number "PAJ-04".

### Growth of Curvularia and production of the EIOAc extract

The fungus was cultivated on a small scale in 2 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL), each containing 0.8 g of potato extract, 4.0 g dextrose and 200 mL distilled water (PDB) which were autoclaved at 125 degC for 15 min. Approximately 10 small pieces (1 x 1 cm) of PDA medium, from the Petri dish containing biomass of the _Curvularia_ isolated were inoculated into each flask and the flasks were sealed with cotton to permit aerobic growth. After incubation for 28 days at 25 degC on rotary shakers at 150 rpm, the mycelia biomass accumulated in the flasks was separated from the aqueous medium by filtration, and the filtrate was partitioned with ethyl acetate (3 x 200 mL). Collection and evaporation of the organic phase in vacuo yielded a brown solid residue (158 mg). After this extract was found to display bioactivity, this process was scaled up using 4.0 L of PDB (20 Erlenmeyer flasks) and afforded 1.8 g of EtoAc extract.

### Antifungal assay

The microorganisms _C. cladosporioides_ (Fresen) de Vries SPC 140 and _C. sphaerospermum_ (Perzig) SPC 491 were used in the antifungal assay. They have been maintained at the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. The compounds 1-4 were applied on a pre-coated Si-gel TLC plates using a solution (10 mL) containing 100, 50, 25, 10, 5 and 1 mg. After eluting with CHCl3:CH3OH (9:1) they were sprayed with the fungi (Rahalison et al., 1991). Nystatin was employed as positive control.

### Determination of cell viability after treatment with benzopyrans

HeLa (human cervix tumor) and CHO (Chinese hamster ovary) cells were cultured at 37 degC in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2, using Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Life Technologies Inc., Gaithersburg, MD) supplemented with 10% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS, Life Technologies Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). Penicillin (100 mg/mL) and streptomycin (100 mg/mL) were included in medium to prevent bacterial growth. A stock solution (20 mmol/L) was prepared by dissolving compounds 1-4 in DMSO (vehicle). The final concentrations (200, 20 and 2 mmol/L) were achieved by direct dilution into the cell medium. Cells were plated (104 cells/well) in a 48-well tray 24 h prior to the beginning of the experiment. After addition of the compound or the vehicle, cells were analyzed after a period of 48 h using the MTT assay (Mosmann, 1983; Rubinstein et al., 1990).

### Extraction and isolation

The EtoAc extract (1.8 g) was fractionated by column chromatography (CC) using reversed-phase silica gel (ODS) and eluted with a MeOH-H2O gradient (1:9 100% MeOH) affording 8 fractions (A-H). Fraction A (125 mg) was further purified using reverse phase prep. HPLC [_l_ = 221 nm, 12.0 mL/ min., CH3CN:H2O (2:8)] affording **1** (2.2 mg) and **2** (1.8 mg). Fraction B (100 mg) was also purified using reversed phase prep. HPLC [_l_ = 230 nm, 12.0 mL/min., CH3CN:H2O (23:77)], affording **3** (10.2 mg) and finally fraction C (770 mg) was also submitted to reverse phase prep. HPLC, [_l_ = 221 nm, 12.0 mL/min., CH3CN:H2O (37:63)] to afford compound **4** (2.7 mg).

#### 3.7.1 (2'S)-2-(propan-2'-ol)-5-hydroxy-benzopyran-4-one (2)

Amorphous powder (1.8 mg); [_a_]D +30 (_c_ 0.25, MeOH); UV _l_max (CH3OH) nm (log _e_): 240 (4.0); IR _v_max (KBr) cm-1 : 3732, 1629, 1030. For 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopic data, see Table 1; HRESIMS: _ml/z_ 221.0917 [M + H]+ Calcd. for C12H13O4, 221.0814.

#### 3.7.2 2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-benzopyran-4,5-diol (4)

Brown amorphous powder (2.7 mg); [_a_]D +15 (_c_ 0.25, MeOH); UV _l_max (CH3OH) nm (log _e_): 240 (3.8); IR _v_max (KBr) cm-1: 3730, 1033. For 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopic data, see Table 1; HRESIMS: _ml/z_ 163.0757 [M + H]+ Calcd. for C12H13O4, 163.0590.

## Acknowledgments

This work was funded by Grants from the Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biot-FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br); Grant # 98/05074-0 awarded to Dr. Bolzani, principal investigator. H.L.T and G.H.S. also acknowledge CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Ensino Superior) and CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico) for Ph.D. fellowships.

## References

* (1) Barbosa-Filho, J.M., Yoshida, M., Gottlieb, O.R., 1989. Lignoids from _Nectandra amazumn_ and _N. glabrescens_. Phytochemistry 28, 1991.



## Page 5

* [19] Chavez, J.P., Gottlieb, O.R., Yoshida, M., 1995. 10-desmethyl-1-methyl-eudsemanes from _Ooceta corymbosa_. Phytochemistry 39, 849-852.
* [20] Franca, N.C., Giesbrecht, A.M., Gottlieb, O.R., Magalhaes, E.G., Magalhaes, A.F., Maia, J.G.S., 1975. Benzylisoquinolines from _Ooceta_ species. Phytochemistry 14, 1671-1672.
* [21] Joshi, V., Merchant, J.R., 1984. Configuration of hydroxyl at position-4 in trimethylchroman-4-ols. Indian Journal of Chemistry 23, 266-267.
* [22] Kashiwada, Y., Nonaka, G., Nishika, I., 1984. Studies on Rhubarb (Rhei rhizoma). 5. Isolation and characterization of chromone and chromanone derivatives. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 32, 3493-3500.
* [23] Maier, W., Hammer, U., Dammann, U., Schulz, B., Strack, D., 1997. Accumulation of sesquiterpenoid cyclohexenone derivatives induced by an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus in members of the Poaceae. Planta 202, 36-42.
* [24] Mandarino, D.G., 1985. Estudo estrutural de pironas por RMN. Ms.C. Thesis, Instituto de Quimica USP, Sao Paulo.
* application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. Journal of Immunological Methods 65, 55-63.
* an easy access to Khellin. Heterocycles 27, 1159-1162.
* [27] Rubinstein, L.V., Shoemaker, R.H., Paull, K.D., Simon, R.M., Tosini, S., Skehan, P., Scudiero, D.A., Monks, A., Boyd, M.R., 1990. Comparison of in vitro anticancer-drug-screening data generated with a tetrazolium assay versus a protein assay against a diverse panel of human tumor cell lines. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 82, 1113-1118.
* a rute to 2-substituted cromones and viral 2-substituted croman-4-ones. Tetrahedron 46, 6553-6564.
* [29] Rahalison, L., Hamburger, M., Hostettmann, K., Monod, M., Frenk, E., 1991. A bioautographic agar overlay method for the detection of antifungal compounds from higher-plants. Phytochemical Analysis 2, 199-203.
* [30] Wu, T.S., Li, C.Y., Leu, Y.L., Hu, C.Q., 1999. Limonoids and alkaloids of the root bark of _Dictamus angustifolus_. Phytochemistry 50, 509-512.



