# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)90130-4.pdf

## Page 1



# PTEROCARPANOIDS FROM _DALBERGIA DECIPULARIS_*

R. DE ALICAR, R. Braz Filho, O. R. GOTTILEB Escola de Pos-Graduacao, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, c.p. 25, ZC-OO, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

R. DE ALICAR, R. Braz Filho, O. R. GOTTILEB Escola de Pos-Graduacao, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, c.p. 25, ZC-OO, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

E-mail: _Dalbergia decipularis_ Rizz. and Matt.,2 trivial name'sebastiao de arruda', tree. _Source_. Andarai, central Bahia, Brazil. _Uses_. The compact, fragrant heartwood has beautiful pink streaks and is used for fine furniture and flooring.3

_Heartwood_. Extraction with benzene produced a solution which was filtered and concentrated under vacuum. Upon standing a precipitate appeared. This was separated by filtration and crystallized from acetone giving (+-)-3-hydroxy-9-methoxyperocarpan, m.p. and m.m.p. with an authentic sample,4 195-197deg. The filtrate was evaporated and extracted with boiling light petroleum. The soluble portion was an oil whose purification by distillation under vacuum (98-99deg, 0-4 mm) gave practically pure nerolidol. The insoluble portion was chromatographed on silica, giving upon elution with benzene 3,9-dimethoxy-pterocarp-6a-en, m.p. 115-116deg (lit. m.p. 110deg, 5 116deg); and with AcOEt (+)-3-hydroxy-9-methoxyperocarpan, m.p. and m.m.p. with an authentic sample,4 127-128deg; 3,9-dimethoxy-6-oxopterocarp-6a-en, m.p. 200-201deg (subl.) (lit.5 m.p. 196-198deg); and an aliphatic ester, m.p. 245-247deg, M-498. The identification involved NMR, IR, UV and mass spectral measurements. The base peak of the mass spectrum of 3,9-dimethoxy-6-oxopterocarp-6a-en is associated with the loss of a methyl group.

_Phytochemical comments_. Nerolidol7 and the pterocarpans4 were isolated previously from other _Dalbergia_ species. The pterocarpens have only recently been reported5 as constituents of _Swartzia madagascariensis_. _Dalbergia decipularis_ seems thus chemically closer to a species of the Leguminosae-Caesalpinioideae than indeed to its proper papillonaceous entourage.

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are indebted to the Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Rio de Janeiro, for financial aid, and to Professor W. D. Ollis, The University, Sheffield, for the mass spectra, Professor S. H. Harper and Dr. W. G. E. Underwood, University College of Rhodesia, Salisbury, kindly contributed the IR spectra of the pterocarpens.

## References

* [1]O. R. GOTTILEB AND A. I. DA ROCHA, _Phytochem._**11**, 1183 (1972).
* [2]C. T. Rizzini and A. de MATTOS FILHO, _Anais Acad. Brasil. Cienc._**40**, 232 (1968).
* [3]W. B. Mors and C. T. Rizzini, _Useful Plants of Brazil_, p. 130, Holden-Day, San Francisco (1966).
* [4]W. D. Ollis, in _Recent Advances in Phytochemistry_ (edited by T. J. Mabry, R. E. Alston and V. C. Runeckles), p. 350, Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York (1968).
* [5]S. H. Harper, A. D. Kemp, W. G. E. Underwood and R. V. M. CAMPBELL, _J. Chem. Soc._**C**, 1109 (1969).
* [6]W. J. Bowyer, J. N. CHATTERJEA, S. P. DHOUADEL, B. O. HANFORD and W. B. WHALLEY, _J. Chem. Soc._**421** (1964).
* [7]Y. P. KATH PALA and S. DUTT, _Indian Soap. J._**17**, 285 (1952); _Chem. Abs._**47**, 273 (1953); D. B. SPOELSTA, _Rec. Trav. Chim._**50**, 433 (1931).



