# 10.1021@jf100233y.pdf

## Page 1

Inhibitory Effect of Gallic Acid and Its Esters on 2,2'-Azobis(2-amidinopropane)hydrochloride (AAPH)-Induced Hemolysis and Depletion of Intracellular Glutathione in Erythrocytes

Valdecir F. Ximenes, Mariana G. Lopes, Maicon Segalla Petronio, Luis Octavio Regasin, Dulce H. Siqueira Silva, Luiz M. da Fonseca

# Abstract

The protective effect of gallic acid and its esters, methyl, propyl, and lauryl gallate, against _2,2'_-azobis(2-amidinopropane)hydrochloride (AAPH)-induced hemolysis and depletion of intracellular glutathione (GSH) in erythrocytes was studied. The inhibition of hemolysis was dose-dependent, and the esters were significantly more effective than gallic acid. Gallic acid and its esters were compared with regard to their reactivity to free radicals, using the DPPH and AAPH/pyranine free-cell assays, and no significant difference was obtained. Gallic acid and its esters not only failed to inhibit the depletion of intracellular GSH in erythrocytes induced by AAPH but exacerbated it. Similarly, the oxidation of GSH by AAPH or horseradish peroxidase/H2O2 in cell-free systems was exacerbated by gallic acid or gallates. This property could be involved in the recent findings on pro-apoptotic and pro-oxidant activities of gallates in tumor cells. We provide evidence that lipophilicity and not only radical scavenger potency is an important factor regarding the efficiency of anti-hemolytic substances.

Gallic acid; gallates; erythrocytes; hemolysis; glutathione; peroxyl radical; antioxidant; pro-oxidant activity

## INTRODUCTION

Gallic acid and its derivatives are among the most abundant phenolic antioxidants in wines and green tea (_I_ - _3_). This phytochemical is well-known for its antioxidant, antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antimutagenic, and chemopreventive properties (_t_ - _7_). The similar beneficial effects of the synthetic esters of gallic acid have been extensively studied, and in many cases, they are stronger than those of gallic acid itself. For instance, lauryl gallate (dodecyl gallate), a widely used food additive, is more efficient than gallic acid as an inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase, an endogenous source of the superoxide anion, and of mitochondrial lipid peroxidation induced by FeIII-NADPH (_d_). Methyl gallate is more effective than gallic acid at inhibiting oral bacterial growth and the formation of _Streptococcus mutans_ biofilms (_4_). Methyl gallate inhibits the production of leukotriene C4 and prostaglandin D2 by bone-marrow-derived mast cells (_th_). Nonyl gallate is more effective than gallic acid against the growth of _Salmonella choleraeus_ (_10_). Lauryl gallate protects against the formation of dimethylbenzanthracene-induced skin tumors in mice and kills, selectively, tumor cells in established tumors (_11_). Such biological activities have been correlated with the amphipathic feature of these ester derivatives (_12_), because the _in vitro_ antioxidant potential is nearly the same as that of gallic acid. Hence, it may be supposed that the accessibility of the gallates to the intracellular medium could be a determining factor for their effects.

Another relevant property of gallates is their pro-oxidant characteristics. Indeed, the cytotoxic effect of octyl, dodecyl, and tetracdexy gallates on melanoma cells has recently been demonstrated (_13, 14_). This biological effect has been associated with DNA fragmentation, activation of NF-_k_B, inhibition of cell adhesion, and alteration of the cell redox status by depletion of both glutathione (GSH) and ATP (_13_). Similarly, the inhibition of HeLa cell growth by propyl gallate was associated with depletion of intracellular GSH and increased production of the superoxide anion (_14_).

The hemolysis of erythrocytes has been extensively used as an _ex vivo_ model for studying reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced disruption of cell membranes and the protective effect of antioxidants. One of the most frequently studied models uses the water-soluble azo compound 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane)hydrochloride (AAPH), which decomposes at physiological temperature (37 degC)

## Page 2

to generate an alkyl radical (R*). In the presence of dissolved molecular oxygen, this radical is converted to the corresponding peroxyl radical (ROO*) (_15_). The mechanism of erythrocyte hemolysis induced by thermolysis of AAPH is not completely understood, but it has been correlated with lipid peroxidation and oxidation of membrane proteins (_16_). The incubation of erythrocytes with AAPH also provokes the depletion of intracellular GSH (_17_).

Because the above biological phenomenon is associated with the disruption of the cell membrane and in view of increasing evidence that the lipophilicity of gallic acid esters is decisive for their beneficial effects, here, we aimed to synthesize selected gallate esters and compare their efficacy as inhibitors of AAPH-induced hemolysis and GSH depletion. The objective was to retain the same oxidizable moiety while altering the lipophilicity. Additionally, we studied and compared the antioxidant and pro-oxidant effects of gallic acid and gallates in cell-free systems.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Chemicals and Equipments.

Gallic acid, vanillic acid, methyl vanillate, (+-)-6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchromane-2-carboxylic acid (trolox), _N_-ethylmaleimide (NEM), (+-)-a-tocopherol (vitamin E), 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) hydrochloride (AAPH), 5,5'-dithioish(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB), glutathione (GSH), 8-hydroxypropyl-2,3,6-trisulfin acid trisulfin salt (pyramine), 2,2-diphenyl-1-picylhydrazyl (DPPH), \(N\),N_-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide, amine hydroperoxide (Cu-OOH), horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (EC 1.11.1), and _o_-phthalaldehyde (OPA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was prepared by diluting a 30% stock solution and calculating its concentration from its absorption at 240 nm (_ε_240 = 43.6 M-1 cm-1) (_18_). Column chromatography was carried out over 0.06-0.20 mm silica gel (Acros Organics, Morris Plains, NJ). Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was performed with Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). Preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was carried out in a Varian Prep-Star 400 system with a Phenomex C-18 (250 x 21.2 mm) column. The monodimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded on a Varian Iowa 500 spectrometer (11.7 T) at 500 MHz ('H) and 125 MHz ('C), using CDCl3 and DMSO-_d

## Page 3

37 degC. When present, apocynin, gallic acid, and gallates (100 _m_M) were added before the addition of H2O2. The reactions were stopped by adding 10 _ng_/mL catalase. The concentration of GSH and its oxidized form (GSSG) were determined by HPLC with fluorimetric detection, as previously described (2): For GSH determination, 50 _m_L of the above reaction mixture was added to 1.0 mL of 0.1% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in 0.1 M Na2HPO4 at pH 8.0. To a 20 _m_L aliquot of this mixture, 300 _m_L of 0.1% EDTA in 0.1 M Na2HPO4 at pH 8.0 and 20 _m_L of 0.1% OPA in methanol were added as this reaction mixture was incubated at 25 degC for 15 min in the dark in well-capped tubes, after which 20 _m_L of each sample was injected into the HPLC system. For GSSG determination, a 200 _m_L aliquot of the reaction mixture was incubated at 25 degC with 200 _m_L of 40 mM NEM, for 25 min, in the dark, to react with the GSH present in the sample. To this mixture, 750 _m_L of 0.1 M NaOH was added. A 20 _m_L portion of this mixture was taken for measurement of GSSG, using the procedure outlined above for the GSH assay, except that 0.1 M NaOH was employed as the diluent rather than 0.1% EDTA in 0.1 M Na2HPO4 at pH 8.0. The HPLC method for the determination of GSH and GSSG is based on derivatization with OPA to form a stable, highly fluorescent derivative (2). The derivatives of GSH and GSSG were separated by liquid chromatography (Varian ProStar in line with a fluorescence detector set at 350/420 nm). The analyses were carried out isocratically on a Luna C18 reversed-phase column (250 x 4.6 mm, 5 _m_m). The mobile phase consisted of 15% methanol in 25 mM Na2HPO4 at pH 6.0 (flow rate of 0.5 mL/min).

### Measurement of Oxygen Consumption.

The consumption of dissolved molecular oxygen during the oxidation of GSH was monitored in a YSI 5300A oxygen monitor (Yellow Spring, OH). The reaction mixture of 1 mM GSH, 100 _m_H2O2, and 0.1 _m_M HRP in PBS was incubated at 37 degC in the presence or absence (control) of 10 _m_M apocynin or gallates. The reaction was initiated by adding H2O2. The oxygen consumption was monitored for 10 min.

Pyranaine-Based Procedure for Evaluation of the Reactivity of Gallates with Peroxyl Radicals Generated by AAPH Thermolysis.

This experiment was performed as described by Lissi et al. (2_d_), with minor modifications. The experiments were based on the decay in the fluorescence of pyramine when it was submitted to oxidation by peroxyl radicals. The fluorescent compound pyramine (5 _m_M) was incubated with 20 mM AAPH in PBS at 37 degC in the absence (control) or presence of gallates in the wells of a microplate. The fluorescence bleaching of the pyramine was monitored at _dx_= 460 nm and _x_= 510 nm in a Spectramax M2 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). The final reaction volume was 300 _m_L. The flag phase (induction time) obtained when the antioxidants were present was measured for various concentrations of each gallate. The slopes of the curves of induction time versus concentration were used to measure the relative reactivity of the gallates with AAPH-derived peroxyl radicals.

### Free-Radical Scavenging Activity on DPPH/DPPH Bleaching Assay.

The free-radical scavenger activity of gallic acid and its esters was compared by the DPPH bleaching assay (5). The antioxidants were incubated for 30 min with 100 _m_M DPPH in methyl alcohol in the dark. The scavenger activity was evaluated spectrophotometrically at 517 nm, using the absorbance of the unreacted DPPH radical as the control. The scavenger activity was calculated as ((absorbance of the control - absorbance of the sample)/absorbance of the control) x 100.

## Results

We studied the hemolysis of erythrocytes and the protective effect of gallic acid and its esters. The molecular structures of the compounds studied are shown in **Figure 1**. Hemolysis was provoked by thermolysis of the azo compound AAPH, which generates a low but constant flux of peroxyl radicals when incubated at 37 degC (_15_). **Figure 2** shows the kinetic profile of hemolysis and the protective effect of gallic acid and propyl gallate. The inhibition of hemolysis was dose-dependent (Figure 3), and the esters methyl gallate (G1), propyl gallate (G3), and lauryl gallate (G12) were more effective inhibitors than their acid precursor, gallic acid (G0) (**Table 1**).

Because the above results suggest a higher efficacy of the esters as free-radical scavengers, we also compared their relative potency in cell-free models. First, they were compared as scavengers of the stable free-radical DPPH. The results depicted in **Table 2** show that no significant difference was observed between gallic acid and its ester derivatives. In a second set of experiments, we studied the direct reactivity of gallic acid and its esters with AAPH-derived peroxyl radicals. In this assay, the relative reactivity of the antioxidants with peroxyl radicals is determined by the lag phase in the decay of pyramine fluorescence (2_d_). **Figure 4** shows the typical time profile of the bleaching obtained when pyramine was incubated with AAPH in the presence of gallic acid and methyl gallate. The linear relation between the delay and the concentration of gallic acid or gallates was used to measure the reactivity of the tested compound with AAPH. In this design, the slope of the curve is directly proportional to the efficiency of the antioxidant as a scavenger of peroxyl radicals. **Figure 4** also shows the typical linear correlation between the concentration and lag phase for gallic acid and methyl gallate. The slopes obtained were 442 +- 30 for gallic acid, 499 +- 31 for methyl gallate, 453 +- 6 for propyl gallate, and 187 +- 7 for lauryl gallate (mean +- SEM, \(n\) = 3). As can be observed, only lauryl gallate presented a

Figure 1.: Chemical structures of the compounds used in this study.

Figure 2.: AAPH-induced hemolysis and the protective effect of gallic acid (G0) and propyl gallate (G3). The reaction mixture (positive control) contained 10% (v/v) erythrocytes and 50 mM AAPH in PBS at 37 °C. The results are mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of duplicates of three separate experiments.



## Page 4

decreased reactivity with peroxyl radicals in this experimental model.

Considering the above cell-free studies, the stronger antihemolytic effect of the gallates, relative to that of gallic acid, suggests that lipophilicity is a determining factor in this experimental model. To verify this proposal, we also compared the antioxidant vanillic acid versus its methyl ester (methyl vanillate) and trolox, a more water-soluble form of vitamin E, versus vitamin E itself. The results with these two different classes of antioxidants followed the same pattern as that for gallates and gallic acid, reinforcing the suggestion that lipophilicity of antioxidants is crucial with respect to antihemolytic protection (**Table 1**).

The direct hemolytic capacity of gallic acid and gallates was also investigated, because these compounds could interact with and disrupt the erythrocyte membrane. In these experiments, gallic acid and gallates were incubated with erythrocytes without AAPH. The results in **Table 3** show that only the 12-carbon ester lauryl gallate caused significant hemolysis after incubation for 6 h.

The protective effect of gallates was not restricted to AAPH-induced hemolysis. The results given in **Table 4** show that gallates were also effective when the hemolysis was provoked by incubation of erythrocytes with cumene hydroperoxide. Again, there was a correlation with lipophilicity.

In a further experiment, the protective effect of gallic acid and gallates on the depletion of intracellular GSH induced by AAPH was also studied. Despite their antimobutyric properties, gallic acid and gallates were unable to inhibit the oxidation of GSH when erythrocytes were incubated with AAPH. On the contrary, the depletion of GSH was exacerbated by methyl and lauryl gallates (**Table 5**).

To clarify these findings, we studied the direct reaction between pure GSH and AAPH-derived peroxyl radicals and tested the effect of gallic acid and gallates on this reaction. Again, the presence of gallic acid and gallates tended to exacerbate the oxidation of GSH (**Figure 5**).

In another set of experiments, pure GSH was oxidized by H2O3 in a reaction catalyzed by HRP. Because GSH is a poor substrate for peroxidase, the efficiency of oxidation was low (26). However, the addition of gallic acid and gallates caused a strong increase in the oxidation of GSH (**Figure 6**).

It is well-known that some phenolic compounds are able to act as a co-catalyst in reactions of inefficient peroxidase substrates, such as GSH. In such situations, the oxidized intermediate phenolic radical is reduced back and GSH is converted to GSSG. Moreover, during this redox cycle, the dissolved molecular oxygen in the reaction mixture is consumed, being reduced to superoxide anion (27). For these reasons and in light of our results, we measured the production of GSSG and the oxygen consumption as GSH was oxidized by HRP/H2O2 in the presence of gallic acid or gallates. To ascertain whether our experimental conditions for assessing the co-catalytic effect of phenols upon the oxidation of GSH was correct, we used apocynin, which is able to initiate this process, as a reference compound (28). As can be seen in **Figure 7**, both gallic acid and apocynin exacerbated the oxidation of GSH; however, only in the presence of apocynin was GSSG obtained as a product. Similarly, only in the presence of apocynin was the consumption of dissolved oxygen observed (**Figure 8**). The other gallates showed the same results as gallic acid (data not shown).

## DISCUSSION

The hemolysis of erythrocytes has been extensively used as an _ex vivo_ model in the study of ROS-induced disruption of cell membranes. The inhibitory property of many antioxidants upon AAPH-induced hemolysis is well-documented (29-32). However, there is no clear relationship between the molecular structure of the antioxidants and their efficiency as inhibitors. Here, working with gallic acid and its ester derivatives, we found

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline experimental condition & percent hemolysis (3 h) & percent hemolysis (6 h) \\ \(-\)AAPH & \(2 \pm 1^{6}\) & \(3 \pm 1^{6}\) \\  & \(17 \pm 3^{6}\) & \(78 \pm 7^{6}\) \\  +G0 & \(3 \pm 2^{d}\) & \(72 \pm 6\) \\  +G1 & \(3 \pm 2^{d}\) & \(18 \pm 5^{d}\) \\  +G3 & \(2 \pm 1^{d}\) & \(9 \pm 4^{d}\) \\ +AAPH & +G12 & \(

## Page 5

that lipophilicity seems to be an essential characteristic of an efficient antihemolytic compound. Similar findings were reported by Wu et al. that ranked the antihemolytic efficiency of gallates as propyl > ethyl > methyl (_33_). Corroborating this proposal, the correlation between efficacy against AAPH-induced hemolysis and lipophilicity was not restricted to gallic acid and its ester derivatives but extended to other classes of molecules, such as vanillic acid versus its lipophilic derivative methyl vanillate and trolox versus vitamin E. Moreover, the benefit of lipophilicity was not restricted to AAPH-induced hemolysis, because it was also seen when the erythrocytes were challenged with cumene hydroperoxide.

Reinforcing the importance of lipophilicity, our result showed clearly that higher antihemolytic efficacy of the gallates was not related to their oxidizability. Indeed, except for lauryl gallate, no significant difference was observed between gallic acid and its esters in their potential as antioxidants in cell-free systems. Only the 12-carbon chain ester was relatively poor as a peroxyl radical scavenger in the cell-free systems. Despite that and again reinforcing the importance of lipophilicity, lauryl gallate was a more efficient inhibitor of hemolysis than gallic acid.

It is important to observe that any compound used as an antihemolytic agent when erythrocytes are challenged by free

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline experimental condition & percent hemolysis (2 h) \\ \hline –Qu–OOH & & 8.1 ± 4.9a \\  & & 72.9 ± 1.6a \\  & 10 & 67 ± 1.7 \\  & +60 (_μM_) & 20 & 17 ± 6.9a \\  & +G1 (_μM_) & 10 & 11.



## Page 6

radicals could also interact directly with the cell membrane and provoke its disruption. This effect has been described, and there is a relationship between lipophilicity and hemolytic capacity developed by many compounds [34, 35]. Accordingly, lauryl gallate, the most lipophilic compound used in this study, was the only ester capable of inducing hemolysis of erythrocytes under our experimental conditions.

Other important findings include the interaction of gallic acid and gallates with GSH. This chemical feature could explain or be involved in the recent findings about cellular pro-oxidant effects of gallates [13, 14]. This tripeptide is the main endogenous antioxidant in mammalian cells, and the ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) reflects directly the redox status of the cell [36]. It is well-known that redox homeostasis is crucial for cells to survive, and the pathophysiological mechanisms of several diseases are related to the exacerbated production of ROS and/or decreased antioxidant functions [37]. In fact, apoptosis, which is altered in tumor cells, strongly depends upon the GSH/GSSG ratio [38, 39]. Two pathways could explanation the exacerbated oxidation of GSH when gallates are present in the reaction mixture or cellular medium. The first is the action of these compounds as co-catalysts, where the intermediate phenoxyl radical would be reduced back to gallate with concomitant oxidation of GSH. This phenomenon is well-established for phenolic compounds, such as tyrosine and apocynin [27, 28], and the consequence of this redox cycle is the consumption of GSH, the formation of GSSG, and the reduction of oxygen to superoxide anion [40]. This was exactly what we observed for apocynin, used as a model for a comparison to gallates in this study. However, when gallates were used, the consumption of GSH was not followed by the formation of GSSG and the depletion of dissolved oxygen. Hence, this mechanism does not seem to be responsible for the augmented depletion of GSH caused by gallic acid and gallates.

The second possible explanation for the involvement of gallic acid and gallates in the depletion of intracellular GSH is a chemical reaction between the oxidized trihydroxybenzene moiety, probably in its quinone form, and GSH via the Michael

Figure 5.: Oxidation of GSH by BAPH and effect of gallic acid and gallates. The reaction system (positive control) consisted of 2.5 mM AAPH and 100 _μ_M GSH in PBS, incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. When present, the gallates were 100 _μ_M. The results are mean ± SEM of duplicates of five separate experiments. (#) Statistically significant difference relative to the positive control (_p_ < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Tukey multiple comparison test).

Figure 6.: Oxidation of GSH by HRP/H2O2 and effect of gallic acid and gallates. The remaining GSH was analyzed by the DTNB method. The reaction mixture (control) consisted of 0.1 _μ_M HRP, 100 _μ_M H2O2, and 100 _μ_M GSH in PBS and was incubated for 10 min at 37 °C. When present, the gallates were 100 _μ_M. The results are mean ± SEM of duplicates of three separate experiments. (#) Statistically significant difference relative to the positive control (_p_ < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Tukey multiple comparison test).

Figure 7.: Oxidation of GSH and production of GSSG. The remaining GSH and the produced GSSG were measured by HPLC. The reaction mixture (control) consisted of 0.1 _μ_M HRP, 100 _μ_M H2O2, and 100 _μ_M GSH in PBS and was incubated for 10 min at 37 °C. (Top) Analysis of remaining GSH: (i) chromatogram of the reaction mixture (control), (ii) chromatogram of the reaction mixture in the presence of apocynin, and (iii) chromatogram of the reaction mixture in the presence of gallic acid. (Bottom) Analysis of GSSG produced: (i) chromatogram of the reaction mixture (control), (ii) chromatogram of the reaction mixture in the presence of apocynin, and (iii) chromatogram of the reaction mixture in the presence of gallic acid.



## Page 7

reaction. This is a well-known reaction that involves electrophilic quinones and nucleophilic substances, such as GSH, leading to thiol adducts (_41_, _42_). In this case, the consumption of GSH is not followed by the formation of GSSG and oxygen consumption, as verified here. In summary, **Scheme 1** shows our proposal for the involvement of gallic acid and gallates when these compounds were oxidized in the presence of GSH, which could explain the depletion of intracellular GSH as verified here and by others (_13_, _14_).

## Literature Cited

* (1) Bertelli, A. A.; Das, D. K. Grapes, wines, resveratrol and heart health. _J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol._**2009**, _34_, 468-476.
* (2) Paixao, N.; Pereira, V.; Marques, J. C.; Camara, J. S. Quantification of polyphenols with potential antioxidant properties in wines using reverse phase HPLC. _J. Spe. Sci._**2008**, _31_, 2189-2198.
* (3) Butt, M. S.; Sultan, M. T. Green tea: Nature's defense against malignancies. _Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr._**2009**, \(4\), 463-473.
* (4) Kang, M. S.; Oh, J. S.; Kang, I. C.; Hong, S. J.; Choi, C. H. Inhibitory effect of methyl gallate and gallic acid on oral bacteria. _J. Microbiol._**2008**, _46_, 744-750.
* (5) Kim, S. H.; Jun, C. D.; Suk, K.; Choi, B. J.; Lim, H.; Park, S.; Lee, S. H.; Shin, H. Y.; Kim, D. K.; Shin, T. Y. Gallic acid inhibits histamine release and pro-inflammatory cytokine production in mast cells. _Toxicol. Sci._**2006**, _91_, 123-131.
* (6) Birosova, L.; Mikulusova, M.; Vaverkova, S. Antimutagenic effect of phenolic acids. _Biomed. Pap. Med. Fac. Univ. Palocky Olomae Czech Repub._**2005**, _149_, 489-491.
* (7) Giftson, J. S.; Jayanthi, S.; Nalini, N. Chemopreventive efficacy of gallic acid, an antioxidant and anticarcinogenic polyphenol, against 1,2-dimethyl hydrazine induced rat colon carcinogenesis. _Invest. New Drugs_**2009**, _28_, 251-259.
* (8) Kubo, I.; Masukoa, N.; Xiao, P.; Haraguchi, H. Antioxidant activity of dodecyl gallate. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2002**, _50_, 3533-3539.
* (9) Kim, S. J.; Jin, M.; Lee, E.; Moon, T. C.; Quan, Z.; Yang, J. H.; Son, K. H.; Kim, K. U.; Son, J. K.; Chang, H. W. Effects of methyl gallate on arachidonic acid metabolizing enzymes: Cyclooxygenase-2 and 5-lioroxygenase in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells. _Arch. Pharm. Res._**2006**, _29_, 874-878.
* (10) Kubo, I.; Fujita, K.; Nihei, K. Anti-_Salmonella_ activity of alkyl gallates. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2002**, _50_, 6692-6696.
* (11) Ortega, E.; Sadabaa, M. C.; Ortiz, A. I.; Cespo, C.; Rocamora, A.; Escolano, J. M.; Roy, G.; Villar, L. M.; Gonzalez-Porque, P. Tumoricidal activity of lauryl gallate towards chemically induced skin tumours in mice. _Br. J. Cancer_**2003**, _88_, 940-943.
* (12) Kubo, I.; Fujita, K.; Nihei, K.; Masukoa, N. Non-antibiotic antibacterial activity of dodecyl gallate. _Biogo. Med. Chem._**2003**, _11_, 573-580.
* (13) Locatelli, C.; Leal, P. C.; Yunes, R. A.; Nunes, R. J.; Creczynski-Pasar, T. B. Gallic acid ester derivatives induce apoptosis and adhesion inhibition in melanoma cells: The relationship between free radical generation, glutathione depletion and cell death. _Chem.-Biol. Interact._**2009**, _181_, 175-184.
* (14) Han, Y. H.; Park, W. H. Proxyl gallate inhibits the growth of HeLa cells via regulating intracellular GSH level. _Food Chem. Toxicol._**2009**, _47_, 2531-2538.
* (15) Niki, E. Free radical initiators as source of water- or lipid-soluble peroxyl radicals. _Methods Enzymol._**1990**, _186_, 100-108.
* (16) Sato, Y.; Kamo, S.; Takahashi, T.; Suzuki, Y. Mechanism of free radical-induced hemolysis of human erythrocytes: Hemolysis by water-soluble radical initiator. _Biochemistry_**1995**, _34_, 8940-8949.
* (17) Sandhu, I. S.; Ware, K.; Grishman, M. B. Percoxyl radical-mediated hemolysis: Role of lipid, protein and sulfhydryl oxidation. _Free Radical Res. Commun._**1992**, _16_, 111-122.
* (18) Beers, R. F.; Sizer, I. W. A spectrophotometric method for measuring the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide by catalase. _J. Biol. Chem._**1952**, _195_, 133-140.
* (19) Ko, F. N.; Hsiao, G.; Kuo, Y. H. Protection of oxidative hemolysis by demethyldioseugenol in normal and \(\beta\)-thalassemic red blood cells. _Free Radical Biol. Med._**1997**, _22_, 215-222.
* (20) Drabklin, D. L.; Austin, J. H. Spectrophotometric studies: Preparation from washed blood cells, nitric oxide haemoglobin and sulf haemoglobin. _J. Biol. Chem._**1935**, _112_, 51-57.
* (21) Ximenes, V. F.; Pessoa, A. S.; Padovan, C. Z.; Abrantes, D. C.; Gomes, F. H.; Maticoli, M. A.; de Menezes, M. L. Oxidation of melatonin by AAPH-derived peroxyl radicals: Evidence of a pro-oxidant effect of melatonin. _Biochim. Biophys. Acta_**2009**, _1790_, 787-792.
* (22) Kand'ar, R.; Zakova, P.; Lotkova, H.; Kucera, O.; Cervinkova, Z. Determination of reduced and oxidized glutathione in biological samples using liquid chromatography with fluorimetric detection. _J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal._**2007**, _43_, 1382-1387.
* (23) Hissin, P. J.; Hilf, R. A fluorometric method for determination of oxidized and reduced glutathione in tissues. _Anal. Biochem._**1976**, _74_, 214-226.
* (24) Campos, A. M.; Sotomayor, C. P.; Pino, E.; Lisi, E. A pyranine based procedure for evaluation of the total antioxidant potential (TRAP) of polyphenols. A comparison with closely related methodologies. _Biol. Res._**2004**, _37_, 287-292.
* (25) Brand-Williams, W.; Cuvelier, M. E.; Berset, C. Use of a free radical method to evaluate antioxidant activity. _Lebensm.-Wiss. Technol._**1995**, _28_, 25-30.
* (26) Tien, M. Myeloperoxidase-catalyzed oxidation of tyrosine. _Arch. Biochem. Biophys._**1999**, _367_, 61-66.
* (27) Pichorrer, H.; Meudieva, D.; Winterbourn, C. C. Generation of superoxide and tyrosine peroxide as a result of tyrosyl radical

Figure 8: Consumption of oxygen during the oxidation of GSH and cocatalysis by phenolic compounds. The reaction mixture (positive control) consisted of 0.1 \(\mu\)_M_ HRP, 100 \(\mu\)H \(\mu\)H2O2, and 100 \(\mu\)_M_ GSH in PBS at 37 °C. When present, the gallates and apocynin were 100 \(\mu\)_M_.



## Page 8

scavenging by glutathione. _Arch. Biochem. Biophys._**1995**, _323_, 429-437.
* [28] Kamega, M. P.; da Fonseca, L. M.; Brunetti, I. L.; Silva, S. O.; Ximenes, V. F. The reactivity of _ortho_-methoxy-substituted catechol radicals with sulfhydryl groups: Contribution for the comprehension of the mechanism of inhibition of NADPH oxidase by apocynin. _Biochem. Pharmacol._**2007**, _74_, 457-464.
* [29] Feng, J. Y.; Liu, Z. Q. Phenolic and enolic hydroxyl groups in curcumin: Which plays the major role in scavenging radicals? _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2009**, _57_, 11041-11046.
* [30] Costa, R. M.; Magalhaes, A. S.; Pereira, J. A.; Andrade, P. B.; Valentio, P.; Carvalho, M.; Silva, B. M. Evaluation of free radical scavenging and antihemolytic activities of quinone (_Cydonia oblbaga_) leaf: A comparative study with green tea (_Camellia sinensis_). _Food Chem. Toxicol._**2009**, _47_, 860-865.
* [31] Zhao, F.; Liu, Z. Q. Indole and its alkyl-substituted derivatives protect erythrocyte and DNA against radical-induced oxidation. _J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol._**2009**, _23_, 273-279.
* [32] Chen, Y.; Deuster, P. Comparison of quercetin and dihydroquercetin: Antioxidant-independent actions on erythrocyte and platelet membrane. _Chem.-Biol. Interact._**2009**, _182_, 7-12.
* [33] Wu, J.; Sugiyama, H.; Zeng, L. H.; Mickle, D.; Wu, T. W. Evidence of Trolox and some gallates as synergistic protectors of erythrocytes against peroxyl radicals. _Biochem. Cell Biol._**1998**, _76_, 661-664.
* [34] Starek, A.; Szabla, J.; Kice-Kononowicz, K.; Szymczak, W. Comparison of the in vitro hemolytic effects produced by alkoxyacetic acids on human and rat erythrocytes. _Int. J. Occup. Med. Environ. Health_**2008**, _21_, 147-155.
* [35] Frecer, V. QSAR analysis of antimicrobial and haemolytic effects of cyclic cationic antimicrobial peptides derived from protegrin-1. _Biopy. Med. Chem._**2006**, _14_, 6065-6074.
* [36] Jones, D. P. Extracellular redox state: Refining the definition of oxidative stress in aging. _Rejuvenation Res._**2006**, \(9\), 69-81.
* [37] Fang, J.; Seki, T.; Maeda, H. Therapeutic strategies by modulating oxygen stress in cancer and inflammation. _Adv. Drug Delivery Rev._**2009**, _61_, 290-302.
* [38] Frydrych, I.; Mlejnek, P.; Dolezel, P. Cyclosporin A sensitises Brc-Alb positive cells to imatinib mesylate independently of P-glycoprotein expression. _Toxicol. in Vitro_**2009**, _23_, 1482-1490.
* [39] Ji, L.; Liu, T.; Chen, Y.; Wang, Z. Protective mechanisms of _N_-acetyl-cysteine against pyrrolizidine alkaloid clivorine-induced hepatotoxicity. _J. Cell Biochem._**2009**, _108_, 424-432.
* [40] Ximenes, V. F.; Kamega, M. P.; Rissato, S. R.; Galhane, M. S. The oxidation of apocynin catalyzed by myeloperoxidase: Proposal for NADPH oxidase inhibition. _Arch. Biochem. Biophys._**2007**, _457_, 134-141.
* [41] Cornwell, D. G.; Ma, J. Y. Nutritional benefit of olive oil: The biological effects of hydroxytyrosol and its arylating quinone adducts. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2008**, _56_, 8774-8786.
* [42] Cornwell, D. G.; Ma, J. Y. Studies in vitamin E: Biochemistry and molecular biology of tocopherol quinones. In _Viatamis and Hormones--Advances in Research and Applications_; Elsevier Academic Press: San Diego, CA, 2007; Vol. 76, pp 99-134.



