# 10.1016@j.bse.2008.05.001.pdf

## Page 1

Intraspecific variability of flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones from leaves of _Cryptocarya mandioccana_ Meisner (Lauraceae)

Claudia J. Nehme, Pedro L.R. de Moraes, Aristeu G. Tininis, Alberto J. Cavalheiro

# Abstract

Chemical variability in populations of _Cryptocarya mandioccana_ Meisner was investigated using chromatographic profiles of flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones from leaves of 57 trees from three sites in the Atlantic rain forest of Sao Paulo State - Brazil. The flavonoid profiles of the leaves from all trees were similar. However, four chemotypes were recognized by qualitative and quantitative differences in styrylpyrones. Chemotype F showed lower contents of these polyketides than chemotypes F1, F2 and F3, which were characterized by styrylpyrones formed from different numbers of acetate units. Chemotypes with higher levels of styrylpyrones were more frequent in southern regions, with soils of higher K+, Ca2+ and Mg2+ content. Soil and climate could indicate a genetic or environmental influence on styrylpyrones in leaves of _C. mandioccana_.

## Introduction

_Cryptocarya mandioccana_ is widely distributed in the Atlantic rain forest of Brazil. The trees are 15-30 m high and 20-104 cm in diameter at breast height, presented bisexual flowers and 2\(n\) (24) chromosomes (de Moraes and Gardingo, 1996). The fruits are widely consumed by primates such as brown howler monkeys (_Alouatta fusca_), brown capuchins (_Cebus apella_), muriquis (_Brachytees arachnoids_), and cradios (_Pipele jacutinga_ and _Penelope obscura_) (de Moraes and Paoli, 1995). Although the current nomenclature is _C. mandioccana_ Meisner, in our previous papers (Cavalheiro and Yoshida, 2000; Marchetti et al., 2006; Nehme et al., 2002, 2005; de Moraes and Derbyshire, 2004; de Moraes and Gardingo, 1996; de Moraes and Monteiro, 2002; de Moraes and Paoli, 1995) we have used the name _Cryptocarya moschata_ Nees & Martius owing to a nomenclature problem (de Moraes, 2005). Photochemical studies of the bark of C. _mandioccana_ revealed the presence of several styrylpyrones (Cavalheiro and Yoshida, 2000), whilst in leaves the main secondary metabolites were flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones (Nehme et al., 2002, 2005).

The production of secondary metabolites can be affected by genetic, ontogenetic and environmental factors including age of individuals, seasonality, level of nutrients, osmotic stress and photoperiod (Gobbo-Neto and Lopes, 2007). Indeed, _in nature_ there are great differences even between individuals, especially amongst those with a normal breeding rate (Harborne and Turner, 1984). Several reasons have been proposed to explain such phenotypic polymorphism including recurrent mutations and genetic drift (Jones, 1973). The identification of polymorphic forms within species (chemotypes) can help to understand 

## Page 2

the distribution, origin and the mechanisms of interaction between these chemotypes as well as the co-evolution with others species. Considering that genes involved in secondary metabolism are expressed at low levels compared with those of primary metabolism, different genes can be isolated from chemotypes presenting dissimilar pattern of secondary compounds using differential display analysis for instance (Yamazaki and Saito, 2002).

Studies on the chemical variability of a population of _C. mandioccana_ (former _C. moschata_) have demonstrated the occurrence of two chemotypes (named FS and F) presenting dissimilar styrylpyrone profiles (Nehme et al., 2002), although the composition of the leaf essential oil did not vary significantly with circadian or seasonal rhythm (Telascrea et al., 2006; Marchetti et al., 2006). Evaluation of the genetic structure of populations of _C. mandioccana_ using isozyme markers has shown a high level of genetic variability within this species compared with other angiosperms. In addition, such a large variability was found to be greater within populations than amongst populations, and in the latter case the pronounced variability was explained by gene flow (de Moraes and Monteiro, 2002; de Moraes and Derbyshire, 2004).

In the present work, trees of three natural populations of _C. mandioccana_ were selected to investigate (i) the variability concerning two classes of polyketides (flavonoids and styrylpyrones); (ii) the influence of soil macronutrients on the production of these compounds; and (iii) the relationship between chemotypes and soil characteristics.

## Materials and methods

### Plant material

Fifty-seven trees of _C. mandioccana_ were randomly selected from three different areas of Atlantic rain forest in the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Sampling was performed at similar time of the year and day to minimize seasonal and circadian effects. Eight trees were sampled in September and November 1998, 28 trees were sampled in October and November 1999 and 21 trees were sampled twice, in September and November 1998, and in October and November 1999 (Table 1). Samples were collected between 9:00 and 16:00 hours. All plants were identified by Dr. Pedro L. R. Moraes, and the voucher specimens were deposited in the Herbarium Maria Eneyda P. Kaufmann Fidalgo (Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil).

### Study areas

Plants were collected from three natural reserves of Atlantic rain forest: Parque Estadual Carlos Botelho, Nucleo Sao Miguel Arcanjo (area coded CB, 24deg04'S; 47deg58'W), Estacao Ecologica Jureia-Ictatins, Nucleo Arpoador (area coded JI; 24deg23'S; 47deg02W), Parque Estadual Serra do Mar, Nucleo Picinguab (area coded SM; 23deg20'S; 44deg50'W). The approximate distances between the areas are: from CB to JI is 120 km, from CB to SM is 260 km, and from JI to SM is 350 km. Voucher specimens for the samples collected at CB, JI and SM were deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo under the

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l l l l l} Code & Sampling date & DBH\({}^{\mathrm{a}}\) & Code & Sampling date\({}^{\mathrm{b}}\) & DBH\({}^{\mathrm{a}}\) & Code & Sampling date & DBH\({}^{\mathrm{a}}\) \\ CB 230 & 09/26/98, 10/30/99 & – & JU 2001 & 11/01/99 & 29.93 & NP 0001 & 11/01/98, 11/13/99 & 57.00 \\ CB 231 & 30/10/99 & – & JU 2002 & 11/01/99 & 64.64 & NP 0002 & 11/0

## Page 3

reference numbers CAVALHEIRO CB230, 231, 283, 293, 300, 301, 302, 256, 353, 354, 313, 314, 316, 317 and XCM, NuBBE NP 0001 - 0025 and CAVALHEIRO JU 2001 - 2021, respectively.

### Sample preparation

On average 20 leaves were collected from each tree, cleaned with a cloth and stored in a plastic bag at -18 degC. Prior to solvent extraction, leaves were dried at 40 degC for 24 h and milled. Powdered leaves (120 g) were placed in a centrifuge tube, extracted with petrol (4.0 ml, bp 60-68 degC) under constant sonication for 30 min, followed by addition of MeOH (2.0 ml) and 10% aqueous HOAc (2.0 ml; v/v), and sonication for further 30 min. Then, this mixture was stirred and centrifuged at 1200g, for 15 min. An aliquot (1.0 ml) was taken from the aqueous-alcoholic phase, filtered on a 0.45 um PTFE membrane and submitted to HPLC analysis, by injection of 20 mL (Nehme et al., 2005). All samples were prepared in triplicate.

### HPLC conditions

Chromatographic analyses were carried out on a Supelcosil LC-18 column (250 x 4.6 mm, 5 mm) with a Supelcosil LC - 18 guard column. The column was eluted with acetonitrile (A) and phosphate/triethylamine buffer, pH 2 (B), in gradient mode (A/B 15:85 to A/B 40:60, over 45 min), flow rate of 0.7 ml/min (Nehme et al., 2005), using a UV-vis diode array detector (PDA). Chromatograms obtained at 254 nm were integrated and the areas of 20 main peaks were used as variables for statistical analysis.

### Identification of secondary metabolites

Flavonoid glycosides were eluted between 12 and 21 min showed intense absorptions at 205, 255 and 350 nm. Styrylpyrones eluted between 25 and 35 min showed intense absorptions at 204 and 250 nm and weak absorptions at 282 and 290 nm. The main compounds, identified by UV spectra and relative retention time (Nehme et al., 2005), were quercetin-3-0-b-d-galactopyranoside (**F1**), quercetin-3-0-b-d-glyceropyranoside (**F2**), quercetin-3-0-b-d-xylopyranoside (**F3**), quercetin-3-0-b-d-anibopyranoside (**F5**), quercetin-3-0-b-d-rhamnopyranoside (**F6**), cryptomoschatone E3 (**S1**), cryptomoschatone D1 (**S2**), cryptomoschatone D2 (**S3**), cryptomoschatone F1 (**S4**), deacetylcryptocaryalactone (**S5**), cryptofolione (**S6**) and cryptomoschatone E2 (**S7**). (Fig. 1).

### Soil analysis

Soil samples were collected from the three different places at the base of each tree, mixed up together and analyzed. The contents of P (mg/L), K (mmolcl/L), Ca (mmolcl/L), Mg (mmolcl/L), organic matter (g/L), pH and potential acidity (H + Al, mmolcl/L) were evaluated according to the method reported by Van Raij et al. (1987).

Fig. 1: Structures of flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones from leaves of Cryptocarya mandioccana.



## Page 4



### Statistical analysis

The data set of secondary metabolites including 20 variables, peak areas for 6 flavonoid glycosides, 7yrylpyrrolynes and 7 unidentified compounds, was measured in 57 trees, of which 21 of them were collected in 1998 and 1999, and 36 collected in 1998 or 1999; a total of 78 cases (Table 1). Each matrix entry is an average of two replications. The data were auto-scaled before the analysis. The chemical similarity of the trees was verified through incremental hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) using Euclidean distance as the measurement of similarity between individuals. For a more consistent clustering, the similarity distance was defined after checking whether all trees sampled twice were included in the same cluster. HCA was performed by Ein*Sight 3.0 program (Informetrics Inc., 1991 - Seattle, WA). Discriminant analysis using a backward stepwise method was performed by Statistica 5.1G program (StatSoft Inc.,TuIsa, USA).

## Results and discussion

Hierarchical cluster analysis of 78 cases (36 trees sampled once and 31 trees sampled twice) and 20 peaks relating to secondary metabolites as variables showed that the 57 _C. manioccana_ trees collected in the Atlantic rain forest could be

Fig. 2: Dendrogram and chemotype profile obtained after HCA on 78 cases (57 trees of _Cryptocarya manioccana_, 21 of them collected twice).



## Page 5

clustered in four chemotypes, named F, FS1, FS2 and FS3 (Fig. 2). Comparisons between the chromatographic profiles of trees sampled in 1998 and 1999 showed quantitative differences concerning the content of secondary metabolite, which could be attributed to seasonal or circadian rhythms of secondary metabolism (Figs. 3-5). Therefore, the robustness of clustering analysis was improved by grouping, in the same cluster, the cases involving the same tree obtained in two different years (1998 and 1999). For example, the samples CB283/98 and CB283/99 presented large quantitative variability with respect to their secondary metabolites, although the qualitative chemical profiles were similar, therefore they were

Fig. 4: Comparison between chromatographic profiles of secondary metabolites from leaves of _C. mandioccana_ – chemotype F3.

Fig. 3: Comparison between chromatographic profiles of secondary metabolites from leaves of _C. mandioccana_ – chemotype FS2.



## Page 6

classified in the same group according to cluster similarity. Using backward stepwise discriminant analysis, it was possible to classify all cases in four chemical groups using only four variables, which were related to styrylpyrones **S2**, **S5**, **S6** and **S7** (Table 2 and Fig. 6).



## Page 7

(**S6**), all biosynthesized from cinnamate and five or six acetate units. The more intense peak of styrylpyrones in chemotype FS3 was attributed to cryptomoschatone D1 (**S2**), produced from cinnamate and four acetate units. The flavonoid glycoside profiles proved to be very similar for all chemotypes, with the peak corresponding to quercetin **F6** being the most intense. This regular feature suggests that the relative flavonoid profiles could be used as chemosystematic markers for _C. mandioccana_.

Flavonoids and styrylpyrones are biosynthesized by type III polyketide synthases (PKS) (Staunton and Weissman, 2001; Beckert et al., 1997; Jez et al., 2001). Chalcone synthase with a very specific initiation-elongation-cyclization cavity seems to be involved in biosynthesis of flavonoids in leaves of _C. mandioccana_. However, styrylpyrone synthases showing different elongation cavities must be involved in styrylpyrone biosynthesis and their different expression levels could be related to the

Figure 5: (continued).



## Page 8

chemotypes described above. Therefore, these _C. mandioccana_ chemotypes could be interesting models for evaluating the relationship between cavity volume and polyketide chain-length in type III PKS, as well as the genetic and environmental influences on their production.

Regarding the environmental influences on the _C. mandioccana_ chemical profiles, two aspects must be considered. First, chemotype F was predominant within the SM population, whilst chemotype FS2 was more frequent within the CB and Jl populations, demonstrating the inter- and intra-population chemical variability. The rare chemotypes FS1 and FS3 were found only within SM and CB populations, respectively (Fig. 7). The chemical differences observed between northern and southern populations of _C. mandioccana_ could be the first indication of a clonal variation in striypytyprone contents. In addition, it is known amongst botanists that the floristic composition of these two regions of Atlantic rain forest is quite different, fact that could be explained by the geomorphology and climate of these regions (Leitao Filho, 1982). Second, linear discriminant analysis of the two most frequent _C. mandioccana_ chemotypes (**F** and **FS2**), considering

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} Variablesa & Wilks’ λ & Partial λ & Fb & _p_-Level & Tolerance \\
**S5** & 0.00960 & 0.009 & 2662.9 & 0.0000 & 0.806 \\
**S2** & 0.00200 & 0.042 & 540.8 & 0.0

## Page 9

seven soil parameters, time of collection and trunk diameter, revealed that Mg, K and Ca significantly influenced the occurrence of these chemotypes (Table 3). The results using the functions generated by discriminant analysis showed 92.3% of correct classification of trees for chemotype F and 58.8% of correct classification of trees for chemotype FS2, with a total error count of 20.9% (Table 4). In spite of the poor correlation obtained for chemotype FS2 and soil variables, chemotype F possesses good correlation with lower levels of Mg, K and Ca, which suggests some possible influence of soil nutrients on styryl/pyrone profiles of _C. mandioccana_.

Chemical variability could be also related to genotype, from two main observations: first, some pairs of trees (i.e., CB253 and CB254, CB230 and CB231, JJ2009 and JJ2010) that are located just a few meters apart showed different chemical profiles and second, a genetic study on this species has demonstrated that individuals of _C. mandioccana_ from different populations form distinct genetic groups closely related to geographical origin and that locus SKdh-2 was significantly related to production of quercetin-3-O-b-glucuronoside (**F2**) and the diastereoisomers cryptofolione and cryptomoschatone E2 (**S6/S7**), indicating that shikimate dehydrogenase could play a differential regulation on these chemotypes of _C. mandioccana_ (de Moraes et al., 2007).

These facts could be indicative of genetic and/or environmental influence on constitution of styrylpyrones in leaves of _C. mandioccana_.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c} Variablesa & Wilks’ λ & Partial λ & \(F\) & _p_-Level & Tolerance \\
**Mg2+** & 0.870 & 0.783 & 10.82 & 0.002 & 0.136 \\
**K+** & 0.740 & 0.921 & 3.33 & 0.075 & 0.329 \\
**Ca2+** & 0.712 & 0.957 & 1.74 & 0.194 & 0.2

## Page 10



## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to FAPESP for financial support and doctoral scholarship to Claudia J. Nehme and to CAPES for a doctoral scholarship to Aristeu G. Tinnins. We would also like to acknowledge Instituto Floresti for authorizing the collection of _C. mandioccana_ samples at Carlos Botelho State Park, Serra do Mar State Park and Jureia-Itatins Ecological Station.

## References

* (1) Beckert, C., Horn, C., Schnitzler, J.P., Lehning, A., Heller, W., Veit, M., 1997. Styrylpyrone biosynthesis in _Equisetum arvense_. Phytochemistry **44**, 275-283.
* (2) Cavalheiro, A.J., Yoshida, M., 2000. G-[to-A-Aryalkenfill]-5.6-dihydro-a-pyrones from _Cryptocarya mandioccana_ (Lauraceae). Phytochemistry **53**, 811-819.
* (3) Gobb-Noe, L., Lopes, N.P., 2007. Plantas medicialis:. _Istores de influencia_ no contedido de metadolitos secundarios_. Quim. Nova **30**, 374-381.
* (4) Harborne, J.B., Turner, B.L., 1984. Application of chemistry at the infraspecific level. In: Harborne, J.B., Turner, B.L. (Eds.), Plant Chemosystems. Academic Press, London, pp. 237-266.
* (5) Jez, J.M., Bowman, M.E., Noel, J.P., 2001. Structure-guided programming of polyketide chain-length determination in chalcone synthase. Biochemistry **40**, 14829-14838.
* (6) Jones, S.J., 1973. Ecological genetics and natural selection in molluscs. Science **182**, 546-552.
* (7) Leitko Filho, H.F., 1982. Aspects of macromolecules das forestas to estado de Sao Paulo. Silvic. Sao Paulo 16A, 197-206.
* (8) Marchetti, C.N., Telascca, M., Tinnins, A.G., Cavalheiro, A.J., 2006. Dinimica circadiana e szonal dos principais componentes do eleso essencial de _Cryptocarya moscata_ Nees (Lauraceae). Rev. Bras. Plantas Med. **2**, 23-36.
* (9) de Moraes, P.L.R., 2005. Lectropification of names of Brazilian species of _Cryptocarya_ (Lauraceae). Taxon **54**, 789-795.
* (10) de Moraes, P.L.R., 2004. Genetic structure of natural populations of _Cryptocarya moscata_ Nees (Lauraceae) from southeastern Brazilian Atlantic rain forest. Biota steotrope. **4** (1) Available from: [http://www.biotanetropios.org.br](http://www.biotanetropios.org.br).
* (11) de Moraes, P.L.R., Gardingo, J.R., 1996. Chromosome number of _Cryptocarya moscata_ Nees & Martius ex Nees (Lauraceae). Rev. Bras. Genet. (Suppl. **19**), 135.
* (12) de Moraes, P.L.R., Monteiro, R., 2002. Taxas de craumento em una populacao natural de _Cryptocarya moscata_ Nees (Lauraceae). Biota Netopro. 2 (2). Available from: [http://www.biotanetropios.org.br](http://www.biotanetropios.org.br).
* (13) de Moraes, P.L.R., Nehme, C.J., Alves, M.C., Derbyshire, M.T.V.C., Cavalheiro, A.J., 2007. Chemical composition of flavonoids and styrylpyrones and the genetic variability of isozymes in natural populations of _Cryptocarya mandioccana_ Meisner (Lauraceae). Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **35**, 233-244.
* (14) de Moraes, P.L.R., Paoli, A.S., 1995. Seed dispersal and germination of _Cryptocarya moscata_ Nees & Martius ex Nees, _Ocotea catharimentsis_ Mez and _Endlichen panulata_ (Sprengel). Microlite (Lauraceae). Argo, Biol. Technol. **38**, 1119-1129.
* (15) Nehme, C.J., Bastos, W.L., Araujo, A.J., Cavalheiro, A.J., 2005. An HPLC-DAD method to analyse flavonoid glycoside and styrylpyrones from _Cryptocarya_ species (Lauraceae). Phytochem. Anal. **16**, 93-97.
* (16) Nehme, C.J., Moraes, P.L.R., Cavalheiro, A.J., 2002. Intrapopulational variability of styrylpyrones in leaves of _Cryptocarya mandioccana_ Nees (Lauraceae) from Carlos Botelho State Park. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **30**, 613-616.
* (17) Staunton, J., Weissman, K.J., 2001. Polyketide biosynthesis: a millennium review. Nat. Prod. Rep. **18**, 380-416.
* (18) Telascca, M., Araujo, C.C., Marques, M.O.M., Facanali, R., Moraes, P.L.R., Cavalheiro, A.J., 2006. Essential oil from leaves of _Cryptocarya mandioccana_ Meisner (Lauraceae): composition and intraspecific chemical variability. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **35**, 222-232.
* (19) Van Raij, B., Guaggio, J.A., Canterella, M., Ferreira, E., Lopes, A.S., Battaglia, E.C., 1987. Anilas quinica do solo para fins de fertilidade. Fundacao Cargil, Campinas.
* (20) Yamazaki, M., Saito, K., 2002. Differential display analysis of gene expression in plants. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. **59**, 1246-1255.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c} \hline Chemotype & \(n\) & F & F2 & \% (Right) \\ \hline F & 26 & 24 & 2 & 92.3 \\ F52 & 17 & 7 & 10 & 58.8 \\ Total & 43 & 31 & 12 & 79.1 \\ \hline F = \(-1.54\pm 0.59\)[Mg] + \(0.19\)[K] \(-0.08\)[Ca] \((p=0.604)\) & & & & \\ F52 = \(-4.38+1.37\)[Mg] \(-0.32\)[K] \(-0.14\)[Ca] \((p=0.395)\). & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 4: Number of observations and percent classified into chemotypes F or F52 by soil discriminant models

