# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)97240-6.pdf

## Page 1



# GUTTIFRAE XANTHONES FROM _Kielmeyera Rubriflora*+_

O. R. Gottlieb, A. A. Lins Mesquita and T. J. Nagem

Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil

###### Abstract

_Kielmeyera rubriflora_ Camb. contains 2-hydroxyxanthine, 2,4-dimethoxy-3-hydroxyxanthone, 2,3-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyxanthone, 4-hydroxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone, 4-methoxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone and 1,7-dimethoxy-2,3,8-trihydroxyxanthone (Ia).

Wood and bark of the tree _Kielmeyera rubriflora_ Camb. (Guttiferae) were collected in the Serro region, Minas Gerais State, Brasil. The benzene extract of the wood yielded 2-hydroxyxanthone,1,2,4-dimethoxy-3-hydroxyxanthone,2,3-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyxanthone,2-54-hydroxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone,2,3 4-methoxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone,3,5 kielcorin4 and \(\beta\)-sitosterol. All the xanthones had been isolated previously from other _Kielmeyera_ species and were identified by direct comparison with authentic samples.

The benzene extract of the bark yielded, besides aliphatic material, a new compound. Its molecular weight, determined by mass spectrometry, was consistent with the constitution of a dimethoxytrihydroxyxanthone. The PMR-spectrum confirmed the existence of two methoxyls and of three aromatic protons. One proton was represented by a singlet at 3:55\(\tau\) and must, consequently, be placed at the 2-, 3- or 4-position of a trioxygenated ring. The remaining two protons were represented by doublets at 2:67 \(\tau\) (\(J\) 9-0 Hz) and 3:43 \(\tau\) (9-0 Hz) and must, consequently, be placed at the 5,6 or 6,7-positions of the dioxygenated ring. All signals were sufficiently up-field to preclude the existence of a proton at a _peri_ (1,8)-position of either ring.6

One of these _peri_-positions is occupied by a hydroxyl, as shown by the shift of the UV absorption maxima upon addition of AlCl3 + HCl. The second _peri_-position, however, is occupied by a methoxyl, since the compound reacted speedily with diazomethane to form a monohydroxy-tetramethyloxxanthone (and not a dihydroxy-trimethoxysxanthone). The mass spectrum of this derivative contained a peak corresponding to M-15-18 a.m.u. Loss of the elements of water upon electron impact again suggested the presence of a methoxy-group adjacent to the carbonyl.7

## References

* [1]P. M.



## Page 2

The di-_O_-methyl derivative gave a Gibbs test maximum at 667 nm, typical of a system featuring an unsubstituted position, _para_ related to a _peri_-hydroxyl.8 The Gibbs test,8 when performed on the original compound, as well as the shift of UV maxima upon addition of H3BO3 + NaOAc, indicated the presence of an _ortho_-dihydroxy grouping. Clearly, these hydroxyls cannot be situated at positions adjoining the _peri_-hydroxyl. Three vicinal hydroxy groups are incompatible with the relatively high stabilty of the compound in presence of alkali. They have, consequently, to be placed either at C-2,C-3 adjoining the _peri_-methoxyl, or at C-3,C-4. The latter alternative, however, cannot be correct, since it also would impart instablilty to a xanthone in alkaline medium.8 Thus, the _peri_-hydroxyl with the unsubstituted _para_-position is located in the disubstituted ring. In view of the vicinity of the hydrogens on this ring, the remaming methoxyl and the _peri_-hydroxyl must be _ortho_-related. This leads to the constitution of 1,7-dimethoxy-2,3,8-trihydroxyxanthone (Ia) for the new compound.

The 1,2,3,7,8-pentaoxygenation pattern has not been reported previously for a natural xanthone.

## EXPERIMENTAL

For experimental techniques see Ref. 5. The identification of all previously described substances was confirmed by direct comparison (co-chromatography, mixed m.ps and IR spectra) with authentic samples.

_Isolation of the constituents of_ Lielmeyera rubriflora. The powdered wood (7*0 kg) was continuously extracted with hot benzene. The filtered benzene solution was evaporated and the residue (18 g) was chromatographed on silica. Elution with CHCl3 yielded, in order, 4-methoxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone, b-sitosterol, 4-hydroxy-2,3-dimethoxyxanthone (20 mg), 3-hydroxy-2,3-dimethoxyxanthone (20 mg), 4-hydroxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone (10 mg), 2-hydroxyxanthone (30 mg) and kielcorn (40 mg).

The powdered bark (7*0 kg) was continuously extracted with hot benzene. The filtered benzene solution was evaporated and the residue (35 g) was extracted exhaustively with light petroleum. The insoluble portion (8 g) was chromatographed on silica, yielding only aliphatic material which was not further examined. The light petroleum solution was filtered through silica and extracted with aqueous Na2CO3. The alkaline solution was acidified and extracted with CHCl3. The CHCl3 was evaporated and the residue was crystallized from MeOH, giving Ia (24 mg).

1,7-_Dimethoxy_-2,3,8-_trihydroxyxanthone_ (Ia). Pale-yellow crystals, m.p. 198-200deg; \(\begin{equation*}\kappa\text{ER}\end{equation*}\) (cm-1): 3350, 1635, 1612, 1580; \(\begin{equation*}\lambda\text{EROH}\end{equation*}\) (nm): 231, 255, 281, 325, 394 (e resp. 21,100, 20,050, 18,600, 11,300, 3800)

## Page 3

8-_Hydroxy_-1,2,3,7-_tetramethyloxxantone_ (Ib). Ia was methylated with CH2N2 in Et2O, yielding Ib as yellow crystals, n.p. 116-118deg, _v_max(cm-1): 1658, 1608, 1593. _max(nm): 236, 255, 280, 305, 368 (_t_ resp. 26,400, 34,900, 28,600, 19,700, 8600); no alteration upon addition of NaOAc and of H3BO3 + NaOAc; _x_max(nm): 238, 277, 305 sh (_t_ resp. 43,500, 34,500, 12,800) acidification restored the spectrum in EtOH; _x_EOH+_xCI3 (nm): 234, 266, 280, 295 sh, 320, 335 sh (_t_ resp. 35,700, 24,900, 26,600, 22,000, 18,300, 14,900); _max(2,26H+_AlCl3+_HCl(nm): 225 sh, 233, 255 sh, 279, 295 sh, 335 sh, 394 (_t_ resp. 32,500, 34,600, 22,900, 29,700, 17,600, 11,600, 7400). Gibbs testd_lmax(nm): 465, 685 (Absorbance resp. 0.35, 0-71); MS: M 332 (100%), _m/e_ (%) 317 (93), 302 (36), 299 (15), 287 (17), 274 (7), 259 (19).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are indebted to the Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Brasil, for financial aid. They also want to thank Mr. A. Pereira Duarte, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil, for the collection and identification of the plant material, and Professor W. D. Ollis, The University, Sheffield, England, who kindly arranged for the determination of the mass spectra.

## References

-

-

-

-

-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

