# 10.1016@j.biortech.2010.01.041.pdf

## Page 1

Geranylation of benzoic acid derivatives by enzymatic extracts from _Piper crassinervium_ (Piperaceae)

Silvia Noeli Lopez, Adriana Aparecida Lopes, Joao Marcos Batista Jr., Otavio Flausino Jr., Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani, Massuo Jorge Kato, Maysa Furlan

# Abstract

The ability to carry out geranylations on aromatic substrates using enzymatic extracts from the leaves of _Piper crassinervium_ (Piperaceae) was evaluated. A literature analysis pointed out its importance as a source of premylated bioactive molecules. The screening performed on aromatic acceptors (benzoic acids, phenols and phenylpropanoids) including geranyl diphosphate as premyl donor, showed the biotransformation of the 3.4-dihydroxybenzoic acid by the crude extract, and the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid by both the microsomal fraction and the crude extract, after treating leaves with glucose. The analysis of the products allowed the identification of _C_- and 0-geranylated derivatives, and the protease (subtilisin and pepsin) inhibition performed on the 0-geranylated compounds showed weak inhibition. Electrophoretic profiles indicated the presence of bands/spots among 56-58 kDa and pl 6-7, which are compatible with premyltransferases. These findings show that \(P\). _crassinervium_ could be considered as a source of extracts with geranyltransferase activity to perform biotransformations on aromatic substrates.

## 1 Introduction

Biotransformations are chemical reactions catalyzed by cells, organs or enzymes. They are different from biosynthesis, where complex products are assembled from simple substrates by whole cells, organs or organisms. Plant enzyme biocatalysts can be utilized to introduce new structural motifs on existing drugs expecting to improve their bioactivity, pharmacokinetic profile and also for the production of new drugs (Giri et al., 2001).

So far, natural products bearing one or more premyl groups have been isolated predominantly from higher plants. These compounds, originated from several natural product classes, often hold antimicrobial, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, and anticancer activities (Epifano et al., 2008). Since the premylation of small aromatic molecules is a pivotal step in the biosynthesis of many natural products, the access to prenylation reaction catalysts might represent an advantageous short-cut to obtain premylated aromatic compounds (Yazaki et al., 2001; Haagena et al., 2007).

Aromatic geranyltransferases are a sub-class of premyltransferases that catalyzes _C_-geranylations on several aromatic substrates. Several examples of new aromatic premyltransferases have been reported from bacteria as soluble monomeric biocatalysts, with a relatively high promiscuity for aromatic substrates. In spite of the lack of a full elucidation of substrate- and regioselectivity, these enzymes were successfully employed to carry out either _C_- or _O_-prevalations of several compounds (Epifano et al., 2008). In plants, aromatic geranyltransferases are membrane-bound proteins, showing a strict substrate specificity for the endogenous premyl donor groups (e.g. DMAPP, GPP, etc.), although they may accept a variety of aromatic compounds as acceptors of the premyl moieties (Yazaki et al., 2001; Kuzuyama et al., 2005). There are few examples in which premyltransferases have been isolated and characterized from plants (Muhlenwege et al., 1998). Therefore, biotransformations using plant enzymatic extracts enriched in premyltransferase activity could be used as an alternative to obtain either known or new bioactive compounds.

Piperaceae family is a basal angiosperm family, comprising more than 4000 species. Its species are chemically very rich and major classes of compounds described include phenylpropanoids (Orjala et al., 1993), lignan/neolignans (Parmar et al., 1997; Benesvides et al., 1999; Martins et al., 2003; Felippe et al., 2008), pyrones (Singh, 1992), aliphatic and aromatic amides (Alecio et al., 1998; Silva et al., 2002), alkaloids (Dodson et al., 2000), polyketides (Cheng et al., 2003), benzoic acid derivatives (Bergamo et al., 2005; Morandim et al., 2005) and chromenes (Lago et al., 2004; Morandim et al., 2005; Salazar et al., 2005). Belonging to this 

## Page 2

family, _Piper_ is one of the most abundant genera, with approximately 2000 species (Wanke et al., 2007). _Piper crassineurium_ species accumulates antifungal, trypanocidal and antioxidant C-geranylated metabolites derived from both benzoic acid and _p_-hydroquinone (Danelutte et al., 2003; Yamaguchi et al., 2006; Lopes et al., 2008).

In spite of the knowledge on the chemical constituents and the biological potential of Piperaceae species, no comprehensive study has been made in order to survey such bioactive metabolites within the members of the family.

Here we present a compilation that points out to the importance of _Piper_ genus as a source of bioactive compounds and, particularly, of _P. crassineurium_ as an enzyme source to perform geranylations on aromatic substrates. We report the biotransformation (i.e. the geranylation) of both the _p_-hydroxybenzoic and 3.4-dihydroxybenzoic acids carried out by the enzymatic extracts from the leaves of _P. crassineurium_ besides the full characterization of two products as geranyl ester derivatives in addition to the characterization of one major product formed by biotransformation of the 3.4-dihydroxybenzoic acid as a C-geranylated derivative. Additionally, the inhibitory activity on HIV-like proteases was determined for the products as well as the electrophoretic characterization of catalytically active protein fractions by using SDS PAGE and 2-DE.

## Methods

### Literature survey and analysis

'Piperaceae' and 'activity' were used as key words to perform a search in the available databases (e.g. _Science Direct_ and _ACS_ databases). All the obtained information was uploaded in a table according to genus, species, type of compound and biological activity reported (see the Electronic Annex in the online version of this article). Typical software Excel 2007(r) (Microsoft Corporation) was used to analyse and plot the obtained information.

### Plant material

Fresh leaves of _P. crassineurium_ were collected from adults specimens cultivated from seeds under greenhouse conditions at the Institute of Chemistry, UNESP, Araraquara, SP, Brazil. Plant material was authenticated by Dr. Guillermo Paredes (Universidad Pedro Ruiz Gallo-Peru) and the voucher specimen (Kato-0084) was deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Incubation into _b_-D-glucose of young leaves from _P. crassineurium_. Leaves freshly excised from an adult plant were placed separately in 1.5 ml Eppendorf(r) tubes and each administrated 100 ml from a 10% solution of _b_-D-glucose in water at 25 degC for 72 h (Bergamo et al., 2005).

### Synthesis and purification of geranyl diphosphate (GPP)

In a 100 ml round bottom flask 1 mmol of geraniol was mixed with 6 mmol of trichloroacetonitrile. Bis-triethylammonium phosphate (2.4 mmol in 20 ml of acetonitrile) was added drop-wise to the mixture over a period of 6 h, at room temperature under continuous stirring (Cornforth and Popjak, 1969). The mixture was further stirred for 12 h at room temperature and then, the reaction was stopped by dilution with 100 ml of ethyl ether, followed by extraction with 30 ml of NH4OH 0.1 M (3x). The basic solution was then re-extracted with 30 ml of ethyl ether (3x) and evaporated under reduced pressure. The GPP was purified by precipitation in acetonitrile at -20 degC overnight, compared with a commercial sample using TLC on cellulose (isopropanol/25% aqueous ammonia/water 50:25:25) and characterized by 1H, 13C and 31P NMR. 1H NMR (500 MHz, D2O): \(d\) 4.44 (H-1, \(d\) = 7.0 Hz), 5.41 (H-2, \(t\) = 7.0 Hz), 2.02-2.15 (H-4 and H-5, _m_), 5.17 (H-6, _m_), 1.59 (-_CH_3 = 8, _s_), 1.65 (-_CH_3 = 9, _s_), 1.66 (-_CH_3 = 10, _s_), 1.3C NMR (125 MHz, D2O): \(d\) 63.0 (-1, 1.243 (C-3, _d_), 143.6 (C-3, _d_), 2.58 (C-5), 120.0 (C-6), 133.9 (C-7), 2.50 (C-8), 1.72 (C-9) and 15.8 (C-10), 31P NMR (H3PO4, 202 MHz, D2O): \(d\) -9.75 (P-1), -1.40 (P-2).

Synthesis, purification and characterization of the 0-geranyl derivatives of the 3.4-dihydroxybenzoic acid

To a stirred solution of the 3.4-dihydroxybenzoic acid (2 mmol) in dry DMF (10 ml), anhydrous potassium carbonate (6 mmol) was added and the solution stirred for 30 min at 40 degC under nitrogen atmosphere (Pisco et al., 2006). Geranyl bromide (4 mmol) was added drop-wise and the resulting mixture was heated and stirred at the same temperature for 8 h under nitrogen atmosphere. The mixture was then poured into cold water (50 ml) added with 0.1% of HOAc, and extracted with CHCl3 (100 ml) and EtOAc (100 ml). The EtOAc layer was washed, dried with Na2SO4, and evaporated under reduced pressure and the residue was submitted to column chromatography [Silica-gel 60 (230-400 mesh), iso-cratic elution with Hex-EtOAc (60:40)] yielding five fractions. Fraction 2 was characterized as compound **3**, fraction 4 as compound **4** and fraction 5 as compound **5**. The purified products were characterized by 1H, 13C NMR, DEPT, gHMBC, gHMQC and ESI-MS (Fig. 4, Table 1).

Synthesis, purification and characterization of the 0-geranyl derivatives of the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid

The _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid (1 mmol) dissolved in 5 ml of THF was added to a slurry of 5 g of Al2O3 neutral in ether (1 ml) (Glusenkamp and Buchi, 1986). The solvent was evaporated and geranyl bromide (3 mmol) in ether-hexane (30:70) was added. After stirring during 4 days, Al2O3 was filtered off and washed with 1% HOAC in EtOAc. The combined organic layer was evaporated and the products were purified using column chromatography [Silica-gel 60 (230-400 mesh), gradient elution with Hex 100%, Hex-EtOAc (90:10; 80:20; 50:50)], yielding 7 fractions. From fraction 3 it was characterized the geranyl ester derivative (**6**), whereas the geranyl ether derivative (**7**) was purified from fraction 4 by subsequent column chromatography [Silica-gel 60 (230-400 mesh), isocratic elution with Hex-EtOAc (80:20)]. The purified products were characterized by 1H, 13C NMR, DEPT, gHMBC, gHMQC and ESI-MS (Table 2, Fig. 5).

### Protein extraction

Leaves of _P. crassineurium_ were harvested from an adult specimen and maintained in liquid N2. The frozen leaves (10 g) were triturated in a mortar with addition of 35% polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in 30 ml of 100 mM potassium phosphate (KPi, pH 8). The homogenate was stirred slowly by 15 min in ice bath, filtered on gauze and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min to obtain the supernatant (crude enzymatic extract), which was then submitted to protein determination, activity assay and electrophoretic analysis.

### Microsomal fraction

The protocol was performed according to Muhlenweg et al. (1998) with minimal modifications. The supernatant (20 ml) obtained as described in Section 2.6 was subjected to ultracentrifuga

## Page 3

tion at 39,000 rpm for 1 h. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 10 ml of 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), containing 2 mM DTT, 1 M KCl and 10% (w/v) glycerol, and stirred on ice for 30 min. The suspension was subjected to ultracentrifugation as described above. The supernatant was discarded, and the tube was carefully rinsed with 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). The pellet was then resuspended in 10 ml of 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 6.5), containing 2 mM DTT, 2 M KCl, 10% (w/v) glycerol and 4 mM 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonium]-2-hydroxy-1-propanesulphonate (CHAPSO), and stirred on ice for 30 min. The suspension was ultracentrifuged as described above, and the desired proteins were recovered as supernatant, which was passed through a Sephadex G-25 column (9.0 cm long, 1.0 cm i.d.), previously equilibrated with the 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) containing 1.5 mM CHAPSO, 2 mM DTT and 10% (w/v) glycerol. The eluate was submitted to protein determination, activity assay and electrophoretic analysis.

### Protein determination

The protein determination was performed by the Bradford modified method, using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard (Stoscheck, 1990).

### Detection of the geranyltransferase activity

The reaction mixture (100 ml) containing 100 mM KPi (pH 8.0), 10 mM of precursors, 10 mM GPP, 10 mM MgCl2 (or MnCl2) and 65 ml of the proteic extract was incubated under stirring for 60 min at 35 degC. The reaction was stopped with the addition of 5 ml of 6 M HCl and extracted with 150 ml of EOAc. After vortex and centrifugation, the organic layer was evaporated, the residue dissolved in MeOH (100 ml) and analysed by HPLC-UV, using a Phenomenex GEMINI(r) column (5 mm C18 110 A, 250 x 4.6 mm) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. An isocratic condition (25 min) consisted of 70% acetonitrile and 0.1% aqueous HOAc (30%), with detection at 254 and 280 nm. Injection volume: 50 ml. For each reaction, two negative controls, which consisted of: (1) enzymatic extract + buffer and (2) precursor + divalent cation + GPP + buffer, were carried out simultaneously. Each experiment was performed in duplicate.

### Sodium dodecylsulphate-polyacrylamide electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)

The SDS PAGE was performed according to the supplier information (GE Healthcare(r)). The 12% polyacrylamide gels were stained with AgNO3. The relative molecular mass (_M_r) of denatured proteins was estimated using the Lablmage 1D(r) software calibrated with low molecular weight standards (phosphorylase \(b\), serialbumin, ovalbumin, carbonic anhydrase and trypsin inhibitor, with 97.4, 66.2, 45.0, 31.0, 21.5 and 14.4 kDa, respectively).

### Two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE)

The 2-DE with immobilized pH gradients (IPG-Dalt) was carried out according to the supplier information (GE Healthcare(r)). The IPG strips (13 cm) were rehydrated for 14-18 h with sample proteins previously treated with the Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare(r))

## Page 4

in an Immobiline DryStrip Reswelling Tray. First dimension isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out in an Ettan IPCphor II Manifold applying a manufacturer's standard protocol. The second dimension was performed on a vertical (\(14\times 16\) cm) 12% polyacrylamide SDS gel, in a SE 600 Ruby System, 45 mA/gel and 600 V. Each gel was stained with silver according to the Silver Staining Protocol (Amersham Biosciences(r)).

### Inhibition of the protease activity

#### 2.12.1 Reagents

Pepsin was from porcine gastric mucous. Recombinant Type VIII Subtilisin Carlsberg, Arg-Glu-(EDANS)-Ser-Gln-Asn-Tyr-Pro-Ile-Val-Gln-Lys-(DABCYL)-Arg fluorogenic substrate (EDANS-DABCYL) and dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) spectrophotometric grade, were from Sigma-Aldrich, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

#### 2.12.2 Protease activity assay

The assays were performed in triplicate. Compounds were dissolved in DMSO and diluted in 0.1 M sodium phosphate (pH 7.5) for subtilisin and 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 4.4) for pepsin, respectively. Warfarin and dicouamod were used as positive controls (Thaisiromgs et al., 1994; Pochet et al., 2000). Samples and standard inhibitors (1 mg/ml) were pre-incubated with subtilisin (37 nM) or pepsin (1.7 nM) for 1 h, and then transferred to a black opaque microplate to be tested. The substrate EDANS-DABCYL (2 mM) was prepared in the specific buffer for each protease. In the control assay only protease and substrate were used. Proteases were prepared in the day of the experiment and the tests were performed for each one separately. Readings were made using 360 nm (excitation) and 460 nm (emission) filters during 7 min, with 1 min intervals, at 37 degC (Hirata et al., 2005). The fluorescence intensity was used to calculate the % of inhibition as follows:

\[\% I = 100 - \left[ \left( \Delta\text{Fs}/\Delta\text{Fp} \right) \ast 100 \right]\]

where, \(\Delta\text{Fs}\) and \(\Delta\text{Fp}\) are the difference between the first and last readings for the sample test and the control, respectively.

Fluorescence bioassay data were collected with a multidetection microplate reader Synergy(tm) HT and analysed using the KCA software (Bio-Tek(r) Instruments, Inc.) and Microsoft Windows XP(r).

## 3 Results and discussion

Prenylation is a chemical or enzymatic addition of a hydrophobic side chain to an accepting molecule (another terpenoid molecule, an aromatic compound, a protein, etc.). In particular, the prenylation of aromatic secondary metabolites plays a critical role in the biosynthesis of a wide range of molecules exerting valuable pharmacological effects. Several examples can be found in phylogenetically different classes of living organisms, from bacteria across mammals to plants (Epifano et al., 2008).



## Page 5

studied partially due to their wide occurrence and biomass availability (Fig. 1, Electronic Annex).

Among _Piper_ genus, 44 species were subjected to photochemical or bioactivity investigations, being _P. cubeba_ the most intensively studied with near 8%, followed by _P. longum_ and _P. aduncum_ with 7%, _P. methystcium_ and _P. tubercultum_ with 6%, _P. sanctum, P. nigrum and _P. crassinevium_ with 5% (Fig. 1). Only nine studies with _Peperoma_ species were found, with _P. duclouxii_ (28%), _P. dindygulensis_ (18%) and _P. galioides_ (13%), being the three mentioned most frequently.

Considering the type of compounds, they were grouped based on their structural characteristics, as follows: ALK (alkaloids and other substances bearing nitrogen), LG (ligmans, neoligans and related compounds), PCT (polyketides), TP (terpenoids), BPRP (preparlated benzopyrans), HQPR (preparlated hydroquinones), BPR (preparlated benzoic acid derivatives), FLV (flavonoids, chalcones and related compounds), B (benzene derivatives), BP (benzopytrans), AG (fatty acids), FP (phenylpropanoids), E (epoxides), ET (steroids), CHX (cyclohexanic derivatives), KLN (kavalacotones, pyrones, and related compounds) and NPT (naphthalene derivatives), (Fig. 2A). Their distribution shows the prevalence of nitrogenated substances (ALK), ligands (LG) and flavonoids (FLV) in _Piper_ species. Nevertheless some differences could be observed in _Peperomia_, where LG (lignoids) and BPPR (preplated benzopyrans) were the most abundant (Fig. 2A).

Regarding biological activities, the grouping was performed considering the biological target in order to simplify as follows: **snc** (involving activities related to central nervous system, such as sedative and relaxant), **tryp** (antiprotozaol activity against _Tympanosoma_, _Plasmodium_, _Leishmania_), **cyt** (cytotoxicity and related activities), **atb** (anticmicropholi, such as antibacterial and antifungal), **can** (anticancer activity, related to cytotoxic but more specifically targeted), **insec** (insecticidal or repellent activity, such as anti-mosquito or ant), **aox** (antioxidant activity, such as DPPH), **enz** (inhibitory activity against several enzymes), **aai** (anti-inflammatory activity), **acoa** (anticoagulant, such as inhibition of platelet aggregation), **iger** (allelophatic activity), **photo** (photo-protecting activity), **cic** (cicatrizing activity) and **avir** (antiviral activity). The obtained distribution shows that _Piper_ genus is mostly related to antibacterial and antiprotozaol activities, followed by anti-inflammatory and enzymatic inhibitory activities, while _Peperomia_ appears to be mostly related to cytotoxic and antiprotozaol activities. Only _Pothomorph_ genus showed some relationship with antiviral activity (Fig. 2B).

Fig. 2.: (A) Distribution by type of bioactive compounds reported by genera in Piperaceae family, ALK (substances bearing nitrogen at the molecule), LG (ligmans, neoligans and related compounds), PCT (polyketides), TP (terpenoids), BPPR (preprylated benzopyrans), HQPR (preparlated hydroquinones), BPR (preprylated benzoic acid derivatives), FLV (flavonoids, chalcones and related compounds), B (benzene derivatives), BP (benzopyrans), AG (fatty acids), FP (phenylpropanoids), E (epoxides), ET (cytochastic derivatives), KLN (kavalacotones, pyrones, and related compounds) and NPT (naphthalene derivatives). (B) Distribution observed by biological activity groups for each genus reported: **snc** (related to central nervous system, such as sedative and relaxant), **tryp** (antiprotozaol activity against _Tympanosoma_, _Plasmodium_, **civ** (cytotoxicity and related), **atb** (anticmicropholi, such as antibacterial and antifungal), **can** (anticancer activity, related to cytotoxic but more specifically targeted), **insec** (insecticidal or repellent activity, such as anti-mosquito or ant), **aox** (antioxidant activity, such as DPPH), **enz** (inhibitory activity against several enzymes), **aai** (antiinflammatory activity), **acoa** (anticoagulant, such as inhibition of platelet aggregation), **iger** (allelophatic activity), **photo** (photo-protecting activity), **cic** (cicatrizing activity) and **avir** (antiviral activity). The obtained distribution shows that _Piper_ genus is mostly related to antibacterial and antiprotozaol activities, followed by anti-inflammatory and enzymatic inhibitory activities, while _Peperomia_ appears to be mostly related to cytotoxic and antiprotozaol activities. Only _Pothomorph_ genus showed some relationship with antiviral activity (Fig. 2B).



## Page 6

About preplated natural products, i.e., all the compounds bearing one or more prepally, geranyl, farnesyl or geranyl/ary moieties as substituents in their basic structures, open or cycled (BP, BPR, BPR and HQPR), they could be found in _Preperomia_, _Pothornorph_ and in _Piper_ species (Fig. 2). In addition, they are mostly related to antimicrobial (**arb**), insecticidal (**insec**) and antioxidant activity (**aox**), being the prenylated benzoic acid derivatives (BPR) from _Piper_ species, the group with the most biological activities reported (Fig. 3).

The analysis for the occurrence of major secondary compounds pointed out that _Piper_ species could be considered as an important source of prenylated compounds and thus a source for further studies of prenyltransferase activity. The two species _P. crassinevium_ and _P. aduncum_ accounted for 11% of the total number of species in which bioactive substances have been reported for this genus and can be considered good candidates for further investigation on bioactive prenylated metabolites (Fig. 1, Electronic Annex).

Considering the literature survey performed here as well as our previous experience on both bioactivity and biosynthetic studies of prenylated compounds from some _Piper_ species, _P. crassinevium_ was selected for further studies (Lopes et al., 2008). This species accumulates two C-geranylated metabolites derived from benzoic acid [4-hydroxy-3-_E_-(3',7'-dimethyl-1'-_oxo-2',6'-octalenyl)benzoic acid (**1**)] and from 1,4-benzenediol [(1,4-dihydroxy-2',6'-octalenyl)benzene (**2**)], which showed antifungal, antioxidant and trypanacid activities (Fig. 1) (Danelutte et al., 2003; Yamaguchi et al., 2006; Lopes et al., 2008).

A screening for the prenylation activity with the crude enzymatic extract from fresh leaves of _P. crassinevium_ plus geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP) as the prenyl donor, a divalent cation (MgCl2 or MnCl2) and several aromatic substrates (_p_-hydroxybenzoic acid, 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, _p_-hydroxybenzaldehyde, phenol, _p_-hydroquinone, caffeic acid, _o_- and _p_-counter acids) was initially performed. Neither the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid nor the _p_-hydroquinone (the two theoretically natural precursors of compounds **1** and **2**) was biotransformed, whilst the reaction with the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid led to the formation of products, as observed in the chromatographic profile, suggesting a biotransformation reaction when compared with that of the negative control. The reaction was consistently reproducible and the product was analysed by HPLC-UV-MS showing an intense peak at _t_R: 13.1 min with _l_max at 280 nm besides some minor compounds between _t_R: 7-9 min (Fig. 4). The fact that the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid could be bio-transformed is interesting because no prenylated natural products bearing a catechol moiety have been isolated from _P. crassinevium_ previously.

The characterization of the biotransformation products was performed by the analysis of their UV-Vis and MS or tandem MS-MS (ESI negative mode) spectra, as well as by comparison with synthetic compounds prepared for this purpose: the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid geranyl ester (compound **3**), the 4-0-geranyl-3-hydroxybenzoic acid (compound **4**) and the 3-0-geranyl-4-hydroxybenzoic acid (compound **5**) (Table 1).

Regarding the minor products detected (chromatographic peaks detected at 254 nm with _t_R between 7 and 9 min), their mass (MS) spectra were investigated and compared to those of the synthetic compounds **3**-5. This analysis and the comparison of the chromatographic profiles, UV (_A_max 258 and 295 nm) and MS spectra ([M-H]- = 289, [M-C10H17]- = 153 and [M-C10H17-C02]- = 109) with those of the negative controls (see Section 2.9) allowed the determination of the product eluted at _t_R: 8.6 min as the geranyl ester of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid (**3**) (Fig. 4).

The compound eluted at _t_R: 13.1 min displayed a [M-H]- = 303, which under subsequent fragmentation by MS-MS, gave rise to the fragment ion _m_/_z_ = 259, indicating the loss of a CO2 molecule (Fig. 4). Considering that the addition of one geranyl moiety to this aromatic core produces a molecule with MW = 290, an additional oxidation at the geranylic chain was suggested on the basis of the MW = 304 observed, compatible with additional 14 unites to the MW = 290. This suggestion was based on the observation of the oxidation pattern of the isolated metabolites **1** and **2**, which have a carbonyl carbon at their geranyl moieties (Fig. 1). The position of the geranyl moiety could be proposed as a _C_- (at the aromatic ring) instead of an _O_-substitution (at a phenol group), due to the lack of the fragment at _m_/_z_ = 153 in the MS-MS spectrum (Fig. 4). The position of the oxidation at the geranyl moiety was assumed to be at C-5', due to the observation of the fragment ions at _m_/_z_ = 203 and 159, which could result from a McLafferty-type rearrangement (Fig. 4) (Grossert et al., 2006).

Since plant prenyltransferase are mostly membrane-associated enzymes, an additional protocol on the crude extract was performed to obtain a microsomal fraction (Muhlenwege et al., 1998). The process was monitored by electrophoresis SDS PAGE and 2-DE, and the microsomal fraction was evaluated for its geranyltransferase activity having _p_-hydroquinone, _p_-hydroxybenzoic and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acids as aromatic acceptors. No products were detected when _p_-hydroquinone and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid were used as substrates. Nevertheless, the analysis indicated that the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid was biotransformed yielding a new product as a weak chromatographic peak (_t_R: 13.6 min), absent in the negative controls. The chromatographic profile of the obtained product was compared with those of the endogenous (**1**) and synthetic (**6** and **7**, Table 2) compounds, suggesting that the product of this biotransformation could be an 0-geranylated derivative (Fig. 5).

Previous studies carried out by our research group with leaves of _P. crassinevium_ have demonstrated that compounds **1** and **2** were biosynthesized _de novo_ after incubation for three days with glucose (unpublished results). Consequently, a protocol of feeding glucose by pre-incubation of fresh leaves from _P. crassinevium_ with a 10% aqueous solution was applied to enhance the expression of the geranyltransferase activity.

Subsequent to the enzymatic reaction, the synthesis of the expected product was enhanced, being possible to identify it as the geranyl geranyl ester of the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid **6** both in the crude extract and in the microsomal fraction (Fig. 5). This result is

Fig. 3: Distribution of prenylated bioactive metabolites by genera within Piperaceae family. BPR (prenylated benzojcryans), HQPR (prenylated hydroquinones), BPR (prenylated benzoic acid derivatives), BPR (benemyaxions), **t**yp (antiprotozol activity against Trypanosoma, _Plasmodium_, _E_-(_kishman), **ed**_

## Page 7

complementary to a previous report of the geranylation of the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid to its ether derivative with a recombinant geranyltransferase from bacterial origin (Haagena et al., 2007). Nevertheless, from the analysis of the spectral data of the product

Fig. 4: Typical chromatogram obtained for the biotransformation of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, using GPP and the crude enzymatic extract from the leaves of _P_-_crasinerurum_, which shows the product identified as compound **3** at \(t\)2; 8.6 min, and the proposed fragmentation pattern of the product eluted at \(t\)2; 13.1 min, based on the analysis of its MS and tandem MS-MS. Divalent cation: MgCl2). Final concentrations: 10 mM. Reaction conditions: 60 min, 35 °C. Chromatographic conditions: ACN–HOAc 0.1% (70:30), 1 ml/min, inj., vol. 50 ul, 25 min, detection: UV _λ_ = 280 nm, ESI negative mode – 30 V.



## Page 8

obtained and characterized by Haagena et al. (2007), we propose that it is the ester derivative instead of the ether, as reported. The expected chemical shift value for the CH2-1' at \(d\) observed in the 1H NMR, should be similar for the two derivatives **6** and **7** and, therefore this data should not be enough to distinguish which derivative was formed. Thus, further NMR experiments including analysis of the 13C NMR values and the _g_HMBC correlations were carried out.

The observed differences in the substrate specificity, suggest the presence of, at least, two geranyltransferases in _P.__cassinevium_. One of them was soluble and showed affinity to the 3.4-dihy-droxybenzoic acid, while the second was concentrated in the microsomal fraction, recognizing the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid as substrate and was inducible by glucose. The SDS PAGE and 2-DE analysis indicated the concentration of spots between pl 6-7 and 56-58 kDa in the microsomal fraction, which is in agreement with previous reports for geranyltransferases from plants (Fig. 6).

The two enzymatically formed products were characterized as _O_-geranylated derivatives and were previously reported as synthetic compounds (Kubo et al., 2003). The production of esters instead of ethers or C-prenylated derivatives, as naturally occurs in plants, suggests that different conditions and environments could affect the prenylation outcome in crude and partly purified enzymatic extracts. Besides, a C-geranylated derivative of the 3.4-dihy-droxybenzoic acid bearing a carbonyl group at C-5' could be proposed by the analysis of its MS-MS fragmentation data. Our

Fig. 5.: Chromatographic analysis for the enzymatic reaction of the crude enzymatic extract, from the leaves of _P.__cassinevium_ before (A) and after (B) the treatment with 10% glucose, with _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid and GPP. (C) Synthetic standard of the _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid geranyl ester. (D) Negative control. Divalent cation: MgCl2, Final concentrations: 10 mM. Reaction conditions: 60 min, 35 °C. Chromatographic conditions: ACN-HOAC 0.1% (70:30), 1 ml/min, inj. vol. 50 μl, 25 min, detection: UV \(i\) = 254 nm.



## Page 9

observations are in agreement with previous reports based on bacterial recombinant aromatic prenyltransferasees (Haagena et al., 2007).

In spite of the large number of data on phytochemistry and bioactivity on _Piper_ species, no studies have been addressed to determine their antiviral potential and the only exception involved the monotypic _Pothomorphe umbellata_ (Fig. 3). The inhibition of viral proteases has indeed been demonstrated to be a good target to search new drugs for the treatment of several illnesses including AIDS. In this context, the investigation on some common proteases such as subtilisin and pepsin is considered as a useful screening for the discovery of potential inhibitors of retroviral proteases (Hirata et al., 2005). Compounds **3** and **6** were tested as inhibitors of subtilisin and pepsin using the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) methodology. Both compounds showed weak activity, being the ester **6** slightly more active than **3** showing 15% of inhibition at 1 mg/ml on pepsin and 14% on subtilisin (Table 3). Warfarin and dicomumoral were tested as positive controls. The HIV-like protease inhibitory potential reported for **3** and **6** is the first approach to the determination of antiviral activity of this kind of compounds, and complements the range of biological activities previously reported, such as antifungal and antibacterial (Kubo et al., 2003; Nihei et al., 2004).

## 4 Conclusions

Prenylation of aromatic compounds represents an important feature when the formation of bioactive compounds in plants is concerned. There are several examples in which different simple prenyl, geranyl, farnesyl, geranylgeranyl or polytergenic unities are added to aromatic substrates rendering them with important biological properties. The literature survey indicated that among Piperaceae family, _P. crassinervium_ species appeared as an important source of geranyltransferase activity looking at biotransformations reactions. Between the two substrates evaluated, the p-hydroxybenzoic acid was O-geranylated, whilst the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid was both C- and O-geranylated. The 0-geranylated products presented a weak protease inhibitory activity. The electrophoretic analysis performed on the microsomal fraction showed a typical prenyltransferase electrophoretic profile (Mr 56-58 kDa, pl 6-7).

This work contributes to the comprehensive study of biotransformation reactions with geranyl moieties using plant enzymatic extracts as an alternative strategy to the biocatalysis with purified enzymes.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Prof. Wagner Vilegas and Dr. Alberto C. Alcio for the helpful discussions and suggestions regarding MS spectrometry. This work was supported with grants provided by the State of Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) (03/11524-9 and 05/57042-0), and was also supported by FAPESP within the BIOTA/FAPESP - Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.bio-tasp.org.br). SNL, AAL, JMB] and OF] wish to thank FAPESP for the provision of scholarships. M.F., M.J.K. and V.S.B. are also grateful to the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for research fellowships.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Compound (1 mg/ml) & \(\chi\) Inhibition & \\  & Pepsin & Subtilisin \\
**3** (3.44 μM) & 4.47 & 9.02 \\
**6** (3.64 μM) & 15.25 & 13.59 \\ Warfarin (3.24 μM) & 84.63 & 30.31 \\ Dicoumarol (2.97 μM) & 43.90 & 49.21 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Inhibitory activity (%) for compounds **3** and **6** tested at 1 mg/ml on pepsin and subtilisin. Warfarin and dicomumoral were included as positive controls (1 mg/ml).

Fig. 6: SDS PAGE and 2-DE of the crude extract (CE) and the microsomal fraction (μF) from the leaves of _P. crassinervium_. 2-DE conditions: for CE was used a 13 cm IPC strip pl 3–10 linear, for μF if we used a 13 cm IIG strip pl 4–7. SDS PAGE and the second dimension of 2-DE were executed with 12% of polyacrylamide gel, monitored with LMW standards (14–97 kDa). Staining of gels was performed with AgNO5 (_Silver Staining Protocol_, Amersham Biosciences). Digitalisation and image analysis were performed using LabImage 1D® and Image Master 5.05 software.



## Page 10



## Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2010.01.041.

## References

- Alecio, A.C., Bolzani, V.S., Young, M.C.M., Kato, M.J., Furlan, M., 1998. Antifungal amides from _Poper hiphium_. Journal of Natural Products 61, 637-639.

- Benevides, P.J.C., Sartorelli, P., Kato, M.J., 1999. Phenylpropanolis and neoligans from _Poper rgenelli_. Phytochemistry 52, 339-343.

- Bergamo, D.C., Kato, M.J., Bolzani, V.S., Furlan, M., 2005. Biosynthetic origin of the isoprene units of 4-methyldiethodamine in _P_hifomorphe milleta. Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society 16, 1406-1409.

- Cheng, M., Lee, S., Chang, Y., Wu, S., Tsai, I., Jayaprakasam, B., Chen, L., 2003. Chemical and cytotoxic constituents from _Perporum sui_. Phytochemistry 63, 603-608.

- Cornforth, R.H., Popjak, G., 1969. Methods in Enzimology 15: Steroids and Terpenoids. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 359-390.

- Danellette, A.P., Lago, J.H.G., Young, M.C.M., Kato, M.J., 2003. Antifungal flavonones and preynylated hydroquinones from _Poper russinervin_. Phytochemistry 64, 555-559.

- Dodson, C.D., Dyer, L.A., Searcy, J., Wright, Z., Letourneau, D.K., 2000. Cenodalamide, a dihydropyridrone alkaloid from _Poper rencodatum_. Phytochemistry 53, 51-54.

- Epifano, F., Genovese, S., Menghini, L., Curiti, M., 2008. Chemistry and pharmacology of oxyproparted secondary plant metabolites. Biosoramic and Medicinal Chemistry 16, 8117-8126.

- Felipe, L.G., Baldough, D.C., Kato, M.J., Bolzani, V.S., Guimardes, E.F., Cicarelli, R.M.B., Furlan, M., 2008. Trypanodiat trashrofurant legans from _Perporum bianda_. Phytochemistry 69, 445-450.

- Giri, A., Dhingra, V., Giri, C.C., Singh, A., Ward, O.P., Narasu, M.L., 2001. Bitotransformations using plant cells, organ cultures and enzyme systems: current trends and future prospects. Biotechnology Advances 19, 175-199.

- Glosselkamp, K.H., Bochi, G., 1986. _P-c_preparation of phenols promoted by aluminum oxide surfaces. Journal of Organic Chemistry 51, 4481.

- Grossef, J.S., Cook, M.C., White, R.L., 2006. The influence of structural features on facile McLafferty-type even-electron rearrangements in tandem mass spectra of carboxylate anions. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 20, 1511-1516.

- Haagema, Y., Unsold, I., Westricht, L., Gust, B., Richard, S.B., Noel, J.P., Heide, L., 2007. A soluble, magnesium-independent preyntransferase catalyzes reverse and regular C-prepartitions and O-prepartitions of aromatic substrates. FEBS Letters 581, 2889-2893.

- Hirata, J., Chung, L.P., Ariese, F., Irth, H., Gooijer, C., 2005. Coupling of size-exclusion chromatography to a continuous assay for Sultibition using a fluorescence resonance energy frontier peptide substrate: Testing of two standard inhibitors. Journal of Chromatography A 1081, 140-144.

- Kubo, I., Fujita, K., Nihei, K., 2003. Molecular design of multifunctional antibacterial agents against methicillin resistant _Staphylococcus aureus_ (MRSA). Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry 11, 4255-4262.

- Ktauyama, T., Noel, J.P., Richard, S.B., 2005. Structural basis for the promiscuous biosynthetic prehydration of aromatic natural products. Nature 435, 983-987.

- Lago, J.G.L., Ramos, C.S., Casanova, D.C.C., Morandim, A.A., Bergamo, D.C.B., Cavahiero, A.J., Bolzani, V.S., Furlan, M., Guimardes, E.F., Young, M.C., Kato, M.J., 2004. Benzoic acid derivates from _Poper_ species and their fungitoxic activity against _C_dosporamid chodosporides and \(C\). _sharesospermum_. Journal of Natural Products 67, 1783-1788.

- Lopes, A.A., Lopez, S.N., Regasini, L.O., Batista Jr., J.M., Ambrosio, D.L., Kato, M.J., Bolzani, V.S., Cicarelli, R.M.B., Furlan, M., 2008. In vitro activity of compounds isolated from _Poper russinervin_ against _Tympanosoma cruzi_. Natural Products Research 22, 1040-1046.

- Martins, C., Lago, J.H.G., Kato, M.J., 2003. Trypanodiat trashrofurant lignans from _Poper_ solsinavourin_. Phytochemistry 64, 667-670.

- Morandim, A.A., Bergamo, D.C., Kato, M.J., Cavahiero, A.J., Bolzani, V.S., Furlan, M., 2005. Circadian rhythm of anti-fungal preynatured chromene in leaves of _Poper aducum_. Phytochemical Analysis 16, 282-286.

- Muhlenweg, A., Melzer, M., Li, S., Heide, L., 1998. 4-Hydroxyleneoate 3- geranyltransferase from _lithospermum_. purification of a plant membrane-bound proprumferrasferase. Planta 2049, 407-413.

- Nibei, K., Nihei, A., Kubo, L., 2004. Molecular design of multifunctional food additives: Antioxidative antifungal agents. Journal of the Agriculture and Food Chemistry 52, 5011-5020.

- Orjala, J., Erdelmeier, C.A.J., Wright, A.D., Rali, T., Sticher, O., 1993. Two chromes and a preynylated benzoic acid derivative from _Poper aducum_. Phytochemistry 34, 813-818.

- Pamra, V., Sain, L.S., Bisht, K.S., Jain, R., Tanjea, J.B., A Tyagi, O.D., Prasad, A.K., Wengel, J., Olsen, C., Boll, P.M., 1997. Photochemistry of the genus _Poper_. Phytochemistry 46, 597-673.

- Pisco, L., Kordian, M., Peske, K., Feist, H., Michalik, D., Estrada, E., Carvalho, J., Hamilton, G., Rando, D., Quinocos, J., 2006. Synthesis of compounds with antiproliferative activity as analogues of preynylated natural products existing in Brazilian propols. European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 43, 401-407.

- Pochet, L., Quoc, C., Dyer, C.B., Coutures, J., Masererel, B., Reboud-Ravaux, M., Pirotte, B., 2000. Coumarinic derivatives as mechanism-based inhibitors of a-chymotrypsin and human leukocyte elastase. Biosorgnic and Medicinal Chemistry 8, 1489-1501.

- Salazar, K.I.M., Paredes, G.E.D., Iluncor, L.R., Young, M.C.M., Kato, M.J., 2005. Chromes of polyketride origin in _Perporum_ vilippetola_. Phytochemistry 66, 573-579.

- Silva, R., Navicotine, H.M.D., Kato, M.J., Bolzani, V.S., Meda, C.I., Young, M.C.M., Furlan, M., 2002. Antifungal amides from _Poper arbrown_ and _Poper thuruclatum_. Phytochemistry 59, 521-527.

- Singh, Y.N., 1992. Xava: an overview. Journal of Ethnolarmacology 37, 13-45.

- Stoschek, C.M., 1996. An elasimply 1982: Guide to Protein Purification. Academic Press, San Diego.

- Thashirayons, S., Tomlin, D.F., Wattenpaugh, K.D., Chong, K.-T., Howe, W.J., Yang, C.-P., Strbholz, J.W., Turner, S.K., McGrath, J.P., 1994. Structure-based design of HIV protease inhibitors: 4-hydroxyomavirus and 4-hydroxy-2-2-pyroses as non-peptide inhibitors. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 37, 3200-3204.

- Wanke, S., Jaramillo, M.A., Borsch, T., Samain, M.S., Quandt, D., Neuhuis, C., 2007. Evolution of Piperales-mark gene and trunk intron sequence data reveal lineage specific resolution contrast. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 42, 477-497.

- Yamaguchi, L.F., Lago, J.H.G., Tanizaki, T.M., Di Mascio, P., Kato, M.J., 2006. Antioxidant activity of preynylated hydroquinone and benzoic acid derivatives from _Poper_ russinervin_. Phytochemistry 67, 1838-1843.

- Yazaki, K., Matsuoka, H., Shimomura, K., Bechtold, A., Sato, F., 2001. A novel dark-induced protein, Lebl-, and its involvement in root-specific secondary metabolism in _Lithospermum erythrotrin_. Plant Physiology 125, 1831-1841.



