# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89351-6.pdf

## Page 1



# (--)-Rubranine from _Aniba Rosaeodora_+
Footnote †: Part 49 in the series ‘The chemistry of Brazilian Lauraceae’, For Part 48 sec ref. [1]. Sponsored by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo.

Irene B. de Allelciu, Raimundo Braz Fo., Otto R. Gottlieb, Eva G. Magalhaes

Present address: Centro Tecnico Cientifico, Pontificia Universidade Catolica, Rio de Janeiro, RJ.

###### Abstract

_Aniba rosaeodora_; Lauraceae; (--)-rubranine; citrylidenechalcone; pinocembrin; geranylation; pyrolysis; synthesis.

_Aniba rosaeodora_; Lauraceae; (--)-rubranine; citrylidenechalcone; pinocembrin; geranylation; pyrolysis; synthesis.

## Introduction

At the outset of the present studies on Lauraceae species, the presence of an orange product in _Aniba rosaeodora_ Ducke was reported [2]. Later named rubranine, its structural elucidation relied on spectral data, complemented by acid isomerization **1a** - **2a**[3], **3** and **4**[4], as well as syntheses involving pyridine-catalysed condensation of citral and either photoreceptornome (followed by aldol condensation of the resulting product **1a** with benzaldehyde) [3.5] or pinocembrin (**5a**) at 160deg. At 100deg the latter reaction gives **6** and **7** which at 180deg yields rubranine (**1a**). Spectral evidence being incompatible with the existence of unchelated hydroxyl and carbonyl functions. structure **8** cannot represent either of the intermediates, invalidating structure **1b** for rubranine [6].

The distinction between **1a** and **1b** is impossible on spectral grounds [3, 6]. Even acid isomerization, on which the original structural proposal **1a** was based [3], lost weight as a decisive argument with the isolation of **4**. This was postulated to arise from **1a** by opening of both benzylic ether bonds, rotation of 180deg about the Ar--C bond and ring closure [4]. The formation of compounds **2a** and **3** could, of course, be rationalized through an analogous sequence of events starting from **1b**.

With regard to acid isomerization, it may be relevant to mention that rubranine (**1a**), as well as racemic pinocembrin (**5a**) [8], were obtained from rosewood by a process [3] which involved extraction with boiling benzene and repeated washings of the solution with dilute HCl in order to separate anibine (**9a**) [2]. The rubranine was found to be optically inactive and this fact, as well as the absence of citral in the wood was explained postulating anibine-catalysed scavenging of citral by pinocembrin during extraction, Indeed, racemic rubranine was formed in excellent yield when the compounds were heated, presumably in benzene, to reflux temperature [3].

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Prior to examination of the possibility of artifact formation we wanted to confirm the structure of our (--)-rubranine. An analytical means of differentiating between the structures **1a** and **1b**, an alternative to acid isomerization, consists of pyrolysis. Lack of colour and the UV spectrum of the product indicated that the original chalcone chromophore had been isomerised to a flavanone type. In spite of its chromatographic behaviour (one TLC spot) and sharp mp. the product was a _ca_ 1:1 mixture of two compounds, both showing a chelated hydroxyl (t -2.23, -2.19). The derivatives were represented as the linear isomers **2a** and **2b**, rather than the angular ones, on account of a strongly positive Gibbs test [10]. Although this evidence is not completely reliable, due to the possibility of ring opening under the conditions (pH 9.2) of the test, the presence of both the linear and the angular isomers in this mixture is unlikely, in view of the sharpness of the PMR signal of the lone aromatic proton. Both derivatives, **2a** and **2b**, contain vinyl methyls (t 8.1). No such groups, of course, could be generated from **1b** whose pyrolysis should yield a 5-hydroxyflavanone with an exocyclic vinyl group (**12**).

Confirmation of this reasoning was obtained upon hydrogenation of the pyrolytic product, Again a mixture of two compounds resulted. These, however, could be separated by chromatography on silica gel into a 5-hydroxyflavanone (**2c**) and a 2',6'-dihydroxydihydrochalcone (**13**). As expected both contain one quaternary (t 8.7, singlet) and two tertiary (t 8.8 and 9.3, doublets) methyls. Hydrogenation of **12** would have led to a compound possessing one tertiary and two quaternary methyls.

As already pointed out, however, the safest means of structural confirmation is the synthesis of rubranine by condensation of citral with pinocembrin in pyridine.



## Page 2

Indeed, this must lead to 1a as the predominant city-lidene-chalcone [6], the precedence of Michael addition of the phenolate anion, formed from the hydroxyl of highest acidity, to the a,b-unsaturated aldehyde over C--C bond formation having been established [5]. Under conditions described for critcal and phloroglucinol [11], a product resulted, which was fractionated by chromatography on silica gel into a 3:7 mixture of the flavanones **6** and **7** [6], a 10:13:77 mixture of the novel chalcones **14a**, **14b** and **15**, and a product which was indistinguishable from natural (-)-rubranine by TLC, mp, UV, IR, PMR and MS comparison. The relative proportion of the flavanones **6** and **7** was determined by measurement of the integrated intensities of the respective signals in the PMR spectrum of the mixture. The C-6 proton of **6** and the chromene protons of **7**, subject to the paramagnetic effect of the electron current in the vicinal chelate system, give rise to signals at lower field than the C-8 proton of 7 and the chromene protons of **6**. An analogous effect is responsible for the differences in chemical shifts of the signals due to the lone aromatic protons and the chromene protons in the chalcones. The former signals make the distinction between the rotamers **14a** and **14b** possible. Consideration of the intensities of the latter signals show that the major constituent of the chalcone mixture is the dichromene derivative **15**, a conclusion which was confirmed by MS.

Having satisfied ourselves with respect to the structure of (-)-rubranine, experiments were designed to show the feasibility of _in vivo_ formation of the cirtylidene system via condensation of geraniol and a phloroglucinol ring. In spite of the mildness of the chosen conditions, aqueous citric acid [12], phloroglucinol itself proved unsatisfactory as a model substrate. All 3 products, **16a**, **16b** and **17a**, obtained besides derivatives of geraniol [13], showed that the initial alkylating step had been followed by acid-catalysed cyclization. In order to produce the chromene intermediate of a cirtylidene system, however, oxidative cyclization of the geranylphenol is required. The tendency for acid-catalysed cyclization can be diminished, using the less reactive phloroacetophenone as substrate. In this case, besides the two cyclized derivatives **16c** and **17b**, geranylphloroacetophenone (**18**) was obtained. This compound had 

## Page 3

already been prepared previously and oxidized with DDQ in refluxing benzene into the chromene **14c**[4]. At room temperature under reported conditions [14], we also succeeded in separating from the reaction product the isomeric chromene. **14d** and a mixture of the cityflidene derivatives **1c** and **1d**. The components of the mixture were identified easily, having been obtained previously : **1c** (debenzylidenerubraine) by alkaline degradation of rubranine [3] or by heating of **14c** in pyridine [4], and **1d** by acid reactant of **14c**[4]. The surprising ease of production of these cityflidene derivatives, either during the oxidation reaction of geranylphloroacetophenone proper or during chromatographic separation of the products, favours the opinion that an analogous process may justify the biosynthesis of rubranine (**1a**) from pinocomethrin (**5a**).

Pinocomethrin (**5a**), for the final experiments, was prepared from cinnamoyl chloride and phloroglucinol according to a process [15] which does not describe the 3 side products **19a 19b**[16] and **19c** we obtained in the reaction. Due to the slight solubility of pinocomethrin in water, attempts at geranylation in aqueous citric acid failed. In a solution of TsOH in ethyl acetate, however, 8-geranylpinocephrin (**5b**) and 6-geranylpinocephrin (**5c**) were obtained in a 2:1 proportion. Oxidation of **5b** with DDQ in benzene at room temperature [14] gave the expected chromene **6**, a proven intermediate of rubranine synthesis [6]. Acid treatment of **6** was not optimized for obtaining rubranine. Under the rather vigorous conditions used, **3**, the major product of acid isomerization of rubranine [3,4] was produced directly.

In conflict with the statement that rubranine is an artifact [3] are the following observations: (I) (-)-rubranine can be isolated by washing _A. roseqedora_ wood for a few seconds at room temperature with hexene or benzene. (2) Citral does not accompany linalool and geranilol in _A. roseqedora_. The same is true, however, for _A. duckei_ Kosterm. [7], a species which, except for the replacement of pinocomethrin by cotin (**10**) [8] and the absence of rubranine, shows a very similar composition, including the presence of anibine [2]. Thus, by analogy with the reaction envisaged for the biosynthesis of deoxynetocal (**11**) [9], the formation of rubranine may also involve condensation of geranyl pyrophosphate, or even a linalool derivative, with a phloroglucinol system, in this case that of pinocomethrin.



## Page 4



## 10 Experimental

### Isolation of constituents.

Ground branch wood of _A. roxaeodora_ (2.6 kg) was percolated successively with C6H6 and EtOH The C6H6 solution was evaud and then residue 48 g was chromatographed on Si gel (400 g Fluhron with C6H6 gave in order, an ol, 1a (4.5 g), 5a [8] (8 g), with C6H6-CHCl2 (2:1) gave 9b [2] (0.3 g); and with C6H6-CHCl3 (1:1) gave 9a (0.6 g). The EtOH soln was evaud and 1.3 of the residue (50) was chromatographed on Si gel (400 g Fluhron with C6H6-CHCl3 (1:1) gave, additional quantities of 5a (0.2 g), 9b (0 l g) and 9a (0 l g).

-)-Rubranane (1a) [a]235 -32 7 (7 63 mg/10 ml dioxane) MS (_m_/_e_). M** obs. 390.1845 (42%.), [C2H6H2O2]+ req. 390.1831, obs. 375.1581 (4), [M-Me]+ req. 375 1596, obs. 313 1454 (5), [M-Ph]+ req. 313 1440; obs. 307.0993 (100), [M-CH2Cl2CH2CH2CH2]+ req. 313 0970, obs. 303.0357 (31), [M-CH2Cl2CH2CH2]+ req. 203.0344 (42), ORD (_c_ 0.3416, CHCl2-25, 420 250 nm) [ph]420 -570; [ph]400 -570; [ph]700 -2510; [ph]430 00 01910; [ph]450 -5700; [ph]700 -9100; Other data Refs [3, 6].

### Pyrolysis of rubranane.

In 300 mg, 200-210, 15 mm, 1 hr. The product was chromatographed on Si gel (2 g) and elution with petrol-C6H6 (1:4) gave a product, which, when washed with MeOH, gave colourless crystals (2a - 2b (1) / 229 nm) 124-126deg (MeOH); (2a mg 135-137deg [3], [M-OH](nm) 229, 300, 349sh (_t_ 12900, 15000, 2350); no NaOAc shift: [M-NH2OH

## Page 5



