# 10.1590@S0103-50532001000300010.pdf

## Page 1



[

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905, Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Universidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica Centro de Estudo de Insetos Sociais, Universidade Estadual Paulista Julio de Mesquita, CP 199, 13506-900, Rio Claro - SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Da casca do caule de _Picramnia teapensis_ Tul. frami isolados dois novos benzoatos triterpenicos, \(\text{o}\text{3}\alpha\),\(\text{7}\beta\)-dibenzoato do acido lup-20(29)-en-28-oico e o \(\text{7}\beta\)-benzoato do acido \(\text{3}\alpha\)-hidroxi-lup-20(29)-en-28-oico. A elucidacao estrutural deses composuos fio fundamentala na analise dos dados espectroscopicos. Outros composuos conpocados, \(\beta\)-istostored, estigmasterol, lupoel e epilupool, forem identificados em mistura por CG-EM. Nenhum dos triterpenes benzoilados mostrou efeito imbibitorio no crescimento _in-vitro_ do _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_ (Fisher), tambem citado como _Leucocoprimus gongylophorus_ (Heim), _syn Rozites gongylophora_ (Moller), o fungo simbionte cultivado pelas formigas cortadeiras de folhas _Atta sexdens_ L.

Two new benzoic acid esters of triterpene alcohols [lup-20(29)-en-28-oic acid \(\text{3}\alpha\),\(\text{7}\beta\)-dibenzoate and \(\text{3}\alpha\)-hydroxy-lup-20(29)-en-28-oic acid \(\text{7}\beta\)-benzoate] were isolated from the stem bark of _Picramnia teapensis_ Tul. The structures of these compounds were established on the basis of spectral analyses. Other known compounds, \(\beta\)-sitostored, estigmasterol, lupool and epilupool, were identified in mixture by GC-MS. The triterpene esters have not shown _in-vitro_ inhibitory effect on the growth of _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_ (Fisher), referred also as _Leucocoprimus gongylophorus_ (Heim), _syn Rozites gongylophora_ (Moller), the symbiotic fungus cultivated by the leaf-cutting ant _Atta sexdens_ L.

T riterpene esters, lupanes, _Picramnia teapensis_, _Atta sexdens_, _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_]T riterpene Benzoates from the Bark of _Picramnia teapensis_ (Simaroubaceae)

## Introduction

The genus _Picramnia_ is restricted to the neutropic region. According to Engler, the genus _Picramnia_ belongs to Simaroubaceae, but Fernando & Quinn have promoted _Picramnia_ to a new family named Picramniaceae1.

Footnote 1: e-mail: djbf@power.ufscar.br

We have previously described our findings on the chemical study of _P. teapensis_, a tree found in Central America2-3. The study of the ethyl acetate extract of the stem bark from this plant has led to the isolation and characterization of two _C_-glycosylated anthrones (picramniosides D, E); two _C_-glycosylated oxanthrones (mayoside and mayoside B); a \(C\),_O_-diglycosylated anthrone (picramnioside F); a \(C\),_O-diglycosylated oxanthrone (mayoside C); two anthraquinone glycosides (1-_O_-_b_-D-glucopyranosyl emodin and 8-_O_-_b_-D-glucopyranosyl emodin) as well as emodin and umbelliferone2-3. Some of them showed antifungal activity against _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_ the symbiotic fungus cultivated by the leaf-cutting ants _Atta sexdens_ L3. These ants are known as serious pest in agriculture and forestry in Brazil4. During the last decade we have been looking for a natural control of this pest without ecological injury, working on toxicity and repellence of plant extracts and plant products potentially toxic to _Atta_ and their symbiotic fungus5-7.

This report deals with the isolation and identification of new lupane triterpene benzoates, from the chloroform extract of the stem bark from _P. teapensis_ and the test of antifungal activity of the isolated compounds.

## Results and Discussion

The chloroform extract from the stem bark of _P. teapensis_ afforded, in minor quantities, a mixture of

## Page 2

compounds **1** and **2**, which were separated by column chromatography on silica gel. The lupane triterpenes benzoates **1** and **2** were identified on the basis of spectroscopic data, including COSY, DEPT, HMQC and HMBC experiments. Compound **1** was identified as lup-20(29)-en-28-oic acid 3\(a\),7_b_-dibenzoate and compound **2**, in minor quantities, was identified as 3_a_-hydroxy-lup-20(29)-en-28-oic acid 7_b_-benzoate by comparison of 1H and 13C NMR data with those of compound **1**.

Compound **1** had a molecular formula C44H56O6, as determined by 13C NMR and DEPT analysis and confirmed by HREIMS. The IR spectrum of **1** exhibited bands at 3428 cm-1 (_n_ O-H, broad), 2929 cm-1 (terminal methylene function), 1713 cm-1 (_n_ C=O of ester function), 1274 cm-1, 1114 cm-1 (_n_ C-O) and 713 cm-1 (aromatic ring). The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** displayed six signals for methyl groups at d 0.93, 0.95, 0.96, 1.18, 1.31 and 1.69. This last value suggested the presence of one methyl group attached to an unsaturated carbon. Furthermore, vinylic protons signals appeared at d 4.74 (1H, d, \(J\) 1.6 Hz) and d 4.61 (1H, s) and the signal for one allylic proton appeared at d 3.01 (broad td, \(J\) 11.1, 4.6 Hz). The spectrum also showed two acycarboxylic protons at d 4.87 (broad t, \(J\) 2.6 Hz) and d 5.40 (dd, \(J\) 10.1, 5.2 Hz). Signals at d 7.46-8.10 (10 H) showed the typical pattern of the benzoate group (Table 1), the integration indicating the presence of two benzoate groups.

The 13C NMR spectrum of **1** confirmed the nature of the triterpene skeleton, as a lup-20(29)-ene triterpenoid structure, with signals of the terminal olefinic bond at d 150.3 and 109.8. Key signals indicated other functional groups of the lupane skeleton: _i_) the signal at d 179.3 corresponding to a carbonyl carbon of a carboxylic acid function, _ii_) two carbonyl carbons of conjugated ester functions (d 166.0 and 165.8) and aromatic signals corresponding to the benzoic ester ring, and _iii_) two signals of carbonicic carbons (d 78.7 and 77.6). The assignments of 13C and 1H RMN spectra are shown in Table 1 and the data are supported by the DEPT, COSY, HMQC and HMBC experiments. These assignments are comparable with those of structures with the same skeleton previously reported8. The location of the benzoate groups was established as follows: the signal at d 4.87 (broad t, 2.6 Hz), corresponding to H-3, showed correlation with the carbonyl of the benzoate at d 166.0 in the HMBC experiment and the coupling constant indicates an equatorial position of this proton, so the benzoate group must be \(a\). The shielding effect suffered by C-1 (d 34.2) and C-5 (d 49.2) confirmed the relative configuration at C-3. The position of the benzoate at C-7 was determined by the observation of the correlations, in an HMBC experiment (Table 2), of the protons at Me-26 with C7, C-8, C-9 and C-14, and also of H-7 with C-26. The high shielding effect observed for the methyl at C-26 (d 11.7) is reported for skeletons with hydroxyl or esterification in the \(b\) position at C-78.9. The coupling constants exhibited by H-7 (5.2 and 10.1 Hz) indicate that it must be axial, so the relative configuration at C-7 is with the benzoic ester in the \(b\) position.

EIMS data of compound **1** exhibited the expected ester fragmentation, benzoic acid being a prominent eliminated product, with fragments at _m/z_ 558 ([M-PhCO2H]) and _m/z_ 436 ([M-2PhCO2H]). The molecular ion peak at _m/z_ 680, the base peak at _m/z_ 105 ([C6H5CO]'), and other important fragments at _m/z_ 635 ([M-HCO2H]), 248, 202, 201, 188, 187 and 173 were observed (Figure 1). The fragmentation pattern strongly indicated the nature of the lup-20(29)-ene with esterifications at rings A/B.

Compound **2**, C33H52O5, exhibited the same spectroscopic characteristics as **1**, with exception of those of ring A, having the following main 1H and 13C NMR data differences: the spectra showed the presence of only five aromatic protons showing the characteristic pattern of a benzoic group; the signal for H-3, in a \(b\) orientation, appeared as a shielded broad triplet at d 3.42. Therefore the signal of C-2 (d 25.4) was deshielded and the C-3 signal (d 75.9) shielded in comparison with the signals in **1**, as occurs in other lupanes with 3-_a_-hydroxyl8.

Compound **2** was isolated in too small amount to observe all the quaternary carbons by 13C NMR. 1H and 13C NMR attributions shown in Table 1 are consistent with the observations made in DEPT 135 and HMBC experiments. The correlations observed by HMBC were basically from the six methyl groups on the lupane skeleton (Table 2). The correlation of C-26 and C-2' with H-7 confirmed the position of the benzoic ester. Some signals were attributed by comparison with the data of compound **1**.



## Page 3

Figure 1: Some EIMS fragments of compounds **1** and **2**



## Page 4

The EIMS spectrum of compound **2** did not show the molecular ion peak because of the lost of benzoic acid. Some of the observed fragments were at _m/z_ 454 ([M-C6H5CO2H]), _m/z_ 122 ([C6H5CO2H]-) and _m/z_ 105 ([C6H5CO]-), being the base peak at _m/z_ 77 ([C6H5]-). The fragmentation pattern shown in Figure 1 was also observed as in compound **1**.

The chloroform extract from the stem bark of _P.__teapensis_ also afforded a mixture of _b_-sitosterol, stigmasterol, lupool and epilupool which were identified by GC-MS and by comparison of EIMS spectra and co-injection in GC of authentic samples available in our laboratory.

Compounds **1** and **2** were tested in the growth inhibition assay of \(Leucoagaricus~gongylophorus\), using the methodology described by Pagnocca et al.5. These new compounds have not shown inhibitory effect against growth of _L.__gongylophorus_ at concentration of 100 _m_g mL-1. 1-_O-b_-D-Glucopyranosyl emodin and 8-_O-b_-D-glucopyranoside emodin, isolated from this plant, were used as positive controls since they showed complete inhibition of the fungus growth at a concentration of 50 _m_g mL-13.

## Experimental

### General

CC: Silica gel 230-400 Mesh (Merck). TLC: Silica gel 60 F254 (Merck). Melting points uncorr. IR: BOMEM-FT-IR, model Michaelson-100 spectrophotometer. UV (CH2Cl2): Hewlett Packard, model 8452A. Optical rotation (CH2Cl2): Perkin Elmer 241 MC. 1H NMR (400MHz) and 13C NMR (100 MHz): Bruker ARX-400 spectrometer, in CDCl3 containing TMS as int. standard, using 5 (**1**) and 2.5 (**2**) mm sample tubes. GC-MS: Shimadzu QP 5000 system, DB-5 (J&W) capillary column (30 m x 0.25 mm ID, 0.25 _m_m film thickness) with helium as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.6 mL min-1; the temperature program was 150 degC min-1 and increased at a rate of 10 degC min-1 to 250 degC, standing 25 min at this temperature; injection in the split mode (10:1) at an injector, temperature of 225 degC; the interface temperature was 250 degC; mass spectra were recorded in the EI mode at 70 eV. EIMS (70 eV): VG Platform II instrument. HRMS: Autospec-Micromass EBE. Elemental analysis: Fisons Instruments model EA 1108 CHNS-O.

### Plant material

The stem bark of _P.__teapensis_ was collected in Costa Rica, in the region of San Jose de la Montana in September 1990 and identified by Dr. Luis Jorge Poveda. A voucher (CR194274) was deposited in the herbarium of the Universidad Nacional of Costa Rica, Heredia.

### Extraction and isolation of the chemical constituents

Dried and powdered stem bark of _P.__teapensis_ (615 g) was macerated with EtOH 80%. The extract was filtered and concentrated under vacuum, and part of it (10.3 g) was partitioned between H2O and CHCl3. VLC fractionation of the concentrated chloroform layer (2.37 g) on silica gel was carried out, eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2 and CH2Cl2-MeOH mixtures of increasing polarity, to yield 50 fractions, 25 mL each. These fractions were combined in 12 groups on the basis of analytical TLC. Fraction 5 (107.3 mg) was crystallized in CH2Cl2/acetone and its constitution was analyzed by GC-MS. Four compounds were identified from this fraction: _b_-sitosterol, estigmasterol, lupool and epilupool10. Fraction 6 (160.8 mg) was submitted to chromatographic separations on silica gel columns using as eluents hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH, and yielding the triterpene benzoates **1** (10.2 mg) and **2** (1.0 mg).

### Triterpene **I**

Viscous oil (10.2 mg). [a]D25 (CH2Cl2 \(c\) 0.063): -5.9; UV _l_max/nm (_e_): 230 (1890), 274 (150). IR _ν_max/cm-13: 3428, 2929, 2861, 1713, 1454, 1274, 1114, 713 (film); 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz) Table 1; 13C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c}  & Compound **1** & Compound **2** \\ H & C & C \\
2 & 4, 10 & \\
3 & 1, 1”, 3 & n.o. \\
5 & 7, 10, 24, 25 & \\
7 & 7, 26 & n.o. \\
18 & 17, 20, 28 & n.o. \\
19 & 18 & n.o. \\
23 & 3, 4, 5, 24 & 3, 4, 5, 24 \\
24 & 3, 4, 5, 23 & 3, 4, 5, 23 \\
25 & 1, 5, 9, 10 &

## Page 5



###### Acknowledgements.

The authors would like to thank the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), for scholarships and the financial support, as well as to PRONEX/MCT-FINEP, and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq).

## References

* [1] Fernando, E. S.; Quinn, C. J. _Taxon._**1995**, _44_, 177.
* [2] Rodriguez-Gamboa, T.; Fernandes, J. B.; Rodrigues Fo., E.; Da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Castro C., O. _Photochemistry_**1999**, _51_, 583.
* [3] Rodriguez-Gamboa T.; Victor, S. R.; Fernandes J. B.; Rodrigues Fo., E.; Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Castro C., O. _Photochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 837.
* [4] Della Lucia, T.M.C. _Abstracts of the VI International Pest Ant Symposium & Encontro de Mirmecologia,_ Ilheus, Brasil, 1997, 147.
* [5] Pagnocca, F. C.; Silva, O.A.; Hebling-Beraldo, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C. _Bull. Entomol. Res._**1990**, _80_, 349.
* [6] Pagnocca, F. C.; Ribeiro, S.B.; Torkomian, V.L.V.; Hebling-Beraldo, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Silva, O. A.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Ferreira, A. G. _J. Chem. Ecol._**1996**, _22_, 1325.
* [7] Hebling-Beraldo, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Almeida, R.E.D.; Silva, O. A. D.; Pagnocca, F. C. _Abstracts of the Sociedade Entomologica do Brasil_**1991**, _20_, 27.
* [8] Jiang, Z. H.; Tanaka, T.; Kouno, I. _Photochemistry_**1995**, _40_, 1223.
* [9] Lee, S. S.; Lin, B. F.; Liu, K. C. _Photochemistry_**1996**, _43_, 847.
* [10] Peraza-Sanches, S. R.; Salazar-Aguilar, N. E. and Pena-Rodriguez, L M. _J. Nat. Prod._**1995**, _58_, 271.

_Received: November 14, 2000 Published on the web: May 16, 2001_

\begin{table}

\end{table}
Table 1: HREIMS: found 680.4076 [M]\({}^{+}\), requires 680.4078; EIMS _m/z_ (rel. int. \%) 680 (0.2), 635 (0.5) [M-CO\({}_{2}\)H]\({}^{+}\), 634 (1) [M-HCO\({}_{2}\)H]\({}^{+}\), 594 (0.5) [M-HCO\({}_{2}\)H-40]\({}^{+}\), 558 (2), 436 (5), 421 (7) [M-2PhCO\({}_{2}\)H-CH\({}_{3}\)]\({}^{+}\), 248 (0.5), 202 (5), 201 (7), 188 (6), 187 (7), 173 (6), 122 (15) [PhCO\({}_{2}\)H]\({}^{+}\), 105 (100) [PhCO]\({}^{+}\), 77 (60) [C\({}_{6}\)H\({}_{5}\)]\({}^{+}\).



