# 10.1021@np070312g.pdf

## Page 1

Lipoperoxidation and Cyclooxygenase Enzyme Inhibitory Piperidine Alkaloids from _Cassia spectabilis_ Green Fruits

Claudio Viegas, Jr., Dulce H. S. Silva, Marcos Pivatto, Amanda de Rezende, Ian Castro-Gamboa, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, and Muraleedharan G. Nair

Instituto de Quimica, UNESP-Sao Paulo State University, C.P. 355, CEP 14800-900, Araraquara, SP, Brazil, Departamento de Ciencias Exatas, Federal University of Alfernas, 37130-000, Alfernas, MG, Brazil, and Bioactive Natural Products and Phytochemicals, Department of Horticulture and National Food Safety and Toxicology Center, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824

###### Abstract

Phylochemical work in the search for bioactive metabolites from the methanolic extract of _Senna spectabilis_ green fruits led to the isolation of a new piperidine alkaloid, (+)-3-O-feruloylcassine (**1**), in addition to the known (-)-spectaline (**2**) and (-)-3- O-acetylspectaline (**3**). The isolates were submitted to in vitro evaluation of lipoperoxidation (LPO) and cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX-1 and -2) inhibitory properties and showed moderate antioxidant activities (40-70%) at 100 ppm when compared to commercial standards BHT and vitamin E and moderate inhibition of COX-1 (ca. 40%) and marginal inhibition of COX-2 enzymes (<10%) at 100 ppm when compared to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) aspirin, rofecoxib, and celecoxib, respectively.

The chemotaxonomy of widely occurring _Senna_ and _Cassia_ (Fabaceae) species has been the subject of extensive studies, leading to reclassification of some species, including _Cassia spectabilis_.1 Both of these genera exhibit a broad spectrum of pharmacological properties and ethnomedical uses, especially those associated with inflammation.2-6 In Brazil, the tea of their crushed leaves is used to treat throat inflammation and diarrhea.7 Therefore, many plants belonging to _Senna_ and _Cassia_ species have been or are being studied for their anti-inflammatory botanical extracts or for the isolation of new metabolites with unique chemical structures, mode of action, selectivity, and/or effectiveness. Extracts of species from both genera have been investigated for anti-inflammatory activity using in vitro and in vivo assays. For example, _Cassia italica_ is one of the most studied species due to its analgesic, antipyretic, laxative, and antitumor properties.8 Its ethanolic extract decreased the severity of rat paw edema in a potency comparable to acetylsalicylic acid and inhibited prostaglandin biosynthesis by rat peritoneal leucocytes.9 An extract of _Senna dariensis_ has been used against snakebite and was highly active in the inhibition of the hemorrhagic effect of the venom from _Bothprops atrox_,10 whereas _Senna neglecta_ and _Senna alata_ have been used in southern Brazil and Thailand, respectively, to treat inflammation linked to microbial infection.11,12 _Cassia tora_ and _C. angustifolia_ leaf extracts have also shown anti-inflammatory properties using in vivo models with histamine-induced rat hind paw edema and 12-_O_-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced mouse ear edema, respectively, whereas _C. fistula_ leaves methanolic extract was evaluated in vitro models and efficiently protected free radical-induced lipid peroxidation in model membranes and also inhibited the 5-lipoxygenase-mediated peroxidation of arachidonic acid.13-15

As part of our ongoing research on active metabolites in plants of Cerrado and Atlantic Rain Forest of Sao Paulo State (Brazil), we have recently reported the isolation of several new piperidine alkaloids including (-)-spectaline (**2**), (-)-3-O-acetylspectaline (**3**), and (+)-spectaline from leaves, flowers, and ripe fruits of _Senna spectabilis_, which showed anti-inflammatory and acetylcholinesterase inhibitory properties.16-18 Herein we report the isolation and structure elucidation of a new piperidine alkaloid, (+)-3-O-feruloylcassine (**1**), from unripe fruits of _Senna_ (DC.) Irwin & Barneby), along with the identification of the known alkaloids **2** and **3**. In addition, we also report their free radical scavenging potential toward DPPH, lipoperoxidation (LPO), and cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 (COX-1 and COX-2) inhibitory activities.

Compound **1** was isolated as a pale yellow solid (mp 7-74 \(\U\)C). HRESIMS and elemental analysis of **1** indicated the molecular formula C23H43NO3, with eight degrees of unsaturation. Its IR spectrum suggested the presence of secondary amine (3413, 1514 cm-1), ketone (1710 cm-1), and olefinic (3050, 1629, 1529 cm-1) moieties. The 'H NMR spectroscopic signals for two vital olefinic methines at d 7.68 (d, \(J\) = 15.5 Hz, H-7 ) and d 6.36 (d, \(J\) = 15.5 Hz, H-8 ) with a _trans_ relative configuration, three aromatic methanes at d 7.06 (brs, H-2 ), d 7.00 (d, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz, H-6 ), and d 6.82 (d, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz, H-5 ), and three methyl protons at d 3.81 (s, H-10 ) suggested a derived moiety in compound **1**. This spectrum also gave signals for one oxymethine hydrogen at d 4.99 (brs, H-3), three methyl protons at d 1.19 (m, H-7), and two methines at d 3.14 (m, H-2) and 2.80 (m, H-6). The two multiplets at d 1.62 and 1.48, integrated for four protons, were assigned to H-46/H-54\({}_{\text{eq}}\) and H-46/H-54\({}_{\text{av}}\), respectively, on the basis of correlations observed in the 'H-1H COSY spectrum. Signals for methylene protons at d 1.48 (m, H-1 ), 1.16-1.21 (m, H-2 -H-9 ), and 2.34 (t, 7.5 Hz, H-10 ) and methyl protons at d 2.06 (s, H-12 ) clearly indicated a long saturated side chain as previously observed in compounds **2** and **3**.16 The \({}^{1}\)C NMR and DEPT-1357 spectra showed signals for three methines carbons at d 69.0, 56.9, and 54.4,

## Page 2

methylene carbons at d 29.1-29.7, and one methyl carbon at d 16.9, which strongly supported the 2,6-disubstituted-piperidin-3-ol ring similar to those reported for (-)-spectaline (**2**) and (-)-3-O-acetylspectaline (**3**)16 (Figure 1).

The joint analysis of the 13C NMR, 1H NMR, and HMBC spectra evidenced signals for a carbonyl carbon at d 209.6, correlating to methylene protons at d 2.34 and to methyl protons at d 2.06, which were assigned to a terminal methyl ketone subunit on the side chain at C-6. The carboxyl signal at d 166.7 correlated to the olefinic methine at d 7.68 in the HMBC spectrum and suggested an a,d-unsaturated conjugation between the piperidine unit and the 1,3,4-trisubstituted aromatic ring. The downfield value of the methine carbon at d 69.0, when compared to that in (-)-spectaline (d 67.9), and its correlation with the H-7 methyl protons led us to propose a conjugated ester at C-3 on the piperidine ring. The HMBC correlations observed for the methoxy protons at d 3.81 to the quaternary carbon at d 147.0 and for the aromatic methines H-2 (d 7.06), H-5 (d 6.82) to the carbon at d 148.3 evidenced the presence of aromatic methoxy and hydroxy substituents at C-3 and C-4 (Figure 1). The NOESY 1D experiment indicated the position of methoxy at C-3 and hydroxy at C-4 on the basis of the sole spatial correlation of the methoxy protons and H-2. All of these assignments were confirmed by additional HMBC correlations and led us to propose the structure of 2-methyl-3-feruloyl-6-(dodecyl-11 -one)piperidine for compound **1**, which was confirmed by the molecular ion peak at _m/z_ 474.3198 in its HRESIMS. The relative configurations at C-2, C-3, and C-6 were established by comparison of the coupling constants observed for **1** with those published for **2** and **3**16,19 and NOESY 1D experiments. The irradiation of the H-2 signal confirmed its relative spatial correlations to H-3, H-4a, H-6, and H-7 protons as _cis_. Therefore, the structure of **1** was assigned as (+)-2-methyl-3-feruloyl-6-(dodecyl-11 -one)piperidine.

The free radical scavenging activity of compounds **1-3** was evaluated spectrophotometrically by using the stable free radical DPPH and measuring the decrease in absorption at 517 nm. Compounds **2** and **3** were weakly active in this assay and exhibited absorbance variation lower than 10% at 60 ppm. However, compound **1** showed moderate activity (%\(\Delta\)A = 40% at 60 ppm) when compared to the standard truth (%\(\Delta\)A = 92% at 60 ppm), which may be associated with the presence of a feruloyl moiety in the structure of **1**.

The lipoperoxidation inhibitory activity of the isolates was evaluated by measurement of the fluorescence decay after adding Fe\({}^{2+}\) to initiate the oxidation of large unilamellar vesicles. The alkaloids were tested at 100 ppm, the extract was tested at 250 ppm, and commercial antioxidants BHT, BHA, and vitamin E were used as standard reference compounds at 1.9, 2.2, and 4.3 ppm, respectively. Alkaloids **2** and **3** exhibited moderate inhibition (ca. 75% after 21 min, Figure 2) of the liposome peroxidation. Alkaloid **1** showed only 50% inhibition of the LPO, despite the presence of a feruloyl moiety in its structure, which is normally associated with an increase in antioxidant activity. This behavior might be at least partly explained by the possible chelation of Fe\({}^{2+}\) ions by compounds **2** and **3**, in contrast to the poor ability for Fe\({}^{2+}\) chelation of compound **1**. The use of AAPH as the free radical initiator, instead of Fe\({}^{2+}\), confirmed this observation by showing a similar trend in lipid peroxidation inhibitory activity (ca. 50%) by compounds **1-3**.

Inhibition of COX-1 and -2 enzyme activity of compounds **1-3** was evaluated by polarographic measurement of the oxygen uptake during the COX-mediated conversion of arachidonic acid into prostaglandins. Each alkaloid was tested at 100 ppm and compared to standard reference compounds refecoxib, celecoxib, and aspirin, which were tested at 1.7, 1.7, and 108 ppm, respectively. Alkaloids **1-3** inhibited COX-1 enzyme by 33, 40, and 58%, respectively. However, the inhibitory activities of COX-2 enzyme by these compounds were marginal (Figure 3).

In summary, we have isolated three alkaloids (**1-3**) from the green fruits of _S. spectabilis_, which showed weak to moderate free radical scavenging activity toward DPPH and moderate lipoperoxidation inhibitory properties. In addition, these compounds displayed moderate anti-inflammatory activities, especially toward COX-1. Additional research is needed to further explain the anecdotal medicinal claims of this fruit and its potential to be considered as a medicinal or dietary supplement.



## Page 3



**Plant Material.** Plant material was collected in February 2004 from a specimen of _Sema specethilis_ cultivated in the Chemistry Institute at Sao Paulo State University (Aararaquara-SP). A voucher (SP 370917) was deposited at the herbarium of Sao Paulo Botanic Garden, Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil.

**Extraction and Isolation.** Green fruits of _S. specethilis_ (8 kg) were ground and extracted with EtOH (5 x 5 L). Evaporation of solvent yielded 676 g of a crude extract (8.5%). The extract was analyzed by TLC (silica gel, CHCl\({}_{3}\)-MeOH\(-\)NH\({}_{4}\)OH, 36:3:1) to confirm the presence of alkaloids by spraying with Dragonoff and iodochloro-platinate reactions. This extract (9 g) was then suspended in MeOH\(-\)H\({}_{2}\)O, 4:1, the insoluble residue was removed by filtration, and the remaining solution was partitioned successively with hexanes, CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{3}\), EtOHac, and \(n\)-BuOH. Analysis of the organic fractions by TLC revealed that most of the alkaloid constituents were concentrated in the CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) fraction (5.7 g). An aliquot of the CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) fraction (1 g) was then fractionated by neutral alumina column chromatography (hexanes/Et\({}_{2}\)O and Et\({}_{3}\)O/MeOH gradients) to give 30 fractions. Fractions 1-3 (30.4 mg) were further purified by neutral alumina column chromatography (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH, 99:1) and gave compounds 2 (3.4 mg) and 3 (9 mg). Fractions 28-30 (402.6 mg) showed strong UV absorption at 254 nm. An aliquot (200 mg) of this mixture was purified by silica gel column chromatography (EtOAc\(-\)MeOH\(-\)TEA, 90:9:9: 0.1) to give alkaloid 1 (20.2 mg).

**(+)-2-Methyl-3-2-(trimethyl-6-dodecyl-11-one)piperidine(1):** pale yellow oil; [a]\({}^{20}\)\(+\)2-9 (1.00, CHCl\({}_{3}\)); UV (MeOH) \(\lambda_{\text{max}}\) (log \(\varepsilon\)) 326 (4.25), 236 (4.03) mm; IR (KBr) \(\nu_{\text{max}}\) 3413, 3050, 2927, 2854, 1710, 1629, 1596, 1515, 1452, 1373 cm\({}^{-1}\); \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\), 500 MHz) \(\delta\) 7.68 (1H, d = 15.5 Hz, H-8 ), 7.06 (1H, br, s-H-2 ), 7.00 (1H, br, d = 8.5 Hz, H-8 ), 8.5 Hz, H-8 ), 6.36 (1H, d = 15.5 Hz, H-7 ), 4.99 (1H, br, s-H-3 ), 331 (3H, s, OCH\({}_{3}\), 3.4 (1H, H, H-2), 2.80 (1H, m, H-6), 2.34 (2H, t = 7.5 Hz, H-10 ), 2.06 (3H, s, H-12 ), 1.62 (2H, m, H-4o/H-5o), 1.48 (6H, m, H-4o/H-5o), 1.48 (6H, m, H-5o/H-H-1 /H-9 ), 1.21-1.16 (1H, hrs, H-2 H-8 ), 1.19 (3H, m, H-7); \({}^{15}\) NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\), 12% MHz) 209 (6C, C-1 ), 1.667 (C, CO feuyl moiety), 148.3 (C, C-4 ), 147 (C, C-3 ), 145 (7H, C-8 ), 126.8 (C, C-1 ), 123.3 (CH, C-6 ), 114.9 (CH, C-7  and C-5 ), 109.6 (CH, C-2 ), 69.0 (CH, C-3), 56.9 (CH, C-6), 55.9 (CH, OCH\({}_{3}\), 54.4 (CH, C-2), 43.8 (CH, C-10 ), 34.9 (CH\({}_{2}\)C,-1 ), 29.1-29.7 (CH, C-4, C-2 \(-\)C-8 ), 25.6 (CH2, C-5), 23.8 (CH2, C-9), 16.9 (CH, C-7); HRESIMs \(m/z\) [M + H]\({}^{4}\) 47.3198 (caled for C2sLaNos 474.3219).

**Determination of Radical-Scavenging Activity.** 2,2-Diphenyl-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) was used as a stable radical in methanol as per the published procedure.\({}^{20}\) Rutin was used as a reference compound.

**Lipid Peroxidation Assay.** This antioxidant bioassay was conducted, as per the published procedure from our laboratory, by analysis of a model liposome oxidation using fluorescence spectroscopy.\({}^{2f}\)

**Cyclooxygenase Enzymes (COX-1 and -2) Inhibitory Assay.** The COX-1 enzyme inhibitory assay was conducted with an enzyme preparation from ram seminal vesicles, and inhibition of COX-2 was performed by using a preparation from insect cell lysate cloned with human PGBIS-2 enzyme as per the published procedure from our laboratory.\({}^{22,23}\)

**Acknowledgment.** This project was partially funded by the Michigan State University Center for Plant Products and Technologies. The authors thank Dr. D. DeWitt, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan Sate University, for providing the insect lysate for the preparation of COX-2 enzyme and Brazilian funding agencies, FAPESP, through the Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (Biota-FAPESP, [http://www.biota.org.br](http://www.biota.org.br), and BIOprospeccTA, www.bioprospecta.org.br), as well as CAPES and CNPq for research grants and scholarships.

**Supporting Information Available:**\({}^{1}\)H NMR, \({}^{13}\)C NMR, DEPT, g-COSY, g-HMBC, g-HMQC, and NOESY of (+)-2-methyl-3-fenolyl-6-(dodecyl-11 -one)piperidine are available free of charge via the Internet at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org).

## References

* (1) Viegas, C., Jr.; Rezende, A.; Silva, D. H. S.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; Bolzani, V. S.; Barreiro, E. J.; Miranda, A. L. P.; Young, M. C. M. _Quim. Noua_**2006**, _29_, 1279-1287.
* (2) Samy, R. P.; Ignacimuth, S. J. _Ethnopharmacol._**2000**, _69_, 63-71.
* (3) Bhakta, T.; Mukherjee, P. K.; Mukherjee, K.; Banerjee, S.; Mandali, S. C.; Maity, T. K.; Pal, M.; Saha, B. P. _J. Elhenopharmacol._**1999**, _66_, 277-282.
* (4) Tona, L.; Nigmbi, N. P.; Taskala, M.; Mesia, K.; Cimanga, K.; Ayers, S.; Bruyne, T. D.; Pieters, L.; Totte, J.; Vlietrick, A. J. J. _Ethnopharmacol._**1999**, _68_, 193-203.
* (5) Jarifi, M. A.; Subhami, M. J.; Javed, K.; Singh, S. _J. Ethnopharmacol._**1999**, _66_, 355-361.
* (6) Mascolo, N.; Capasso, R.; Capasso, F. _Pytochem. Res._**1998**, _12_, S143-145.
* (7) Schenkel, E. P. _Farmacognosia: da Planta au Medicamento_, 4th ed.;: Editors Universitaria-UFRGS: Porto Alegre, 2002; pp 559-561.
* (8) Jain, S. C.; Jain, R.; Sharma, R. A.; Capasso, F. _J. Ethnopharmacol._**1997**, _58_, 135-142.
* (9) Pal, M.; Roy, D. K.; Pal, P. R. _Indian J. Pharm._**1977**, _39_, 116-117.
* (10) Otero, R.; Nunez, V.; Barona, J.; Fonnegra, R.; Jimenez, S. L.; Osorio, R. G.; Saldarriaga, M.; Diaz, A. _J. Eltnopharmacol._**2000**, _73_, 233-241.
* (11) de Souza, G. C.; Haas, A. P. S.; von Poser, G. L.; Schapoval, E. E. S.; Elisabetsky, E. J. _Ellnopharmacol._**2004**, _90_, 135-143.
* (12) Chomawang, M. T.; Surasmos, S.; Nikoloklam, V. S.; Gritsanapan, W. _J. Ethnopharmacol._**2005**, _101_, 330-333.
* (13) Maity, T. K.; Mandali, S. C.; Mukherjee, P. K.; Saha, K.; Das, J.; Pal, M.; Saha, B. P. _Pytochem. Res._**1998**, _12_, 221-223.
* (14) Sunil Kumar, K. C.; Muller, K. _Photocr. Res._**1998**, _12_, 526-528.
* (15) Cuellar, M. J.; Giner, R. M.; Recio, M. C.; Manez, S.; Rios, J. L. _Fitoterapia_**2001**, _72_, 221-229.
* (16) Virgas, C., Jr.; Bolzani, V. S.; Furlan, M.; Barreiro, E. J.; Young, M. C. M.; Tomazela, D.; Eberlin, M. N. _J. Nat. Prod._**2004**, _67_, 908-910.
* (17) Moreira, M. S. A.; Virgas, C., Jr.; Miranda, A. L. P.; Barreiro, E. J.; Bolzani, V. S. _Planta Med._**2003**, _69_, 795-799.
* (18) Pivatto, M.; Crotti, A. E. M.; Lopes, N. P.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; de Rezende, A.; Viegas, C., Jr.; Young, M. C. M.; Furlan, M.; Bolzani, V. S. _J. Brarz. Chem. Soc._**2005**, _16_, 1431-1438.
* (19) Bolzani, V. S.; Gunaitaka, A. A. L.; Kirositon, D. G. I. _Teratheodron_**1995**, _21_, 5929-5934.
* (20) Ribeiro, A. B.; Bolzani, V. S.; Yoshida, M.; Santos, L. S.; Eberlin, M. N.; Silva, D. H. S. _J. Brarz. Chem. Soc._**2005**, _16_, 526-530.
* (21) Arora, A.; Nair, M. G.; Strasburg, G. M. _Free Radical Biol. Med._**1998**, _24_, 1355-1363.
* (22) Laneville, O.; Breuer, D. K.; De Witt, D. L.; Hla, T.; Funk, C. D.; Smith, W. L. _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther._**1994**, _271_, 927-934.
* (23) Wu, D.; Nair, M. G.; DeWitt, D. L. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2002**, _50_, 701-705.



