# 10.1016@j.phytol.2012.05.004.pdf

## Page 1



# Meroterpenes isolated from the endophytic fungus Guignardia mangiferae

Denise O. Guimaraes

Corresponding author at: Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Av. do Cafc, s/n, 14040-903 Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil. Tel.: +55 16 36024710; fax: +55 16 36024178.E-mail: address: mtpapot@ifr.usp.br

Norberto P. Lopes

Nonica T. Pupo

Current address: Campus du Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro-Macale, Av. Aluita da Silva Gomes, 50, Granja das Cavalieres, 27930-560 Macale, RJ, Brazil. Departamento de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 14040-903 Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Departamento de Fisica e Quimica, Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 14040-903 Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Two new guignardones and one tricycloalternarene derivatives, named guignardone D, E (**2**-**3**) and tricycloalternarene F (**4**), and the known guignardone A (**1**) were isolated from _Guignardia mangiferae_, an endophytic fungus from the leaves of _Viguiera arenaria_ (Asteraceae), after fermentation in Czapek medium. Structures were established on the basis of their spectroscopic data, including \({}^{1}\)H NMR, \({}^{13}\)C NMR, HMQC, HMBC and HRES-MS.

## 1 Introduction

Endophytic fungi are inhabitants of healthy plants that do not cause apparent disease symptoms and can even be beneficial to their hosts (Stadler and Schulz, 2009). The symbiotic relationship between fungi and plants can have profound effects on the plant ecology, fitness, evolution, shaping plant communities and manifesting strong effects on the community structure and diversity of associated organisms (Rodriguez et al., 2009). Endophytic microorganisms represent a very particular ecological niche able to produce a huge chemical diversity, as a consequence of their biological and biochemical evolution. Therefore, these microorganisms play an important role in natural product discovery. Several new bioactive natural products have been isolated from endophytes with potential application as drug leads and agrochemicals (Borges et al., 2009; Gallo et al., 2008; Gunatilaka, 2006; Guo et al., 2008).

In our ongoing research on natural products from endophytic fungi found in association with Asteraceae species we have found several bioactive extracts (Gallo et al., 2009; Guimaraes et al., 2008), as well as bioactive and new compounds (Borges and Pupo, 2006; Borges et al., 2011; Gallo et al., 2009, 2010; Guimaraes et al., 2008, 2010). The crude ethyl acetate extract from the endophytic fungus _Guignardia mangiferae_ has previously shown weak antimicrobial activity (Guimaraes et al., 2008). Recent studies of an endophyte _G. mangiferae_, associated with healthy _flex corunta_ leaves, led the isolation of guignardones A-C (Yuan et al., 2010), meroterpenes closely related to tricycloalternarenes derivatives (Liebermann et al., 1997; Qiao et al., 2007; Yuan et al., 2008). We now report the isolation and structure elucidation of new guignardones and tricycloalternarene derivatives obtained from the Czapek culture broth of _G. mangiferae_.

## 2 Results and discussion

The molecular formula of **1** was established as C17H22O4 according to MS and NMR data. Our NMR data were in agreement with those previously published by Yuan et al. (2010) for guignardone A, a metabolite from the endophytic fungus _G. mangiferae_ found in association with _l. corunta_. The relative stereochemistry of guignardone A (**1**) was established by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis and the absolute configuration was inferred by comparison of calculated and experimental electronic circular dichroism (ECD) (Yuan et al., 2010). In order to check the absolute stereochemistry for **1** experimental ECD was obtained and two positive Cotton effects at 225 nm and 261 nm and a negative Cotton effect at 294 nm (Supplementary data) were coincident for (45,6R,95,10R,14_R_)-guignardone A, corroborating with data in the literature (Yuan et al., 2010).

Guignardone D (**2**) was established as C17H22ClO4 according to MS and NMR data. The RMS diffusers data gave an [M+H]\({}^{+}\) ion at \(m/z\) 325.1185 and [M+Na]\({}^{+}\) ion at \(m/z\) 347.1008 calc. for C17H22ClO4 325.1206 and C17H21CNaO4 347.1026, respectively. \({}^{1}\)H NMR and

## Page 2

\({}^{13}\)C NMR data for compound **2** showed similarity for tetracyclic moiety compared to compound **1**. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum showed a hydrogen at \(\delta\) 3.51 (_d_, H-7a) coupled to a hydrogen at \(\delta\) 3.81 (_d_, H-7b) with \(J\) = 7.7 Hz. The HMQC experiment showed correlation between hydrogens H-7a and H-7b with the carbon at \(\delta\) 70.3 (C-7). The hydrogen at \(\delta\) 2.46 (_dd_, H-5b) is coupled to the hydrogen at \(\delta\) 2.03 (_d_, H-5a) with \(J\) = 10.5 Hz and also to the hydrogen at \(\delta\) 4.55 (_d_, H-4) with \(J\) = 5.6 Hz. Analyses of the HMQC showed correlation of H-5a and H-5b hydrogens with the carbon at \(\delta\) 43.6 (C-5) and analyses of the HMBC showed that these hydrogens correlate with carbons at \(\delta\) 70.3 (C-7), \(\delta\) 78.0 (C-4), \(\delta\) 81.5 (C-6), \(\delta\) 172.2 (C-3) and \(\delta\) 198.4 (C-1). Furthermore, hydrogen at \(\delta\) 4.55 (H-4) showed a correlation with carbon at \(\delta\) 102.6 (C-2). Based on these data it was possible to establish rings C and D for **2** (see Fig. 1). The structural determination of rings A and B of compound **2** was possible after analyses of the HMQC spectrum, which shows the hydrogens at \(\delta\) 2.42 (_br_, H-8b) and \(\delta\) 2.21 (_br_, H-8a) attached to a carbon at \(\delta\) 15.3 (C-8) and also HMBC correlations with carbons at \(\delta\) 102.6 (C-2), \(\delta\) 44.1 (C-9) and \(\delta\) 89.1 (C-10), indicating the proximity of the methylene group (CH2-8) to rings A and C. Hydrogens at \(\delta\) 4.97 (_br_, H-16a) and \(\delta\) 5.22 (_br_, H-16b) showed correlations with the carbon at \(\delta\) 114.6 (C-16), via HMQC. Moreover, H-16a and H-16b showed correlation with the carbon at \(\delta\) 43.9 (C-14) and the methylenic carbon at \(\delta\) 47.3 (C-17), a carbon proposed to be attached to a chlorine atom based on the isotope pattern observed in the HRESIMUS (Supplementary data) and the deshielded carbon chemical. These data allowed us to establish the side chain attached to the carbon **14** of compound **2** with an addition methylenic and chlorine atom instead of the methyl group found in guignardone A (**1**). Guignardone E (**3**) showed similar \({}^{1}\)H NMR and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data compared to the tetracyclic moiety (rings A-D) of guignardones A (**1**) and D (**2**). The main difference observed were the signals of the side chain attached to the carbon C-14. Guignardone E (**3**) was established as C22H2gClO4 according to MS and NMR data. The HRESIMUS data gave an [M+H]\({}^{\ast}\) ion at _m_/_z_ 393.1805 calc. for C22H30ClO4 393.1832. Analyses of HMQC data showed hydrogens at \(\delta\) 4.95 (_br_, \(s\), H-21b) and \(\delta\) 4.87 (_br_, \(s\), H-21a) attached with the carbon at \(\delta\) 114.2 (C-21) and these hydrogens also correlate via HMBC with a methyl carbon at \(\delta\) 16.8 (C-22) and a methylen carbon at \(\delta\) 65.7 (C-19). Methyl hydrogens at \(\delta\) 17.5 (_s_, H-22) showed HMBC correlation with the quaternary carbon at \(\delta\) 143.7 (C-20) and with carbons at \(\delta\) 114.2 (C-21) and \(\delta\) 65.7 (C-19). Attachment of the vinylic hydrogen at \(\delta\) 5.20 (_br_, H-17) with the carbon at \(\delta\) 123.5 (C-17) was evident in the HMQC spectrum. The hydrogen at \(\delta\) 5.20 (_br_, H-17) also showed HMBC correlations with carbons at \(\delta\) 17.9 (C-16) and \(\delta\) 41.3 (C-14). HMQC analyses showed that hydrogens at \(\delta\) 1.63 (s, H-16) are attached to the carbon at \(\delta\) 17.9 (C-16) and HMBC analysis showed that this hydrogen correlates with three different carbons: a quaternary carbon at \(\delta\) 136.5 (C-15), and two methylnic carbons at \(\delta\) 41.3 (C-14) and \(\delta\) 123.5 (C-17). On the basis of above data and analysis of the isotope pattern in the mass spectrum, the side chain attached to the ring A at C-14 was proposed to have a chlorine atom at C-19 (\(\delta\) 65.7).

The molecular formula of tricyclolalternare F (_A_) was established as C17H2O4 according to MS and NMR data. The HRESIMUS data gave an [M+H]\({}^{\ast}\) ion at _m_/_z_ 293.1747; [M+Na]\({}^{\ast}\) ion at _m_/_z_ 315.1566 and [M+K]\({}^{\ast}\) ion at _m_/_z_ 331.1311 calc. for C17H25O4 293.1752, C17H2aNo4 315.1572 and C17H24KO4 331.1311, respectively. \({}^{1}\)H NMR and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data for compound **4** showed similarity for both tricyclic moiety (rings A-C) and side chain attached to the C-14 compared with compound **1**. The main differences in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum were the signals at \(\delta\) 3.48 (_s_, H-7), \(\delta\) 4.25 (_br_, H-4) which were not observed for guignardone A (**1**), and the signals at \(\delta\) 2.25 (_m_, H-5a) and \(\delta\) 2.36 (_m_, H-5b) that showed different multiplicity when compared to **1**. Analyses of the HMQC spectrum showed that hydrogens at \(\delta\) 3.48 (H-7) correlates with a carbon at \(\delta\) 58.2 (C-7), characterizing a methyl group in compound **4**. The absence of the hydrogens and carbon signals for the group CH2-7 in **4** compared to **1** suggests that **4** does not have the tetrahydrofuran ring (ring D). The methoxyl group was attached to carbon C-6 through HMBC analyses that showed methoxyl hydrogens H-7 correlated with the carbon at \(\delta\) 79.1 (C-6), and H-6 is correlated to the carbons at \(\delta\) 65.6 (C-4) and \(\delta\) 194.7 (C-1). Key HMBC correlations for the establishment of compounds **2-4** are depicted in Fig. 2.

NOESY data for compounds **2-4** were not conclusive to establish the relative configurations. The lack of NOESY information could be explained by the few amounts isolated of compounds **2-4**. Therefore, we were not able to compare experimental _versus_ calculated electronic circular dichroism (ECD) data for these compounds as carried out for compound **1**. We assume that compounds **2-4** share the same relative configuration determined for **1** based on the proposed cyclization pathway to form the tetracyclic system proposed by Yuan et al. (2010) and the similar optical rotation values for compounds **1** and **2**.

As a part of our search for anticancer and antimicrobial hits, the major metabolite (**1**) was tested in cytotoxic, enzymatic, antiparasitic and antibacterial assays. Guignardone A (**1**) did not show significant activities either against MDA-MD-435 (melanoma), HCT-8 (human colon carcinoma) and SF295 (brain) tumor cell lines or _in vitro_ against _Leishmania major_, _Staphylococcus aureus_ and _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_. No inhibitory activity of the enzymes

Fig. 1: Guignardone A, D and E (**1-3**) and tricyclolalternare F (**4**).

Fig. 2: Key HMBC correlations for compounds **2–4**.



## Page 3

adenosil-phosphoribosyl-transferase (APRT) from _Leishmania tartonale_ and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (GAPDH) from _Trypanosoma cruzi_ was also observed.

There are few examples of tricycloalternarenes (TCAs) and bicycloalternarenes (BCAs) in the literature and these compounds have been isolated from the phytopathogenic fungus _Alternaria alternate_ (Liebermann et al., 1997, 2000; Nussbaum et al., 1999; Qiao et al., 2007; Yuan et al., 2008). These compounds are closely related to the minor _Alternaria citri_ tangerine-toxins (ACTG-toxins) which damage leaves of sensitive varieties of _Citrus reticulate_ (Nussbaum et al., 1999). However, their exact biological function has not been clarified and together with other compounds they may serve as nonspecific phytotoxins (Qiao et al., 2007). Known TCAs derivatives have been reported to act as non-specific toxins and show positive results in leaf-puncture assays by causing spreading brown lesions and necrotic effects (Liebermann et al., 1997, 2000; Nussbaum et al., 1999). Moreover, TCA 2b, a compound previously described, showed cytotoxic activity against A-549 and HL-60 with 88.6% and 98.7% inhibition, respectively, when tested at 16 mg/mL (Yuan et al., 2008).

Biosynthetic feeding experiments of bicycloalternarenes, intermediates of tricycloalternarenes, indicate that these compounds are mixed terpenoids (Liebermann et al., 2001). The terpenoid moiety is characterized by the combination of three isoprene units biosynthesized _via_ mevalonate pathway and the nonterpenoid part, a six membered cyclic a,b-unsaturated ketone, derivated from the sublimate pathway (Liebermann et al., 2001).

The structural elucidation of guigandones derivatives was recently published by Yuan et al. (2010) and they are very similar to tricycloalternarenes compounds, except for the presence of the tetrahydrofuran ring, which originates a tetracyclic moiety instead of a tricyclic one. More recently, two tricycloalternarenes related to compound **4** and one diastereomer of **1** were also isolated from the endophytic fungus _Pycoporus sanguineus_ and named cobalonics; however neither ECD was not applied to determine the absolute configuration of the last compound nor complete NOESY data were reported for the tricycloalternarenes (Molinar et al., 2012). There are also two additional guigandones derivatives described, guigandone B and C (Yuan et al., 2010), and we hereby decided to maintain the guigandrone nomination for the tetracyclic compounds and tricycloalternarene nomination for the compound **4** that showed a more compatible ring system compared to tricycloalternarenes derivatives.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

Optical rotations were measured with a JASCO DIP-370 spectrometer. UV spectra were obtained in methanol (MeOH) solution using a SHIMADZU PC 1520 spectrophotometer and IR spectra were measured with a Perkin-Elmer spectrum-RX-IFTR system. NMR experiments were recorded on BRUKER DRX-500 spectrometer with CDCl3 as solvent. High-resolution ESI-MS data were obtained on an Ultro-TOF (Bruker-daltonics, Billarica, USA). Column chromatographies were carried out on silica gel 60 (Merck, 0.063-0.200 mm) and TLC chromatographies on silica gel/TLC-cards (DC-Alufolien - Kieselgel - Fluka).

### Microorganism

Endophytic fungus strain code VA15 was isolated from _Viguiera arenaria_ and identified as _G. mangiferae_ on the basis of its ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequence (Guimaraes et al., 2008). The strain has been maintained on potato dextrose agar slants, on agar plugs in sterile water and on silica-gel (1-4 mm Synth, Brazil), stored at 4 degC, at "Laboratorio de Quimica de Micro-organisms - FCFRP-USP".

### Culturing of microorganism and isolation of compounds

The fungus _G. mangiferae_ was cultured using a two-step fermentation process. First, suspension of the mycelium was aseptically inoculated into 1000 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL of seed medium (Jackson et al., 1993). The flasks were incubated for 48 h at 30 degC on a rotary shaker (New Brunswick Scientific Co., Inc., model INNOVA TM 4300 - NJ, USA) operating at 120 rpm. The mycelia were aseptically vacuum filtered from the culture broths (discarded) and transferred into 2000 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 400 mL of Czapek fermentation medium (Alviano et al., 1992). Eleven flasks were used for _G. mangiferae_ fermentation (4400 mL culture medium). The cultures were incubated for additional 20 days at 30 degC, 120 rpm. After fermentation the culture broth was separated from the mycelia by vacuum filtration and extracted with ethyl acetate (EtOAc) and _n_-butanol (BuOH). The organic solvents were evaporated under vacuum, yielding the organic crude extracts.

The BuOH extract (1.64 g) was solubilized in methanol (MeOH) and the MeOH-soluble fraction (789 mg) was subjected to preparative silica gel 60 H column chromatography eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 7:3 (100 mL), _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1 (100 mL), _n_-hexane/EtOAc 3:7 (100 mL), EtOAc 100% (100 mL) and MeOH 100% (100 mL) yielding 5 fractions. Sub-fraction 3 (30.7 mg), obtained from _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1, was subjected to silica gel 60 column chromatography eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1 and MeOH 100% (100 mL) to yield 5 fractions. Sub-fractions 2.1 (4.2 mg) and 2.0 (150 mL) and MeOH 100% (100 mL) to yield 5 fractions. Sub-fractions 2.1 (4.2 mg) and 2.0 (3.2 mg) were submitted to preparative TLC in silica gel eluted with _n_-hexane/EtOAc 1:1. Compound **3** (1.6 mg; \(R\) = 2.6, _n_-hexane/EtOAc 7:3) and compound **2** (0.5 mg; \(R\) = 3.2, _n_-hexane/EtOAc 7:3) were isolated from sub-fractions 2.1 and 2.2, respectively.



## Page 4



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l l l l l l l l l} Position & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Compound 1} & \multicolumn{4}{c}{Compound 2} & \multicolumn{4}{c}{Compound 3} & \multicolumn{4}{c}{Compound 4} \\ \multicolumn{1}{c}{\(\&\)} & \(

## Page 5


## References

* Alviano et al. (1992) Alviano, C.S., Farblarz, S.R., Travassos, L.R., Anglauster, J., Souza, W., 1992. Effect of environmental factors on Fonseca pedrosoi morphogenesis with emphasis on scleptic cells induced by propranolol. Mycopathologia 119, 17-23.
* Borges et al. (2011) Borges, W.S., Mancilla, G., Guimaraes, D.O., Duran-Patron, R., Colado, I.G., Pupo, M.T., 2011. Azabilonines from the endophyte _Chaetomium globosum_. J. Nat. Prod. 74, 1182-1187.
* Borges et al. (2009) Borges, W.S., Borges, K.B., Bonato, P.S., Said, S., Pupo, M.T., 2009. Endophytic fungi: natural products, enzymes and biotransformation reactions. Curr. Opin. Chem. 13, 1137-1163.
* Borges and Pupo (2006) Borges, W.S., Pupo, M.T., 2006. Novel anthraquinone derivatives produced by _Phoma sorghum_, an endophyte found in association with the medicinal plant _Tithonia diversifolia_ (Asteraceae). J. Haz. Chem. Soc. 17, 929-934.
* Gallo et al. (2010) Gallo, M.B.C., Cavalcanti, B.C., Barros, F.W.A., Moraes, M.O., Costa-Lotuffo, L.V., Pessoa, C.O., Bastos, J.K., Pupo, M.T., 2010. Chemical constituents of _Pepulaspora_ immersa, an endophyte from _Smallanthus sonchithilus_ (Asteraceae), and their cytotoxic activity. Chem. Biodivers. 7, 2941-2950.
* Gallo et al. (2009) Gallo, M.B.C., Chagas, F.O., Almeida, M.O., Macedo, C.C., Cavalcanti, B.C., Barros, F.W.A., Moraes, M.O., Costa-Lotuffo, L.V., Pessoa, C.O., Bastos, J.K., Pupo, M.T., 2009. Endophytic fungi found in association with _Smallanthus sonchithilus_ (Asteraceae) as resourceful producers of cytotoxic bioactive natural products. J. Basic Microbiol. 49, 142-151.
* Gallo et al. (2008) Gallo, M.B.C., Guimaraes, D.O., Momenso, L.S., Pupo, M.T., 2008. Natural products from endophytic fungi. In: Saikai, R., Bezbaruah, R.L., Bora, T.C. (Eds.). Microbial Biotechnology. New India Publishing Agency, New Delhi, pp. 139-168.
* Guimaraes et al. (2008) Guimaraes, D.O., Borges, W.S., Kawano, C.Y., Ribeiro, P.H., Goldman, G.H., Nomizo, A., Thiemann, O.H., Oliva, G., Lopes, N.P., Pupo, M.T., 2008. Biological activities from extracts of endophytic fungi isolated from _Viguiera arenaria and Titridium desifolia_. EMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 52, 134-144.
* Guimaraes et al. (2010) Guimaraes, D.O., Borges, W.S., Vieira, N.J., Oliveira, L.F., Silva, C.H.T., Lopes, N.P., Dias, L.G., Duran-Patron, R., Colado, I.G., Pupo, M.T., 2010. Dictyoperizanines produced by endophytic fungi found in association with two Asteraceae species. Phytochemistry 71, 1423-1429.
* Gunatilaka (2006) Gunatilaka, A.AL., 2006. Natural products from plant-associated microorganisms: distribution, structural diversity, bioactivity and implications of their occurrence. J. Nat. Prod. 69, 509-526.
* Guo et al. (2008) Guo, B., Wang, Y., Sun, X., Tang, K., 2008. Bioactive natural products from endophytes: a review. Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 44, 136-142.
* Jackson et al. (1993) Jackson, M., Karwowski, J.P., Humphrey, P.E., Kohl, W.L., Barlow, G.J., Tanaka, S.K., 1993. Calibris, novel antifungal agents produced by _Penicillium restrcient_. J. Antidot. 46, 34-38.
* Liebermann et al. (1997) Liebermann, B., Ellinger, R., Gunther, W., Ihn, W., Gallander, H., 1997. Tricycloal-ternarenes produced by _Alternaria alternate_ related to CCTG-toxins. Phytochemistry 46, 267-303.
* Liebermann et al. (2000) Liebermann, B., Nussbaum, R.-P., Gunther, W., 2000. Bicycloalternarenes produced by the phytopathogenic fungus _Alternaria alternata_. Phytochemistry 55, 987-992.
* Liebermann et al. (2001) Liebermann, B., Nussbaum, R.-P., Gunther, W., Teuscher, J.-M., 2001. Biosynthesis of the Dictyocelinarenarenes, mixed terpenoids of _Alternaria alternata_. Phytochemistry 56, 551-557.
* Molinar et al. (2012) Molinar, E., Rios, N., Spadafora, C., Arnold, A.E., Coley, P.D., Kursar, T.A., Gerwick, W.H., Cudilla-Rios, L., 2012. Coloniones a new class of metrepenoids produced by _Pycompos samiines_. Tetrahedron Lett. 53, 919-922.
* Nussbaum et al. (1999) Nussbaum, R.-P., Gunther, W., Heinze, S., Liebermann, B., 1999. New tricycloalternares produced by the phytopathogenic fungus _Alternaria alternata_. Phytochemistry 52, 593-599.
* Qiao et al. (2007) Qiao, L.-R., Yuan, L.G., Gao, J.-M., Zhao, P.J., Kang, K.-J., Shen, Y.-M., 2007. Tricycloal-ternare derivatives produced by an endophyte _Alternaria_ isolated from _Mytetus_ hocker1. J. Basic Microbiol. 47, 340-343.
* Rodriguez et al. (2009) Rodriguez, J.F., Muhlerj-F., Arnold, A.E., Redman, S.K., 2009. Fungal endophytes: diversity and functional roles. New Phytol. 182, 314-330.
* Stadler and Schulz (2009) Stadler, M., Schulz, B., 2009. High energy biofuel from endophytic fungi? Trends Plant Sci. 14, 333-355.
* Yuan et al. (2008) Yuan, L., Zhao, P.J., Ma, J., Li, G.-H., Shen, Y.-M., 2008. Tricycloalternarenes A-E: five new mixed terpenoids from the endophyte fungal strain _Alternaria alternata_ Ly83. Heiv. Chim. Acta 91, 1588-1594.
* Yuan et al. (2010) Yuan, W.H., Liu, M., Jiang, N., Guo, Z.K., Ma, J., Zhang, J., Song, Y.C., Tan, R.X., 2010. Guigrandones A-C: three metorepenes from _Guigrandia magnifera_. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 6348-6353.



