# 10.1016@0031-9422(80)83207-9.pdf

## Page 1



# Structural Confirmation of Dihydrocinnamic Acids from _Adiscanthus Fusciflorus_ by 13C Nmr*

Paulo C. Vieira, Marden A. de Alvarnega, Otto R. Gottlieb, Maria de Nazare, V. McDougal, Francisco de A. M. Reis

# Abstract

In the wood of _Adiscanthus fusciflorus_ six known alkaloids 4-methoxy-2-quinolone, 1-methyl-4-methoxy-2-quinolone, dictamine, skimming, g-tagarine and N-methylflindersine and two new dihydrocinnamic acids 3-[2',6'-dimethoxy-6',6''-dimethylpyrano(2',3'':4',3')phenyl]-propionic acid and its methyl ester were identified. The structures of the dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives were confirmed by 13C NMR.

## 1 _Adiscanthus fusciflorus_

Ducke, an arborous Rutaceae species from the Amazon region, contains in a section of its trunk (bark included) 4-methoxy-2-quinolone, 1-methyl-4-methoxy-2-quinolone, dictamine and skimming [3], g-tagarine [4] and \(N\)-methylflindersine. All these alkaloids have been separated previously from other rutaceous species, the first four inclusively from another Amazonian species, _Horia longifolia_ Spr. ex Engl. [3], and the last one by \(N\)-methylation of natural flindersine [5]. Their identification was based on spectra and direct comparison with authentic samples.

Two additional constituents, isolated from the same extract of _A. fusciflorus_, were the dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives **1a** and **1b**, which, jointly with dihydrocinnamyl alcohols such as **1c**[6], had been previously found in _Horia badini_ M.A. Lisboa. The structural elucidation of these natural products had been based chiefly on the interpretation of 'H NMR spectra. Their _re_-isolation was therefore an opportunity to test the proposed formulae by 13C NMR.

The phloroglucinol type substitution for **1a** can be safely accepted from 'HNMR evidence for the sole aromatic proton (d6.18). The corresponding unsubstituted C-5' must indeed be vicinal to only one methoxyl (d655.3), 13C NMR showing the other one (d620) to be flanked by two _ortho_ substituents. The signals due to the corresponding _ipso_-carbons (C-6' 8 158.5, C-2' 8 154.9) can be easily assigned due to their complex secondary splitting in the fully protone-coupled C spectrum. In this same spectrum, signals of the _ipso_-carbons C-2" and C-3" show a contrastingly simpler splitting pattern which can be eliminated by decoupling respectively at the resonance frequencies of H-4" (double irradiation at \(d\) 6.48) and H-5" (double irradiation at \(d\) 5.45). These decoupling experiments were additionally very useful in the confirmation of the respective assignment of signals to C-4" and C-5" since the first order C--H couplings are eliminated. Finally, double irradiation at the frequency of the gem-dimethyl protons (d6.138) collapsed the fine splitting of the C-5' signal, confirming the vicinality of this carbon and CMe2. At this stage, since correlation of signals to carbons of the propionic acid moiety is trivial, only the signals at d6113.7 and 75.5 remained to be assigned, a task performed by comparison with model compounds **2**[7] and **3**[8], respectively.

The spectrum of **1a** served as the basis in the interpretation of the spectra of **1b**, dihydro-**1b** and **1c**. The suppression of the 4'',5''-double bond of **1b** in dihydro-**1b** caused a paramagnetic shift of the C-2" signal (Dd6.4), an expression of the endocytic homoallylic effect [9]. Most significantly, from the

## Page 2

point of view of structural confirmations, the C-6' (d 158.5) and C-3' (d 19.0) peaks of **1a** appear at higher (d 130.2) and lower (d 24.9) field, respectively, in the spectrum of **1c**. This is due to the absence in this compound of MeO-6' which thus fails to shield C-3 through a _g_-effect.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of the constituents._ _Adiscanthus fusciformis_ Ducke was collected near Manaus, AM and identified by W. A. Rodrigues, botanist, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia. Powdered trunkwood and bark (2 kg) were extracted with EtOH. The extract (20 g) was suspended in hexane, filtered, the hexane evapd and the residue (7 g) submitted to dry column chromatography (Si gel deactivated with 10% H2O, C6H6-CHCl3, 9:1). The column was extruded and divided into 8 equal parts which gave from bottom to top 8 fractions. Fraction 4 was purified by TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc, 7:3) giving **1a** (300). Fractions 5 and 6 were washed with hexane to give **1b** (200 mg). Fraction 7 contained 1-methyl-4-methoxy-2-quinolone. The hexane insol. part of the extract was suspended in CHCl3 and filtered. The CHCl3 was evapd and the residue (6 g) submitted to Si gel (120 g) column chromatography, elution with CHCl3-MeOH, 100:0 to 95:5, giving fractions A to G. Fraction B was purified by TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc, 4:1) to give **1a** (60 mg). Fraction C was separated by TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc, 7:3) into dictanine (20 mg) and _g_-flagarine (60 mg). Fraction D was purified similarly to give N-methyl-thindersene (50 mg). Fraction E was separated by TLC (Si gel, C6H6-EtOAc, 3:2) into skimminaine (20 mg) and 1-methyl-4-methoxy-2-quinolone. Fraction G was washed and cryst. from EtOH to give 4-methoxy-2-quinolone. Fractions A and F did not lead to pure compounds.

###### Acknowledgements.

This work was supported by grants from Fundaao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos. The authors are indebted to Prof. Ayssor P. Mourao, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, CNPq, Manaus, for the plant extract; and to Dr. Adolfo P. de Padua, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, for compound **1c**.

## References

* (1) Correa, D. de B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Padua, A. P. de (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18,** 351.
* (2) Morel, A. F., Bravo, R. V. F., Reis, F. de A. M. and Raveda, E. A. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18,** 473.
* (3) Correa, D. de B., Gottlieb, O. R., Padua, A. P. de and Rocha, A. I. da (1976) _Rev. Latinoam. Quim._**7,** 43.
* (4) Robertson, A. V. (1963) _Aust. J. Chem._**16,** 451.
* (5) Fiarte, J., Kincl, F. A., Rosenkranz, G. and Sondheimer, F. (1956) _J. Chem. Soc._ 4170.
* (6) Correa, D. de B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Padua, A. P. de (1975) _Phytochemistry_**14,** 2059.
* (7) Archer, R. A., Johnson, D. W., Hagaman, E. W., Moreno, L. N. and Wenkert, E. (1977) _J. Org. Chem._**42,** 490.
* (8) Wenkert, E., Buckwalter, B. L., Burfitt, I. R., Gasic, M. J., Gottlieb, H. E., Hagaman, E. W., Schell, F. M. and Wovkulich, P. M. (1976) _Topics in Carbon_-13 NMR Spectroscopy (Levy, G. C., ed.) Vol. 2. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
* (9) Wenkert, E., Cochran, D. W., Hagaman, E. W., Schell, F. M., Neuss, N., Kature, A. S., Potier, P., Kan, C., Plat, M., Koch, M., Mehri, H., Poisson, J., Kunesch, N. and Rolland, Y. (1973) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**95,** 4990.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} \hline C & **1a** & **1b** & Dihydro-**1b** & **1c** & **2[7]** & **3[8]** \\ \hline MeO-1 & \multicolumn{4}{c}{51.2} \\
1 & 173.5 & 176.5 & 179.5 & 61.4 \\
2 & 34.0 & 33.8 & 34.2 & 33.5 \\
3 & 19.0 & 18.7 & 19.0 & 24.9 \\
1′ & 113.7 & 113.5 & 113.0 & 125.7 & \\
2′ & 154.9 & 154.4 & 153.4 & 153.4 & 158.1 \\ MeO-2′ & 62.0 &

