# 10.1016@j.phytol.2013.08.014.pdf

## Page 1



# Microbial transformation of b-lapachone to its glycosides by Cunninghamella elegans ATCC 10028b

Camila R. Paludo, Eduardo A. da Silva-Junior, Raquel A. Santos, Monica T. Pupo, Flavio S. Emery, Niege A.J.C. Furtado

corresponding author. Tel.: +55 16 36024305; fax: +55 16 36024178.E-mail addresses:niege@cfr.ups.br, niege10@yahoo.com.br 1874-3900/$ - see front matter (c) 2013 Phytochemical Society of Europe. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

###### Abstract

B-lapachone (1) has entered phases I and II clinical trials for the treatment of solid tumors and the therapeutic efficacy of b-lapachone is closely related to its metabolic process. In order to contribute to a better understanding of human metabolism of b-lapachone, _Cunninghamella elegans_ ATCC 10028b was used as a microbial model of mammalian metabolism to biotransformation b-lapachone and two new glycosylated derivatives were produced. The chemical structures were elucidated as 6-hydroxy-2-dimethyl-3.4-dihydro-2H-naphthol[1,2-b]pyran-5-O-b-glucopyranoside (2) and 5-hydroxy-2-2-di-methyl-3.4-dihydro-2H-naphthol[1,2-b]pyran-6-O-b-glucopyranoside (3) by "H NMR, 13C NMR, HMBC, COSY and HRMS analyses. The major derivative (3) displayed a lower activity against breast cancer cell the XBR-3 (\(\text{I}_{\text{C}50}\) = 312.5 mM) than b-lapachone (\(\text{I}_{\text{C}50}\) = 5.6 mM), but did not show cytotoxicity against normal fibroblasts cell line GM07492-A, whereas b-lapachone was highly toxic (\(\text{I}_{\text{C}50}\) = 7.25 mM). These metabolites were reported here for the first time and are similar to those that occur in phase II of human metabolism

## 1 Introduction

b-lapachone (1) (Fig. 1), an _ortho_-naphthoquinone found as a minor constituent in the heartwood of the _Tabebuia_ species (Silva et al., 2003), can also be synthetically produced from precursors such as lapachol (Claessens et al., 2010). This naphthoquinone remains to be a promising anticancer agent and has been included in clinical trials as monotherapy and in combination with other cytotoxic drugs (Miao et al., 2009). Several studies report the pharmacological activity of this molecule against different cancer cell lines and highlighted the great potential for its application (D'annee et al., 2020; Moon et al., 2010; Dong et al., 2010; Park et al., 2011). Although numerous synthetic studies have been carried out on b-lapachone, there are no previous studies involving the microbial transformation of this naphthoquinone. This approach may contribute to a better understanding of human metabolism of b-lapachone and to produce new derivatives.

Microbial transformation has been used as a useful tool for _in vitro_ drug metabolism studies (Borges et al., 2007). Furthermore, microorganisms can provide better yields of the metabolites when compared with _in vivo_ metabolism studies, producing enough material for toxicological and biological assays (Adelin et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2012).

Fungi of the genus _Cunninghamella_ stand out amongst other genera because can catalyze reactions mimicking the mammalian metabolism (Asha and Vidyavathi, 2009). _Cunninghamella_ species are capable of metabolizing a wide variety of xenobiotics using both phase I and phase II reactions (Zhang et al., 1996; Abourashed et al., 2012), oftentimes giving rise to new compounds (Feng et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2013).

Reactions of phase II of b-lapachone were described in a study of _in vivo_ metabolism with mammalians, including humans. It was reported that in human metabolism are formed conjugates with glucuronic acid and sulfate, as well as an unexpected glucosylsulfate conjugate (Savage et al., 2008). In other studies using _in vitro_ metabolism in cryopreserved hepatocytes from mice, rats, dogs and humans and in human liver and intestinal S9 fractions, b-lapachone was preferably conjugated with glucuronic acid. These derivatives of b-lapachone were identified by mass spectrometry (Miao et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2012) as well as an _o_-methylated metabolite of b-lapachone that was found in rat and human liver microsomes (Lee et al., 2013). In red blood cells, metabolic pathways involved both cleavage on the B-ring (Miao et al., 2008).

The correlation between reactions catalyzed by fungi and human is not trivial. Nevertheless, in this case, on the human

## Page 2

metabolism and on the fungi transformation occurred the same reduction of ring B of b-lapachone, with hydroquinone formation, and consequent conjugation in the reduced site.

This report describes for the first time the production of b-lapachone glycosylated derivatives, which were obtained by microbial transformation using _Cunninghamella elegans_ ATCC 10028b.

## Results and discussion

### Identification of metabolites

The transformation of b-lapachone by _C. elegans_ furnished two major glycosylated derivatives that had not been described in the literature before, which were identified as the regionisomers 6-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-3,4-dihydro-2_H_-naphth[1,2-_b_]pyran-5-O-b-o-glucopyranoside (**2**) and 5-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-3,4-dihydro-2_H_-naphth[1,2-_b_]pyran-6-O-b-o-glucopyranoside (**3**) (Fig. 1).



## Page 3

resembled those of **2**, except for the three signals of sp2 carbons linked to heteroatoms, which were observed at d6c 146.3 (C-5), d6c 132.3 (C-6) and at d6c 147.8 (C-10b) (Table 1). Also, the attachment site of the b-o-glucose moiety at position 6 was confirmed by HMBC correlation of H-1' (d6h 4.58) with C-6 (d6c 132.3) and the position of C-6 was confirmed by correlation between H-7 (d6h 8.32) and C-6 (d6c 132.3).

### Mycelium analysis

The two new glycosylated derivatives **2** and **3**, as well as b-lapachone were detected in the extracts from mycelium (see supplementary data). The derivatives may be produced in the intracellular environment once b-lapachone was also detected or the cells may be retained the products and the substrate. This explains the low yields obtained from this biotransformation procedure determined only considering the culture broth.

### Cytotoxicity assay

In this study, cell cytotoxicity assays were carried out with b-lapachone (**1**) and its major metabolite (**3**) on breast cancer cell line SKBR-3 and normal fibroblasts cell line GM07492-A. Doxorubicin was used as the positive control. The major derivative (**3**) was much less potent against breast cancer cell line SKBR-3 (IC50 = 312.5 mM) than b-lapachone (IC50 = 5.6 mM), which was also less potent than doxorubicin (IC50 = 0.45 mM). Compound **3** did not show cytotoxicity against normal fibroblasts cell line GM07492-A (IC500 > 1000 mM), whereas b-lapachone was highly toxic (IC50 = 7.25 mM), as well as doxorubicin (IC50 = 7.0 mM).

It is well known that nathbtoquinones have particular chemical structure capable of inducing oxidative stress. This ability to act as oxidizing agents may explain some of the toxic and pharmacological activities attributed to these compounds (Pinto and Castro, 2009). Plenty of studies have been reported the correlation between quinone cytotoxic activity and high levels of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQQ1) expression (Siegel et al., 2012). The NQQ1 is overexpressed in breast cancer cells (Siegel and Ross, 2000).

Glycosylation of natural products has emerged as a viable strategy to produce bioactive compounds with improved activity (Gantt et al., 2011). Regarding nathbtoquinone glycosylation, there are few reports on structure-activity relationships (SAR) and only one in which the study of antileukemic effects and SAR were performed. The evaluation of 0- or 5- glycosylated derivatives of juglone concluded that these compounds have potential for new antileukemic agents development (Fedorov et al., 2011).

Even though many b-lapachone derivatives have been synthesized, it is the first time that a b-lapachone glycosylated derivative was produced and evaluated against normal and cancer cell lines. Important anticancer drugs, such as doxorubicin, contain sugars attached to the aglycone core and this portion of the molecule usually participates in the interaction between the drug and the cellular target. The planar aromatic portion of the doxorubicin molecule intercalates between two base pairs of the DNA, while the six-membered daunosamine sugar sits in the minor groove and interacts with flanking base pairs immediately adjacent to the intercalation site, as evidenced by several crystal structures (Gao and Wang, 1995). The results of this study revealed that in the case of b-lapachone the addition of a b-o-glucose moiety reduced the cytotoxic activity against cancer cell line SKBR-3. On the other hand, the glycosylated derivative did not show cytotoxicity against normal fibroblasts, which is an improvement of selectivity, and this information can be valuable for the development of rational approaches to achieving changes in selectivity and to predict individual variability of b-lapachone efficacy, since _C. elegans_ may possess metabolic enzymes similar to mammals.

## Materials and methods

### General experimental procedures

Optical rotations were measured in CH3CN with a JASCO Dip-370 digital polarimeter. A Shimadzu model IRPrestige-21 spectrophotometer was used to obtain the IR spectra, and an Agilent HP 8454-G1103A spectrophotometer was used to record the UV spectra. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra, including one-dimensional, 1H and 13C, and two-dimensional NMR techniques, heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence (HMQC), heteronuclear multiple bond coherence (HMBC) and correlation spectroscopy (COSY), were recorded in CD3OD with a Bruker DRX 500 spectrometer at 500 MHz for 1H and 125 MHz for 13C NMR using residual CD3OD resonances as internal reference. 1H and 13C NMR spectra of all compounds are provided in the Supplementary data.

HPLC analyses of biotransformation and control extracts were performed on a Shimadzu SCL-10Avp multisolvent delivery system equipped with a Shimadzu SPD10Avp photodiode array detector, using a phenyl analytical column (Phenomenex Synergi Polar 4 mm, 80 A, 150 mm x 4.6 mm) with a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min using 10-100% acetonitrile in water over 33 min and an Intel Celeron computer utilizing CLASS-VP software for analytical system control, data collection and processing. The spectral data from the detector were collected over the 200-400 nm range of the absorption spectrum.

Preparative HPLC was performed on a Shimadzu CBM-20A system equipped with a Shimadzu SPD-20A UV/VIS detector, using a phenyl semi-preparative column (Phenomenex Synergi Polar 4 mm, 250 mm x 10 mm) with a flow rate of 3.0 mL/min, utilizing LCSolution software version 1.1. The mobile phase used for separation of metabolites in preparative scale consisted of a steady gradient starting at 50% acetonitrile in water, rising to 65% acetonitrile in water over 20 min and reaching 100% acetonitrile in 30 min.

High-resolution mass spectra (HRMS and HRMS/MS) were recorded on a Bruker Daltonics microTOF II-ESI-TOF operating in the positive ion mode. The samples were diluted in acetonitrile and water (1:1, v/v) at a concentration of 0.02 mg/mL. Accurate mass measurements were achieved using TFA-Na+ (sodiated trifluoroacetic acid) as standard for internal calibration on electrospray ionization time of flight (ESI-TOF).

### Chemicals

b-lapachone was obtained by heterocyclization from lapachol, according to classical semisynthetic procedure (Hooker, 1892). Lapachol was purchased commercially (Sigma-Aldrich).

### Microbial transformation of b-lapachone by C. elegans ATCC 10028b

_C. elegans_ was grown in a three-step culture procedure. The fungus was first grown at 30 degC in Petri dishes containing potato dextrose agar medium (Himedia) for seven days. Then, three agar-mycelium discs of approximately 6 mm in diameter were transferred for 13 x 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks, each holding 50 mL of potato dextrose broth medium (Acumedia) on a rotary shaker operating at 120 rpm at 30 degC for six days. The resulting mycelia were harvested, rinsed and transferred to 13x 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks, each holding 100 mL of Czapek modified medium (glucose 1.0%, NaNO3 0.2%, K2HPO4 0.1%, MgSO4*7H2O 0.05%, KCl 0.05% and FeSO4*7H2O 0.001%). The pH of the medium 

## Page 4

was adjusted to 7.0. The substrate (1, 5 mg) was added to each flask as a solution in dimethyl sulfoxide (5.0 mg/mL). Control flasks consisted of culture medium with fungus and dimethyl sulfoxide without b-lapachone, and culture medium with b-lapachone solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide without fungus. Biotransformation experiments were carried out at 30 degC for 168 h with shaking at 120 rpm. After, the mycelia were separated by filtration and the fermentation broth were combined and extracted three times with ethyl acetate and the solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure to yield a crude extract (88 mg).

The crude extract (88 mg) was submitted to a solid-phase extraction clean-up procedure using C18-E cartridge (JT. Baker) and elution of acetonitrile and water, starting with 100% water and reaching 100% acetonitrile. The eluate was evaporated to dryness, and the fractions of 40% (6 mg) and 50% (17 mg) of acetonitrile were dissolved with acetonitrile and water (1:1, v/v), and submitted to a semi-preparative HPLC to give: (2) 6-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-3,4-dihydro-2_H_-naphtho[1,2-b]pyran-5-O-b-b-glucopyranoside;

0.6 mg, 0.55%; reddish brown amorphous solid; \(\left[\alpha_{0}^{2}\right]_{\text{n}}^{4}-62.7\left(\text{c}\,0.075\text{,}\text{H}_{\text{3}}\text{CN}\right)\); UV (EtOH) _l_max 211, 247, 323, 336 and 421 nm; IR (KBr) _v_max 3380, 2972, 2927, 2872, 2853, 1595, 1401, 1321, 1068, 1012, 764 cm-1; HRMS _m_/2 407.1697 [M+], (caled. for C12H20S 407.1700); and (3) 5-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-3,4-dihydro-2_H_-naphtho[1,2-b]pyran-6-O-b-glucopyranoside; 30 mg, 2.76%; reddish brown amorphous solid; \(\left[\alpha_{0}^{2}\right]_{\text{n}}^{4}-11.5\left(\text{c}\,0.31\text{,}\text{CH}_{\text{3}}\text{CN}\right)\); UV (EtOH) _l_max 215, 243, 264, 294, 305, 322, 337 and 430 nm; IR (KBr) _v_max 3406, 2973, 2927, 2877, 2854, 1601, 1406, 1321, 1008, 762 cm-1; HRMS m/2 407.1699 [M+]+, (caled. for C2H2O8 407.1700).

### Mycelium analysis

The mycelia from biotransformation and control experiments were kept in freezer for 24 h followed by crushing and extraction with ethyl acetate. After 24 h in the organic solvent at room temperature the mixtures were filtered and the solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure. The extracts were analyzed by analytical HPLC (Section 3.1).

### Cytotoxicity assay

The cytotoxic activity was evaluated using the neoplastic cell line SKBR-3 derived from human breast cancer and obtained from Cell Bank of Rio de Janeiro (RJ. Brazil), and normal human fibroblast cell line GM07492-A (Coriell Cell Repositories, USA). Briefly, cells were trypsinized and seeded in 96-well plate at a concentration of 4 x 104 cells/well in DEMEM medium with HAM-F10 (1:1, v/v) (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies). After 24 h incubation at 37 degC (CO2, 5%), the cell cultures were treated with different concentrations of b-lapachone and its derivative (**3**), dissolved in DMSO (1%) in concentrations ranging 50-400 mM, and incubated again for 24 h. Then, cell viability was assessed using the Cell Proliferation kit (I Roche) according to manufacturer's instructions. Doxorubicin 4 mM was used as positive control. The tests were performed in duplicate and repeated three times. Results were analyzed using the GraphPad Sigma (3.1) and IC50 values were calculated from the mean values of data from three wells. The IC50 value, _i.e._, the concentration required to inhibit 50% of proliferation was determined by the linear regression model using GraphPad Prism(r) 5.0 (California, USA).

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the Brazilian funding agencies "Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo" (FAPESP Grants 2011/21700-5, 2011/01303-1 and 2009/51812-0), "Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico" (CNPq), "Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior" (CAPES) for their financial support and to Norberto Peporine Lopes, Jose Carlos Tomaz and Jacqueline Nakau Mendonca (NPPS-FCFRP/USP) for mass spectrometry experiments.

## Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.phytol.2013.08.014](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.phytol.2013.08.014).

## References

* (1) Abourashed, E.A., Mikell, J.R., Khan, LA, 2012. Bioconversion of silylbrin to phase I and II microbial metabolites with retained antioxidant activity. Biogr. Med. Chem. 20, 2784-2788.
* (2) Adelin, E., Martin, M.-T., Bricot, M.-F., Cortial, S., Reatilleau, P., Ouazzani, J., 2012. Biotransformation of natural compounds: unexpected thio conjugation of 5d-642305 with 3-mercaptoethanolate catalyzed by _Aspergillus niger_ ATCC 164404 cells, Phytochemistry **34**, 135-140.
* A microbial model for drug metabolism studies
- A review. Biotechnol. Adv. 27, 16-29.
* (4) Borges, K.B., Borges, W.S., Duop, M.-I., Bonato, P.S., 2007. Endophytic fungi as models for the stereoselective biotransformation of thiordiazine. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 27, 669-674.
* (5) Chen, X., Liu, F., Yan, T., Zhou, X., Wu, L., Liao, K., Wang, G., Hao, H., 2012. Metabolic profile, enzyme kinetics, and reaction phenotyping of B-lapachone metabolism in human liver and intestine in vitro. Mol. Pharm. 9, 3476-3485.
* (6) Claessens, S., Hahonimana, P., Kimpe, N., 2010. Synthesis of naturally occurring napthtofluenopause epoxides and application in the synthesis of b-lapachone. Org. Biomol. Chem. 8, 3790-3795.
* (7) D'Anneo, A., Augello, G., Santulli, A., Giuliano, M., Di Fiore, R., Messina, C., Tesoriere, G., Vento, R., 2010. Facilitated and beta-lapachone synergistically induce apoptosis in human retinoblastoma? 975 b cells by conjugating the levels of phospho-slit. J. Cell. Physiol. 222, 433-443.
* (8) Dong, G.Z., Oh, E.T., Lee, H., Park, M.T., Song, C.W., Park, H.J., 2010. B-lapachone suppresses radiation-induced activation of nuclear factor-xB. Exp. Mol. Med. 24, 327-334.
* (9) Fedorov, S.N., Shubina, L.K., Kuzminch, A.S., Polonik, S.G., 2011. Antileukemic properties and structure-activity relationships of O- and S glycosylation derivatives of julque and related 1,4-naphthoquinones. Opscy. 4, 1-5.
* (10) Feng, X., Luan, J., Guo, F.F., Li,D.P., Char, 2012. Microbial transformation of mastic acid by Cunningham Ibaleskana. J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym. 8, 127-130.
* (11) Ferreira, S., Kaiser, C.F., Ferreira, V.F., 2009. An improved one-pt procedure for the preparation of b-lapachone and nor b-lapachone, two potent drug prototypes, Prog. Proced. Int. 41, 211-215.
* (12) Gantt, R.W., Petier-Pain, P., Thorson, J.S., 2011. Enzymatic methods for glycol (diversification/randomization) of drugs and small molecules. Nat. Prob. Rep. 28, 1811-1853.
* (13) Gao, Y., Wang, A.H., 1995. Crystal structures of four morpholino-doxorubicin anticancer drugs complexed with d(CCTAC) and d(CGTAC): implications in drug-DNA crosslink. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 13, 103-117.
* (14) Hooker, S.C., 1892. The constitution of linoleic acid and its derivatives. J. Chem. Soc. 61, 611-650.
* (15) Lee, K., Kim, L.S., Kwak, T.H., Yoo, H.H., 2013. Comparative metabolism study of b-lapachone in mouse, rat, dog, monkey, and human liver microsomes using liquid chromatography-tandemass spectrometry. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 83, 286-292.
* (16) Miao, X.-S., Song, P., Savage, R.E., Zhong, C., Yang, R.-Y., Kizer, D., Wu, H., Volkova, R., Ashwell, M., Supko, J.E., He, X.A., Tam, T.K., 2008. Identification of the _n vitro_ metabolites of 3,4-dihydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-2-methyl(1,2-b)pyran-5,6-dione (ARQ: 501) (ARQ: 501; b-lapachone) in whole. Drug Metab. Dispos. 36, 641-648.
* (17) Miao, X.-S., Zhong, C., Wang, Y., Savage, R.E., Yang, R.Y., Kizer, D., Volkova, E., Ashwell, M.A., Chan, T.C.K., 2009. In vitro metabolism of b-lapachone (ARQ 501) in mammalian hepatocytes and cultured human cells. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 23, 12-22.
* (18) Moon, D.O., Kang, C.H., Kim, M.O., Jeon, Y.J., Lee, J.D., Choi, Y.H., Kim, G.Y., 2010. b-lapachone (IAPA) decreases cell viability and telomerase activity in leukemia cells: suppression of telomerase activity by IAPA. J. Med. 13, 481-488.
* (19) Park, E.J., Choi, K.S., Kwon, T.K., 2011. b-lapachone-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation mediates autophagic cell death in glioma U87 MG cells. Chem. Biol. Lett. 189, 37-44.
* (20) Pinto, A.V., Castro, S.L., 2009. The tropanol activist of naphthoquinones: a review. Molecules 145, 449-4590.
* (21) Savage, R.E., Tyler, A.N., Miao, X.-S., Chan, T.C.K., 2008. Identification of a novel glucosylsulfate conjugate as a metabolite of 3,4-dihydro-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-naphtho[1,2-b]pyran-5-6-dione (ARQ: 501; b-lapachone) in mammals. Drug Metab. Dispos. 36, 753-758.
* (22) Siegel, D., Ross, D., 2000. Immunolore of NAD(P)-liquinone oxidoreductase oxidoreductase 1 (NQ1) in human tissues, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 29, 246-253.
* (23) Siegel, D., Yan, C., Ross, D., 2012. NAD(P):rl-quinone oxidoreductase oxidoreductase 1 (NQ1) in the sensitivity and resistance to antitumor quinones. Biochem. Pharmacol. 83, 1033-1040.



## Page 5

Silva, M.N., Ferreira, V.F., Souza, M.C.B.V., 2003. An overview of the chemistry and pharmacology of naphthoquinones with emphasis on b-lapachone and derivatives. Quim. Nova 26, 407-416.
* Yang et al. (2013) Yang, X., Hou, J., Liu, D., Deng, S., Wang, Z.B., Kuang, H.X., Wang, C., Yao, J.H., Liu, K.X., Ma, X.C., 2013. Biotransformation of isomperatorin by Cunninghamella balka-lesleana AS 3.970. J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym. 88, 1-6.
* Yang et al. (2012) Yang, Y.-H., Sun, R., Song, H.-C., Xu, Y.-B., Yang, P., Yang, D.-Y., Shen, Z.-K., Wang, A.-R., Chen, Y.-G., Dong, J.-Y., 2012. Microbial transformation of the triterpene nigeranoic acid in Trichoderma sp. Phytochem. Lett. 5, 123-127.
* Zhang et al. (1996) Zhang, D., Evans, F.E., Freeman, J.P., Yang, Y., Deek, J., Cerniglia, C.E., 1996. Formation of mammalian metabolites of cyclohezapine by the fungus Cunningham elegans. Chem. Biol. Interact. 102, 79-92.



