# 10.1021@np030530j.pdf

## Page 1

Benzoic Acid Derivatives from _Piper_ Species and Their Fungitoxic Activity against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphareospermum_

Joao Henrique G. Lago,\({}^{\dagger}\) Clecio Sousa Ramos,\({}^{\dagger}\) Diego Campos C. Casanova,\({}^{\dagger}\) Andreia de A. Morandim,\({}^{\ddagger}\) Debora Cristina B. Bergamo,\({}^{\ddagger}\) Alberto J. Cavalheiro,\({}^{\ddagger}\) Vanderlan da S. Bolzani,\({}^{\ddagger}\) Maysa Furlan,\({}^{\ddagger}\) Elsie F. Guimaraes,\({}^{\lx@sectionsign}\) Maria Claudia M. Young, and Massuo J. Kato\({}^{\diamonds,\dagger}\)

###### Abstract

Piper crassinervium, _P. aduncum_, _P. hostmannianum_, and _P. gaudichaudianum_ contain the new benzoic acid derivatives crassinervic acid (1), acupuncture (8), hostmannian (18), and gaudichaudianic acid (20), respectively, as major secondary metabolites. Additionally, 19 known compounds such as benzoic acids, chromenes, and flavonoids were isolated and identified. The antifungal activity of these compounds was evaluated by bioautographic TLC assay against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphareospermum_.

Papercase species have been extensively investigated as a source of new natural products with potential anti-tumoral, antimicrobial, antifungal, and insecticidal activities.1-3 The phytochemical profile in _Piper_ species is characterized by the production of typical classes of compounds such as amides, benzoic acids, and chromenes in addition to ligaments, neoligans, and a few alkaloids.4-6

As part of our research aiming to uncover new antifungal compounds in Brazilian Piperaceae species, we have previously reported the occurrence of pyrrolidine amides in _P. hispidum_7 and piperidine, isobutyl, and pyrrolidine amides in _P. tuberculatum_8 and _P. arboreum_.9 Additionally, anti-fungal preyniled hydroquinones and flavances from leaves of _P. crassinervium_10 have been described as well. The search for new antifungal compounds will contribute to establish a model for further investments in this field in order to preserve, to study, and to exploit rationally the remaining flora of Sao Paulo State.

In the course of the Biota Program ([http://www.biota.sp](http://www.biota.sp)), a large number of _Piper_ species collected in the state of Sao Paulo had their extracts assayed by means of bioautography using _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ (Fresen) de Vries and _C. sphareospermum_ (Perzig). Since the extracts of _Piper crassinervium_ Kunth, _P. aduncum_ L., _P. hostmannianum_ (Miquel) C. DC., and _P. gaudichaudianum_ Kunth showed high growth inhibitory activity, they were subjected to dereplication procedures using chromatographic techniques associated with the bioautographic assay. Thus, the major aim of this paper is to describe the isolation and structural determination of the new antifungal compounds from Piperaceae species.

## Results and Discussion

The MeOH extract from leaves of _P. crassinervium_ yielded three prenylated 4-hydroxybenzoic acids [4-hydroxy-3-(3, 7-dimethyl-3-hydroxy-1-oxo-6-oetenyl)benzoic acid (crassinervic acid, 1), 4-hydroxy-(3, 7-dimethyl-1-oxo-octa-2-_E-6-dienyl)benzoic acid11 (2), and 4-hydroxy-(3, 7-dimethyl-1-oxo-octa-2-_E-6-dienyl)benzoic acid12 (3,4,5-trimethoxydihydrocinnamic acid12 (4), 1,4-dihydroxy-2-(3, 7-dimethyl-1-oxo-octa-2-_E-6-dienyl)benzene10 (5), and two flavanones [5,7-dihydroxy-4-methoxyflavanone13 (naringenin 4-methyl ether, 6) and 5,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-flavanone14 (sakuranetin, 7)].

The CH2Cl2- and hexane-soluble parts of the MeOH extract of the leaves of _P. aduncum_ yielded one new prenylated benzoic acid [methyl 2-methoxy-5-(3-methyl-1-oxo-2-butenyl)benzoate (aduncumene, 8)], four known chromenes [methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylate (9), methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylate (10), methyl 8-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylate (11), and 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylic acid15,16 (12)], 4-methoxy-3-(3, 7-dimethylocta-2-_E-6-dienyl)benzoic acid15 (13), and two dihydrechalcone [2,6-dihydroxy-4-methyl-oxdithydrochalcone15 (14) and piperaduncine B17 (15)].

The CH2Cl2-MeOH (2:1) extracts of the leaves of _P. hostmannianum_ yielded methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylate (10), three prenylated methyl hydroxybenzoate derivatives [methyl 4-hydroxy-3-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)benzoate18,19 (16), methyl 4-hydroxy-3-(3-methyl-2-hydroxy-3-butenyl)benzoate16 (17), and the new derivative methyl 4-hydroxy-3-(3-2-3)-dihydroxy-3-methylbutyl)benzoate (hostmannienne, 18)], and pinoembrin20,21 (19).

The CH2Cl2-MeOH (2:1) extracts of the leaves and roots of _P. gaudichaudianum_ yielded two chromenes [2-methyl-2-(4-methyl-3-pentenyl)-8-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylic acid (gaudichaudianic acid, 20) and methyl 2,2-dimethyl-1-oxo-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylate (21)], three prenylated benzoic acids [4-methoxy-3-(3, 7-dimethylocta-2-E-6-dienyl)benzoic acid15 (13), 4-hydroxy-3-(3, 7-dimethylocta-2-_E-6-dienyl)benzoic acid23 (22), and methyl 4-hydroxy-3-(3-methyl-1-oxo-2-butenyl)benzoate24 (methyl taboangante, 23)], and pinoembrin20,21 (19).

Compound **1** was isolated from the leaves of _P. crassinervium_ as a white amorphous solid. Its molecular formula was established as C17:H2O5 by analysis of its HREIMS spectrum (_m/z_ 306.1459, called 306.1467). The IR spectrum indicated the presence of hydroxyl groups (3380 cm-1), two carbonyl groups (1696, 1611 cm-1), and an aromatic ring (1489, 1421 cm-1). The 1H NMR spectrum exhibited signals

## Page 2

for three aromatic hydrogens at \(d\) 6.93 (d, \(J\) = 8.9 Hz), 8.11 (dd, \(J\) = 8.9 and 2.4 Hz), and 8.56 (d, \(J\) = 2.4 Hz), indicative of a 3,4-disubstituted benzoic acid derivative. Additional signals included three methyl singlets (_d_ 1.37, 1.50, 1.58), two doublets at \(d\) 2.77 (1H, \(J\) = 16.5 Hz) and 2.64 (1H, \(J\) = 16.5 Hz), characteristic of an isolated \(\alpha\)-carbonyl methylene group, and a triplet at \(d\) 4.98 (1H, \(J\) = 7.2 Hz), indicating the presence of a double bond in the side chain. The 13C NMR spectra (BBD and DEDT 135\({}^{\circ}\)) showed signals for 17 carbon atoms assigned as two carbonyl (_d_ 191.5, 170.6), six aromatic (_d_ 163.7, 137.3, 129.9, 122.1, 119.9, 118.8), two olefinic (_d_ 132.5, 122.9), three methyl (_d_ 25.6, 23.9, 17.5), one tertiary carboninic (_d_ 82.3), and three aliphatic methylene carbons (_d_ 47.2, 39.3, 22.2). The assignments of the signals for aromatic carbons were based on comparison with 1H and 13C NMR data reported for known benzoic acids analogues.11 The connectivity between aromatic and aliphatic moieties was revealed by analysis of the HMDC spectrum. The correlations between signals at \(d\) 8.56 (H-2)/2.77 (H-2)/2.64 (H-2 b) with 191.5 (C-1 ) as well as between \(d\) 8.56 (H-2)/8.11 (H-6) with 170.6 (CO2H) (Figure 1) indicated that compound **1** contains one carbonyl group at C-1 and one carboxyl group attached to C-1. The double bond at the side chain was assigned on the basis of the observed cross-peaks between \(d\) 4.98 (H-6 ) and 25.6 (C-8 )/17.5 (C-9 ) in the HMDC spectrum and between signals at \(d\) 4.98 (H-6 ), 2.03 (H-5 ), 1.58 (H-8 ), and 1.50 (H-9 ) in the DQF-COSY spectrum. Thus, the hydroxyl group on a tertiary carbon atom was placed at C-3  of the side chain, in agreement with the HMDC correlations observed between the hydrogen signals at \(d\) 2.77 (H-2 a)/2.64 (H-2 b), 1.70 (H-4 ), and 1.37 (H-10 ) with the carbon signal at \(d\) 82.3 (C-3 ). Analysis of the DQF-COSY, HMQC, and HMDC NMR spectra allowed full assignment for all hydrogen and carbon atoms, and thus, the structure of exrasineric acid (**1**) was elucidated as 4-hydroxy-3-(3, 7 -dimethyl-3 -hydroxy-1 -oxo-6 -octenyl)benzoic acid.

Compound **8** was isolated from the leaves of _P. aduncum_ as a yellow amorphous solid. The molecular formula C14H16O4 was determined by LRESIMS and elemental analysis. The IR spectrum exhibited absorption bands at 1700, 1610, and at 1445 cm-1, assignable to two carbonyl groups and aromatic double bonds, respectively. The structure of the premylated benzoic acid derivative was recognized by analysis of the 1H NMR spectrum, which showed signals at \(d\) 8.18 (1H, d, \(J\) = 1.9 Hz), 8.06 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 8.5 and 1.9 Hz), and 6.93 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz). This spectrum also showed a set of signals including two methyl groups at \(d\) 1.96 (3H, d, \(J\) = 1.5 Hz)/2.20 (3H, d, \(J\) = 1.5 Hz) and a multiplet at 6.53 (1H), which are characteristics of an isoprene unit, and additionally, two methoxyl groups at \(d\) 3.90 (3H, s) and 3.86 (3H, s). The 13C NMR spectra (BBD and DEDT 135\({}^{\circ}\)) exhibited, in the low-field region, one carbonechloronyl group at \(d\) 166.6, six aromatic carbons at \(d\) 161.2, 134.1, 132.0, 131.2, 122.9, 111.4, and two signals corresponding to the double-bond carbons at \(d\) 125.1 (CH) and 156.7 (C). These two signals, associated with the carbonyl signal at \(d\) 192.7, indicated an \(a\),_b_/unsaturated carbonyl system.22,25\({}^{\circ}\) The high-field region exhibited signals assignable to two methyl groups at \(d\) 28.3 and 21.6 and two methoxyl groups at \(d\) 52.5 and 56.2. The assignment of all signals observed in the 13C NMR spectrum of **8** was corroborated by HMQC and HMDC experiments (Figure 1). The HMDC spectrum showed the correlation of the signal at \(d\) 192.2 (C-1 ) with the hydrogens at \(d\) 8.18 (H-6), 8.06 (H-4), and 6.53 (H-2 ) and between \(d\) 166.6 (C-6 ) and 8.18 (H-6) and also with 3.86 (OCH3). Finally, the cross-peaks observed between \(d\) 156.7 (C-3 ) and 2.20 (H-4 ) and 1.96 (H-5 ) confirmed the structure of **8** as methyl 2-methoxy-5-(3 -methyl-1 -oxo-2 -butenyl)benzoate, named aduncumene.

Compound **18** was obtained from the leaves of _P. host-mannianum_, as a white amorphous powder. Its LRESIMS data associated with 13C NMR spectra (BBD and DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\)) and elemental analysis indicated a molecular formula of C13H18O5. The IR spectrum indicated the presence of hydroxyl groups (3463 cm-1), an aromatic ring (1613, 1440 cm-1), and a carbonyl group (1715 cm-1). The 1H NMR spectrum showed signals assignable to three coupled aromatic hydrogens at \(d\) 6.76 (d, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz), 7.72 (dd, \(J\) = 9.0 and 2.0 Hz), and 7.77 (d, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz), characteristic of the 3,4-disubstituted benzoic acid derivative. In addition, this spectrum displayed three singlets at \(d\) 1.27 (3H), 1.30 (3H), and 3.80 (3H) assigned, respectively, to two methyl groups attached to an oxygen-bearing carbon and to one methoxyl group. The presence of an oxymethine hydrogen at \(d\) 3.77 (dd, \(J\) = 6.0 and 4.5 Hz), associated with the signals at \(d\) 3.02 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 17.0 and 4.5 Hz) and 2.73 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 17.0 and 6.0 Hz), suggested a hydroxylated isoprene side chain at C-3 of the benzoic acid nucleus. The HMDC spectrum of **18** (Figure 1) showed correlation between the signals at \(d\) 31.1 (C-1 ) and 7.77 (H-2), between \(d\) 69.2 (C-2 ) and 1.27 (H-4 /1.30 (H-5 )/0.2 (H-1 a)/2.73

## Page 3

(H-1 b), between d 25.0 (C-4 ) and 1.30 (H-5 ), and between d 22.0 (C-5 ) and 3.77 (H-2 J/1.27 (H-4 ), confirming the positioning of the vicinal hydroxyl groups at C-2 and C-3. The methoxy group was determined as a methyl ester, considering that a cross-peak between the signals at d 166.9 (C-6 ) and 3.80 (OCH3) was observed in the HMBC spectrum. Therefore, the structure of **18** was determined as methyl 4-hydroxy-3-(2, 3-dihydroxy-3-methylbutyl)benzoate, named homaminase.

Compound **20** was isolated from the leaves of _P. gaudiachaadium_ as an amorphous solid. The molecular formula C22H28O3 was deduced by LREIMS and elemental analysis. The IR spectrum showed absorption bands at 3500, 1681, and 1601 cm-1 assignable to a hydroxyl, conjugated carbonyl, and aromatic ring, respectively. The 1H NMR spectrum showed two doublets at d 5.58 (1H, \(J\) = 10.0 Hz) and d 6.38 (1H, \(J\) = 10.0 Hz) and four singlets at d 1.41 (3H, s), 1.67 (3H, s), 1.56 (3H, s), and 1.73 (6H, s), which were associated with the chrome/isoprene moieties.15,27 Two low-field doublets at d 7.59 (1H, \(J\) = 2.1 Hz) and 7.75 (1H, \(J\) = 2.1 Hz), assignable to the _meta_ aromatic hydrogens, indicated a 3,4,5-trisubstituted benzoic acid derivative, which was corroborated by analysis of the 13C NMR spectra. A carboxyl group, with a signal at d 172.1, was placed between the two aromatic hydrogens (C-6). The chrome moiety was confirmed by the presence of signals at d 79.9, 129.5, and 121.9 assignable to the carbons C-2, C-3, and C-4, respectively.27 The DEPT 135deg spectrum confirmed these previous assignments and showed the presence of three methylenes at d 41.9 (C-1 ), 22.7 (C-2 ), and 28.2 (C-1 ), which were associated with the respective protons at d 1.78 (H-1 ), 2.25 (H-2 ), and 3.28 (H-1 ) by means of the HMQC spectrum. The linkage positions of the two isoprene side chains to the chrome/aromatic ring were determined by an HMBC experiment (Figure 1), in which correlations between the signals at d 128.9 (C-8) and 5.28 (H-2 ), between d 131.8 (C-7) and 3.28 (H-1 ), between d 41.9 (C-1 ) and 1.41 (H-9), and between d 123.9 (C-3) and 1.78 (H-1 ) were observed. Thus, the complete assignments of NMR data of **20** were made by analysis of HMQC and HMBC data and by comparison with those obtained for similar compounds isolated from _P. hothzkyanum_ and _P. aduncum_.11,28 Therefore, the structure of **20** was determined as 2-methyl-2-(4 -methyl-3 -pentenyl)-8-(3 -methyl-2 -butenyl)-2_H_-1-benzopyran-6-carboxylic acid, named gaudiachaudinic acid. The optical rotation, [a]25D +21 (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3), was similar to that observed for sargatridi,29 but this compound has two additional chiral carbons (C5 and C6 ) in its side chain and is not appropriate for a direct comparison. Nevertheless, the CD curve obtained for **20** was fully opposite to that described for sargatrid including the positive Cotton effect at 260-280 nm (styrene chromophore). Thus, despite the differences in the substitution pattern in the aromatic ring for **20**, the \(S\) configuration at C-2 was suggested.

The antifungal activities of compounds **1**-**23** isolated from these four _Piper_ species were evaluated against _C. caldosoprioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ (Table 1). The fungitoxic potential for the compounds **5**, **6**, **7**, **17**, **19**, and **21** has been previously reported.10,22,26,27 As can be seen, the chromene **9**, crassinervic acid (**1**), and hostmaniane (**18**) showed high potential as antifungal compounds and should be further evaluated against other fungi. Several compounds, **2**, **3**, **5**, **7**, **16**, and **19**, showed potency (1.0 _m_g) similar to that of the control. In the prenylated benzoic acid series (**1**-**3**) the introduction of a hydroxyl group in the side chain, as in the case of **1**, doubled the activity, while the changes in the double-bond configuration (**2** and **3**) did not cause significant improvement.

### Experimental Section

**General Experimental Procedures.** Optical rotations were measured on a JASCO DIP-370 digital polarimeter (Na filter, \(l\) = 588 nm) and CD spectrum in CHCl3 with a JASCO ORDUV-6 spectropolarimeter. IR spectra were measured in REPL pellets on a Perkin-Elmer infrared spectrometer model 1750. UV spectra were recorded on a HP 8452 A spectrophotometer using MeOH as solvent. LREIMS and HREIMS spectra were measured at 70 eV on a HP 5990/5988 A and a VG Autospee spectrometer, respectively, while LREIMS spectra were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. 'H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 500/300 and 125/75 MHz, respectively, on Bruker DRX-500 and Bruker DPX-300 spectrometers. CDCl3 (Aldrich) was used as solvent and TMS as internal standard. Chemical shifts were reported in \(o\) units (ppm) and coupling constants (_J_) in Hz. Elemental analyses were obtained on a Perkin-Elmer elemental analyzer model 2400 CNH. silica gel (Merck, 230-400 mesh) and Sephadex LH-20 (Sigma) were used for column chromatographic separations, while silica gel 60 PF254 (Merck) was used for analytical

Figure 1.: Key HMBC correlations observed for compounds **1**, **8**, **18**, and **20**.



## Page 4

TLC (0.25 mm), preparative TLC (1.0 mm), and circular chromatography (4.0 mm). HPLC separations were performed on a Varian model SD-1, using a reversed-phase column (C-18 Supelecosil, 10 \(\mu\)m, 25 cm \(\times\) 10 mm), with a flow rate of 2 mL/min and detection at 270 nm.

**Plant Material.** Leaves from _P. crassinervium_ Knuth were collected on the campus of the Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil, and identified by Dr. Guillermo E. D. Paredes (Universidad Nacional Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Peru). The voucher specimen (Kato-0084) was deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Leaves from _P. aduncum_ were collected at Reserva Ripasa, Ibate, Sao Paulo, Brazil, and identified by Dr. Elsie F. Guimaraes (Jardim Botanico, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). The voucher specimen (PA22) was deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Leaves from _P. hostmannianum_ were collected in Manaus (State of Amazonas) and identified by Dr. Guillermo E. D. Paredes. The voucher specimen (Kato-0156) was deposited at the Herbarium of the Instituto de Biociencias, USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Leaves and roots from _P. gaudiculatanium_ were collected on the campus of the Universidade de Sao Paulo (Brazil) and were identified by Dr. Elsie F. Guimaraes. The voucher specimen (Kato-0093) was deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

**Extraction and Isolation.** Fresh leaves from _P. crassinervium_ were air-dried, and the ground powder (320 g) was extracted by macroinf with MeOH three times (3 x 2 L) at room temperature. The resulting solution was concentrated in a vacuum to yield 6.0 g of crude extract, which was submitted to column chromatography over silica gel (250 g), using a gradient elution from hexane to EtOHAc and from EtOAc to MeOH, yielding 14 fractions. Fraction 4 (524 mg) was submitted to silica gel chromatography using gradient mixtures of EtOAc in hexane, yielding three fractions (I-III). Fraction II (94 mg) was purified by preparative TLC [CH2Cl2-EtOAc, 9:1, three editions] to yield 51 mg of **5**. Compounds **2** (41 mg) and **6** (124 mg) were obtained by purification of fraction 6 (1083 mg) in column chromatography over silica gel, eluted with mixtures of hexane-EtOAc in a gradient mode. Fraction 7 (312 mg) was purified by silica gel chromatography using a gradient elution from CH2Cl2 to EtOAc, yielding 57 mg of a fraction composed of **6** and **7**. Compound **3** (23 mg) was obtained from fraction 9 (149 mg) after flash silica gel column chromatography eluting with CH2Cl2-EtOAc (9:1, 8:2, and 7:3). Fraction 10 (812 mg) was chromatographed on a silica gel column using a gradient from hexane to EtOAc and from EtOAc to MeOH, yielding four fractions (I-IV). Fraction IV (354 mg) was submitted to gel permeation column chromatography on Sephadex LH-20 (60 x 2 cm) using hexane--CH2Cl2 (4:1) and CH2Cl2-MeCO (1:1) as eluent, to yield **1** (115 mg). Compound **4** (14 mg) was purified from fraction 11 (102 mg) after preparative TLC [CH2Cl2-EtOAc, 8:2, three editions].

Fresh leaves from _P. aduncum_ were air-dried, and the powder (1300 g) was extracted by macroinf with EtOH three times (3 x 3 L) at room temperature. The resulting solution was partitioned between hexane and EtOH-H2O (8:2) to yield the hexane-soluble solution. The EtOH-H2O solution was extracted with CH2Cl2, yielding a CH2Cl2-soluble solution (14.9 g), which was applied to a silica gel column and eluted with hexane containing increasing volumes of EtOAc, yielding 19 fractions (1-19). Fraction 2 yielded 14 (579 mg). Fraction 1 (5.5 g) was subjected to silica gel column chromatography letting with hexane containing increasing concentrations of EtOAc, yielding 20 fractions (I-IX). Fraction V (37.2 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC [hexane--EtOAc (7:3), two editions], yielding **9** (5 mg). Fraction IV (48 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC [hexane--EtOAc (7:3), two editions], yielding **10** (38 mg). Fraction VII (97 mg) was subjected to reversed-phase HPLC (MeOH-H2O, 6:35), yielding **13** (33 mg). Fraction 7 (395 mg) was applied to a silica gel column, eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc, yielding 14 fractions (I-IV). Fraction XII (100 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC [hexane--EtOAc (7:3), two editions], yielding **10** (38 mg). Fraction VII (97 mg) was subjected to reversed-phase HPLC (MeOH-H2O, 6:35), yielding **13** (33 mg). Fraction 7 (395 mg) was applied to a silica gel column, eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc, yielding 14 fractions (I-XIV). Fraction XII (100 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC [hexane--EtOAc (7:3), two editions], yielding five fractions (A-E). Fraction B (50 mg) was subjected to reversed-phase HPLC (MeOH-H2O, 6:35:35), yielding **15** (13 mg). The air-dried and powdered leaves from _P. aduncum_ (300 g) were extracted with EtOAc three times (3 x 1 L). The resulting extract (28.3 g) was dissolved in CHCl2 (100 mL) and partitioned with a saturated solution of NaHCO3 (3 x 50 mL). The NaHCO3 solution was neutralized with HCl (6 M), extracted with EtOAc (3 x 50 mL), dried over Na2SO4, and concentrated, yielding 764 mg of residue. This residue was applied to a silica gel column and eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc, yielding five fractions (1-5). Fraction 3 (80 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC [CHCl2-MeOH (99:1), three editions], yielding **12** (15 mg).

The dried and powdered leaves from _P. hostmannianum_ (550 g) were extracted three times with a mixture of CH2Cl2-MeOH (2:1) (3 x 1 L) at room temperature. The resulting CH2Cl2-MeOH extract was concentrated in vacuo to yield 8 g of the crude extract. Part of this extract (6.5 g) was submitted to silica gel column chromatography and eluted with increasing amounts of EtOAc in hexane, yielding seven fractions (1-7). Fraction I (233 mg) was applied on a silica gel column and was eluted with CH2Cl2 containing increasing amounts of EtOAc, yielding **10** (10 mg) and **16** (100 mg). Fraction 3 (120 mg) was purified by reversed-phase column chromatography eluting with MeOH-H2O (95:5) to yield 12 mg of **19**. Fraction 4 (123 mg) was submitted to preparative TLC [hexane--EtOAc (8:2), three editions] to yield **17** (24 mg) and **18** (16 mg).

Dried ground leaves (20 g) and roots (12 g) from _P. gaudiculatanium_ were extracted twice with CH2Cl2-MeOH

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c}  & antifungal activity (_ugb_)a \\ compound & _C. cladosporioides_ & _C. spharosospermum_ \\
**1** & 0.5 & 0.5 \\
**2** & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
**3** & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
**4** & 10.0 & 10.0 \\
**5** & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
**6** & 1.0 & 5.0 \\
**7** & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
**8** & 5.0 & 5.0 \\
**9** & 0.1 & 0.1 \\
**10** & 5.0 & 5.0 \\
**11** & 5.0 & 5.0 \\
**

## Page 5

(2:1) (2 x 1 L), yielding 5.5 and 2.9 g of crude extracts, respectively. Part of the extract from the leaves (4.5 g) was suspended in MeOH-H\({}_{2}\)O (8.5:1.5), filtered in a bed of Celite, and concentrated in vacuo to yield 2.5 g of the chlorophyll-free leaves extract. This extract was subjected to fractionation on a silica gel column using hexane with increasing amounts of EtOAc as eluent, yielding 15 fractions (1-15). Fraction 7 (50 mg) was subjected to preparative TLC [CH2Cl2-hexane-EtOAc-ACOH, 7.7:1.5:0.5:0.3, three elutations to yield **20** (15 mg) and **23** (3 mg). Part of the crude CH2Cl2-MeOH extract from leaves (0.9 g) was dissolved in EtOAc (50 mL) and partitioned with a saturated solution of NaHCO3 (3 x 50 mL). The NaHCO3 fraction was neutralized with HCl (6 M), extracted with EtOAc (3 x 50 mL), and dried over Na2SO4, yielding a residue (20 mg). This residue was subjected to preparative TLC hexane-EtOAc, 9:1, three elutations, yielding **13** (4 mg) and **22** (7 mg). Part of the extract from roots (245 mg) was separated by circular chromatography (layer of 4 mm) and eluted with hexane with increasing amounts of EtOAc, yielding **23** (77 mg) and **21** (35 mg).

Crassinervic acid [4-hydroxy-3(3,7 -dimethyl-3-hydroxy-1-oxo-6-octomethyl)benzoic acid] (1) was obtained as a white amorphous solid: [40]\({}^{\mathrm{2s}}\) (50-6 T) (0.515, CHCl2); UV (MeOH) _l_max (mg ) 262 (3.90), 320 (3.28) nm; IR (KBr) _v_max 3380, 1696, 1611, 1489, 1421 cm\({}^{-1}\); 1H NMR (CDCl2, 500 MHz) \(d\) 8.56 (1H, d \(J\) = 2.4 Hz, H2.0), 6.93 (H1, d \(J\) = 9.9 Hz, H-5), 8.11 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 8.9, 2.4 Hz, H-6).27 (1H, d \(J\) = 16.5 Hz, H-2 a), 2.64 (1H, d \(J\) = 16.5 Hz, H-2 b), 1.70 (2H, m, H-4 ), 2.03 (2H, m, H-5), 4.98 (1H, d \(J\) = 2.2 Hz, H-6), 1.58 (3H, br, h-8), 1.50 (3H, br, s-9), 1.37 M(1, s-1,0), 12.3 (1H, s, OH); 3C NMR (CDCl2, 125 MHz) (119.9 C,(C-1), 129.9 C,(C-2), 122.1 (C, C-3), 163.7 (C, C-4), 118.8 (CH, C-5), 137.3 (CH, C-6), 191.5 (C, C-1), 4.72 (CH2, C-2), 23.6 (C, C-3), 3.93 (CH2, C-4), 22.2 (CH2, C-5), 122.9 (CH2, C-6), 132.5 (C, C-7), 25.6 (CH2, C 

## Page 6

* (22) Terreaux, C.; Gupta, M. P.; Hostettmann, K. _Phytochemistry_**1999**, _49_, 461-464.
* (23) Seerman, N. P.; Jacobs, H.; McLean, S.; Reynolds, W. F. _Phytochemistry_**1996**, _43_, 863-865.
* (24) Roussis, V.; Ampofo, S. A.; Wiemer, D. F. _Phytochemistry_**1990**, _29_, 1787-1788.
* (25) Mors, W. B.; Nascimento, M. C.; Pereira, B. M.; Pereira, N. A. _Phytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 627-642.
* (26) Lopez, A.; Ming, D. S.; Towers, N. _J. Nat. Prod._**2002**, _65_, 62-64.
* (27) Orjala, J.; Erdelmeier, C. A. J.; Wright, P.; Rali, T.; Sticher, O. _Phytochemistry_**1993**, _34_, 813-818.
* (28) Moreira, D. L.; Guimaraes, E. F.; Kaplan, M. A. C. _Phytochemistry_**1998**, _48_, 1075-1077.
* (29) Kikuchi, T.; Mori, Y.; Yokoi, T.; Nakazawa, S.; Kuroda, H.; Masada, Y.; Kitamura, K.; Kuriyama, K. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1988**, _31_, 106-113.
* (30) Homans, A. L.; Fuchs, A. _J. Chromatogr._**1970**, _51_, 327-329.
* (31) Rahalison, L.; Hamburger, M.; Monod, M.; Frenk, E.; Hostettmann, K. _Planta Med._**1994**, _60_, 41-44.



