# 10.1002@jobm.200800093.pdf

## Page 1



[

[

Received: March 19, 2008; accepted: June 30, 2008

###### Abstract

_Smallanthus sonchifolus_ is a traditional Andean plant which has been cultured mainly in Brazil, Japan and New Zealand due to its medicinal properties. A study of the endophytic fungi associated to the plant was carried out in order to characterize new cytotoxic agents. Thirty two fungal strains were isolated and submitted to cultivation and extraction producing 186 extracts. Of these, 12% displayed moderate to high cytotoxic activities and were considered promising anticancer compound sources. The ethyl acetate fractions of _Nigrospora sphaerica_ and _Phoma betae_ liquid fermentations contained the synergistic compounds 8-hydroxy-6-methoxy-3-methylisocoumarin and (22E,24R)-ergosta-4,6,8(14),22-tetraen-3-one which are potential compounds for drug discovery. Another isolated compound, pimara-7,15-dien-3-b-ol diterpene is being characterized for the first time through a detailed spectroscopic analysis including GC/MS, homo- and hetero-nuclear correlated NMR experiments (HMQC, HMBC, COSY and NOEdiff) along with its optical rotation.

## Introduction

The Asteraceae _Smallanthus sonchifolus_ (Poepp. and Endl.) H. Robinson, a commonly employed Andean-originated medicinal plant, has antidiabetic and anti-inflammatory effects. Some unique substances like the anti-microbial melampolide-type sesquiterpene lactones [1-3] are present in the plant. Its tuberous roots, rich in enzymes and fructose derivatives (FOS, GF2-9), but deficient in starch, are indicated and consumed as healthy diet foods and prebiotics, specially in South America, New Zealand and Japan [4-7]. The plant is also a special and unusual biological niche for fungal colonization.

Interactions involving plants and fungi are quite complex. They may have qualitatively different relationships with a single host plant, from parasitism to mutualism, and/or interact with other fungi inside the same plant. As mutualists, endophytic fungi are considered innocuous to the host plant. They live in a reciprocally balanced stable state that disadvantages none of the partners, including the absence of external manifestation of diseases in the host [8]. Associated fungi may produce substances with specific functions inside and outside the host plant in which they normally reside. Thus, several bioactive natural products have been isolated from endophytic fungi showing a range of effects, for instance antimicrobial and anti-cancer [9].

As part of the bioprostecting program in endophytic fungi associated to therapeutic Asteraceae [10-13], it was considered that _S. sonchifolus_, commonly named Yacon, could host endophytic fungi able to produce

## Page 2

bioactive secondary metabolites for pharmaceutical and biotechnological purposes. Using this approach, 32 endophytes have been isolated and characterized yielding several cytotoxic extracts and compounds. Some of the compounds isolated in this research are being reported for the first time as secondary metabolites produced by the studied fungi. The relevance of the cytotoxic outcome in the fungi and host plant associations is discussed.

## Materials and methods

### Isolation, identification and preservation of fungal strains

Yacon leaves, roots and stems were collected in February 2006, in the city of Ribeirao Preto (S 21deg11.933' NO 47deg46.699'), State of Sao Paulo, Brazil. A voucher specimen was deposited at the herbarium of the Faculty of Philosophy, Sciences and Humanities of Ribeirao Preto _campus_, University of Sao Paulo (FFCLRP-USP) Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.

The collected plant material was washed with running tap water and dried with absorbent paper. Surface sterilization procedures for epiphytic microbes were carried out by sequentially submerging the plant material in 70% aqueous ethanol (2.5 min), 2.5% aqueous sodium hypochlorite (30, 60 or 90 min), 70% aqueous ethanol (1 min) and sterile distilled water (1 min). The borders of the sterilized segments were discarded and four tiny pieces each about 5 mm in length were excised with a sterilized scalpel from the remaining plant tissue. The excised pieces from each tissue type were plated on triplicate Petri dishes containing PDA medium supplemented with pentabiotic (100 mg/ml) and incubated initially at 30 degC for 48 h, followed by 72 h at 23 degC. The effectiveness of the sterilization procedure was verified by plating aliquots of the final water rinse on the same medium used for the endophyte cultures. Each grown fungus from plant tissues was repeatedly subcultured on PDA antibiotic-free medium until pure cultures were obtained.

Conidia producing strains were identified at the Department of Mycology, Center of Biological Sciences of the Federal University of Pernambuco, PE, Brazil. Sporulating fungi were stored at 10 degC in tubes containing silica gel (6 to 12 mesh, grade 40, desiccant activated). The isolates, deposited at the Laboratory of Industrial Enzymology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirao Preto, University of Sao Paulo (FCFRP-USP), have been maintained by serial transfers onto PDA slants at 4 degC.

### Cultivation and extraction procedures

Two culture media, Czapek and rice, were selected for cultivation and screening of biological activities of the isolated fungi, respectively, in liquid and solid cultures.

Liquid cultures were conducted in two steps (Fig. 1). First, the silica or slant stored fungi were inoculated onto PDA-containing medium in Petri dishes and incubated at 30 degC for 7 d. After this period, aqueous suspensions obtained either with fungal conidia or mycelia were transferred to 1 l Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 ml of seed medium [14] and incubated at 30 degC for 48 h in a rotatory shaker (120 rpm). As a second step, this resulting pre-culture was filtered on a Buchner filter through gauze or filter paper and the obtained mycelia was transferred to a 2 l Erlenmeyer flask containing 400 ml of Czapek medium [15] and incubated at the same pre-culture conditions for 20 d. This procedure was carried out for a small scale extract production for bioprospection. Fifteen Erlenmeyer flasks were used for a large scale extract production, aiming to isolate secondary metabolites. Fungi in the 20 day cultures were killed by addition of 50 ml of methanol (MeOH), the suspension was vacuum-filtered and the filtrate fractionated by liquid-liquid partition with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). The resulting organic layer was evaporated under reduced pressure to produce the ethyl acetate fraction of liquid cultures (EaL) and a residue (RL), which was lyophilized. The mycelial mass collected from the filter was soaked overnight in EtOH, followed by filtration and solvent evaporation to pro

Figure 1: Schematic outline of endophytic fungi cultivation and extraction procedures (experimental details in text “Cultivation and extraction procedures”).



## Page 3

duce the mycelial ethanolic extract (EtM). An Erlenmeyer flask containing seed medium without inoculum was submitted to the same preculture conditions. The resulting solid filtrate was transferred to Czapek medium and treated in the same way for control purposes.

For the solid culture (Fig. 1) 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 90 g of parboiled rice in 90 ml distilled water per flask, previously twice autoclaved at 120 degC for 40 min, were employed. For a small scale preparation, one flask sufficed, but thirty flasks were needed for large scale extract preparations. Agar plugs (about \(2 \times 2\) cm) cut from the 7 day-old original cultures on PDA agar were used for inoculation. One flask, without inoculum, was kept for control use. After 20 days incubation in a BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) device at 30 degC, EtOH was added to each flask and the contents were allowed to stand overnight at room temperature. The EtOH was filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure yielding the ethanol extract (EtS), which was submitted to the previously described liquid-liquid partition affording the ethyl acetate fraction (EaS) and the residual fraction (RS).

### Isolation of compounds

EaS fraction (20.2 g) of _Nigrospora sphaerica_ was fractionated by chromatography over a XAD-4 column (22.0 x 4.5 cm) using water, MeOH and EtOAc as eluents (step A, Fig. 2). Fraction M2EaS (9.9 g) was fractionated over silica gel column (CC, 230-80 mesh, 26.0 x 4.5 cm) using a gradient from with hexane:EtOAc (95:5) to MeOH (100%; step B) to provide 22 fractions. Fraction 13 (30.1 mg) was identified as compound **1**. Fraction M1EaS (3.1 g) was crystallized from a heated solution of MeOH/H2O 9:1 yielding compound **3** (101.0 mg; Fig. 2). Fraction EEaS (1.64 g) chromatographed over silica gel (400-200 mesh, 25.5 x 5.0 cm) and eluted with the same gradient as above mentioned (step C) produced 9 fractions. Fraction 5 (246.6 mg) was rechromatographed over silica gel (CC, 230-80 mesh, 28.0 x 3.0 cm) and using a gradient from hexane: EtOAc (95:5) to EtOH (100%; step D) to yield 9 fractions. Fraction 6 (46.3 mg) was rechromatographed again on silica gel (CC, 230-80 mesh, 20.0 x 1.3 cm) using the same gradient elution (step E) to yield compound **2** (16.9 mg).

_N. sphaerica_ fraction EaL (474.3 mg) was fractionated over silica gel (CC, 400-200 mesh, 24.0 x 3.5 cm) by elution with gradient hexane:EtOAc (95:5) to EtOH (100%; step F) yielding 7 fractions. Fraction 7 crystallized spontaneously to afford compound **3** (98.0 mg).

Fraction EaS (16.5 g) originated from 20 day cultures of _Phoma betae_ (19 flasks) was chromatographed over silica gel (400-200 mesh, 11.0 x 12.0 cm) under gradient elution from hexane:EtOAc (9:1) to MeOH (100%; step G; Fig. 3) to afford 9 fractions. Fraction 5 (686.7 mg) was rechromatographed over silica gel (CC, 230-80 mesh, 25.0 x 4.0 cm) by using gradient elution from hexane:EtOAc (8:2) to MeOH (100%; step H) to

Figure 3: Schematic outline of isolation of compounds from _Phoma betae_. G, J: silica gel column, hexane:EtOAc gradient elution from 9:1 to MeOH 100%; H: silica gel column, gradient elution from hexane:EtOAc 8:2 to MeOH 100%; I: precipitation with CHCl3; K: normal phase HPLC, hexane:EtOAc 9:1 elution; L: reversed phase C-18 HPLC, MeOH elution; M: sephadex LH-20 column, EtOH elution; N: crystallization (experimental details in text “Isolation of compounds”).

Figure 2: Schematic outline of isolation of compounds from _Nigrospora sphaerica_. A: XAD column and elution with water, MeOH, EtOAc; B, C, F: silica gel column, gradient elution from hexane:EtOAc 95:5 to MeOH 100%; D, E: silica gel column, gradient elution from hexane:EtOAc 95:5 to EtOH 100% (experimental details in text “Isolation of compounds”).



## Page 4

afford 12 fractions. Compound 2 (14.7 mg) was precipitated from fraction 5 (99.7 mg) using CHCl3 (step I).

Fraction EaS (888.2 mg) originated from 32 day cultures of _P. betae_ (1 flask, fungus sporulation time) was chromatographed over silica gel (400-200 mesh, 27.0 x 3.0 cm) using gradient elution with hexane: EtOAc (9:1) to MeOH (100%; step J, Fig. 3) to provide 13 fractions (Pb-1 to 13). Fraction 4 (Pb-4, 21.9 mg) was submitted to HPLC using an isocratic solvent system containing hexane: EtOAc (9:1) delivered to the a semi-prep Nucleosil 100-7 column (250 x 10 mm I.D.) at a flow rate of 1.5 ml min-1, and monitored at 254 nm detection wavelength at 25 degC (step K). Compound 4 (12.1 mg) was collected at 41 min. The residual fraction (5.0 mg) collected at 45 min was resubmitted to HPLC employing a prep C18 Shimadzu column (250 x 20 mm I.D.) at a flow rate of 2.5 ml min-1, using MeOH as eluent, and monitored at 254 nm (step L). Compound 5 (0.6 mg) was collected at 28 min. Fraction 13 (Pb-13, 426.8 mg) was chromatographed over sephadex LH-20 column (60.0 x 2.5 cm) using EtOH as eluent (step M) to afford 7 fractions. Fraction 4 crystallized spontaneously to yield compound 6 (18.8 mg; step N).

### Spectroscopic data of compound 1

Pimara-7,15-dien-3b-ol (1): white powder; molecular formula: C20H32O; [a]50-3.7deg (_c_ 2.15, CHCl3); EI/MS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 288 (30), 273 (60), 255 (100), 187 (38), 145 (35), 119 (55), 107 (70), 91 (55), 80 (48), 55 (42); 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3): d 5.69 (1H, dd, J = 10.8 and 18.0 Hz, H-15), 5.10 (1H, m, H-7), 4.82 (1H, dd, J = 1.5 and 18.0 Hz, H-16a), 4.79 (1H, dd, J = 1.5 and 10.4 Hz, H-16b), 3.13 (1H, dd, J = 4.4 and 11.6 Hz, H-3), 0.90 (3H, s, Me-18), 0.89 (3H, s, Me-19), 0.73 (3H, s, Me-20); 13C NMR (125 MHz, CDCl3): d 39.2 (C-1), 29.1 (C-2), 79.0 (C-3), 37.1 (C-4), 52.8 (C-5 and 9), 35.8 (C-6), 113.2 (C-7), 38.9 (C-10 and 12), 20.9 (C-11), 35.2 (C-13), 44.1 (C-14), 145.4 (C-15), 110.8 (C-16), 28.1 (C-17), 35.6 (C-18), 21.6 (C

## Page 5

_folius_ tissues possibly demonstrating tissue specificity. Hence, it was possible to isolate eleven, six and nine species from stems, roots and leaves, respectively. A single species, SS21, displayed a systemic colonization and five other species occurred simultaneously in two tissues. Species SS13 was recovered from leaves and roots, SS36 grew from leaves and stems, while SS42, SS65 and SS67 were isolated from both stems and roots. Some strains did not sporulate or grow in the culture conditions employed. They remain unidentified and were named sterile mycelia. Isolates that sporulated were identified by traditional taxonomical methods based on morphological features as established in Table 1.

The isolated genera _Drechslera_, _Fusarium_, _Phoma_, _Alternaria_, _Curvularia_, _Nigrospora_, _Glomerella_ and _Aspergillus_ have been previously reported as plant pathogens in a range of hosts [18-20]. They also have proven to be endophytes in several plant species [21-26] strengthening the argument that disease is an exception in the plant-microbe interaction, which could be more properly regarded as an unbalanced status in a symbiosis [27]. Genus _Papulaspora_ is a well-known competitive soil mold in the culture of mushrooms [28, 29] and it has just been recently reported as an endophyte in a few species as _Vitex negundo_[24], _Manilkara bidentata_[30], _Taxus chinensis_[31], _Amomum siamense_[32] and _Solanum tuberosum_[25]. _Preussia_, however, is recognized either as a soil or a coprophilous genus [33, 34] but has never been mentioned before as an endophyte.

### Cytotoxic activity of extracts

From the 32 fungal isolates, 186 extracts were obtained and tested against three tumor cell lines. EaL fractions had the most pronounced cytotoxic effects together with EaS fractions (Table 2), whereas fractions EtM, RL and RS were practically inactive (data not shown). The exceptions were RLSS33, RLSS75 and RLSS84, which

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline \hline
**Fungal strain** & **Taxonomic identification** & **Tissue occurrence** & \\ \cline{2-4}  & **Leaves** & **Stems** & **Roots** \\ \hline SS13 & _Papulaspora immersa_ Hotson & P & A & P \\ SS16 & _Preussia minima_ (Auersw.) von Arx. & P & A & A \\ SS20 & NI & P & A & A \\ SS21 & NI & P & P & P \\ SS22 & Mycelia sterile & P & A & A \\ SS26 & NI & P & A & A \\ SS29 & _Aspergillus aculeatus_ Lizuka & P & A & A \\ SS32 & _Glomerella cingulata_ (Stoneman) Spaulding et Schrenk & P & A & A \\ SS33 & _Drechslera ravenelli_ (Curt.) Subram. et Jain. & P & A & A \\ SS36 & _Glomerella_ sp. & P & P & A \\ SS40 & _Colletotrichum_ sp. & A & P & A \\ SS42 & _Curvularia lunata_ (Wakker) Boedijn var. _aerea_ & A & P & P \\  & (Bat., Lima et Vasconcelos) M.B. Ellis & A & P & A \\ SS43 & NI & A & P & A \\ SS44 & NI & A & P & A \\ SS46 & _Fusarium oxysporum_ & A & A & P \\ SS50 & _Fusarium oxysporum_ & A & A & P \\ SS55 & NI & A & A & P \\ SS62 & NI & A & A & P \\ SS65 & NG & A & P & P \\ SS67 & _Nigrospora sphaerica_ (Sacc.) E. W. Mason & A & P & P \\ SS68 & NI & A & A & P \\ SS70 & _Glomerella_ sp. & A & A & P \\ SS73 & NI & A & P & A \\ SS74 & Mycelia sterile & A & P & A \\ SS75 & NG & A & P & A \\ SS76 & _Aspergillus fumigatus_ Fresenius & A & P & A \\ S77 & _Alternaria tenuistima_ (Kunze) Wiltshire & A & P & A \\ SS78 & Mycelia sterile & P & A & A \\ SS79 & NI & P & A & A \\ SS82 & _Aspergillus niger_ van Tieghen & A & P & A \\ SS83 & NI & A & P & A \\ SS84 & _Phoma betae_ Frank & A & P & A \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Endophytic fungi occurrence in _Smallanthus sonofilolus_ tissues.



## Page 6

displayed moderate to high activities against colon and breast tumor cells; RSSS65 and RSSS78 inhibited about 50% of colon cells proliferation and EtMSS13, EtMSS67 and EtMSS76 were efficient inhibitors of HCT-8 tumor cells growth. It is noteworthy that only ethyl acetate fractions from both culture types of _P. immersa_ (SS13), _N. sphaerica_ (SS67) and _A. tenuissima_ (SS77) produced good results on all tested cells indicating that production of bioactive molecules by these fungi does not depend on the culture medium employed. These observations emphasize the significance of these species in future biotechnology studies.

### Cytotoxic effects and ecological importance of isolated compounds

_N. sphaerica_ (SS67) and _P. betae_ (SS84) were chosen for large scale cultures and isolation of bioactive compounds due to the cytotoxicity of their extracts.

Three substances were isolated from the _N. sphaerica_ EaS fraction (SS67, Fig. 4): compound **1** was identified as pimara-7,15-dien-3b-ol, compound **2** as ergosterol peroxide and compound **3** as aphidicolin. Spectral data of compound **2** were in agreement with literature data [35], while compound **1**, recently detected in a plant essential oil, was not characterized by the authors [36]. This is the first report of compound **1** obtained from a fungal source and having its structure completely elucidated by 1H and 13C NMR, HMQC, HMBC, MS and NOEdiff spectral data. Both compounds **1** and **2** showed weak cytotoxic activity against the tumor cell lines tested (Table 3).

Compound **3**, isolated from the EaL fraction of _N. sphaerica_ (SS67) had its structure established as the diterpene aphidicolin (Fig. 4) on the basis of its NMR data that are in agreement with reported data [37]. Aphidicolin showed a remarkable cytotoxic activity

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} \hline
**Fungus** & **Cell growth inhibition (\%)** & & & & & \\ \cline{2-7}  & HCT-8 & MDA-MB435 & & & & \\ \cline{2-7}  & **EaL fraction** & **EaS fraction** & **EaL fraction** & **EaS fraction** & **EaL fraction** & **EaS fraction** \\ \hline SS13 & 100.0 (HA) & 54.5 (MA) & 95.2 (HA) & 81.3 (HA) & 98.1 (HA) & 34.2 \\ SS16 & 32.0 & 1.6 & 31.3 & 25.7 & 35.7 & 4.1 \\ SS20 & NC & 10.3 & NC & 11.0 & NC & 4.1 \\ SS21 & 27.2 & I & 37.0 & 1 & 23.3 & 10.9 \\ SS22 & 100.0 (HA) & I & 100.0 (HA) & 11.8 & 100.0 (HA) & 1 \\ SS26 & 31.9 & 19.9 & 17.1 & 15.9 & 41.2 & 24.9 \\ SS29 & 40.1 & 68.0 (MA) & 60.6 (MA) & 27.9 & 33.1 & 62.9 (MA) \\ SS32 & 56.6 (MA) & 33.7 & 20.0 & 33.0 & 47.7 & 15.1 \\ SS33 & 86.7 (HA) & 3.6 & 71.2 (MA) & I & 84.5 (HA) & I \\ SS36 & 52.4 (MA) & 35.3 & 38.7 & 44.7 & 49.0 & 19.7 \\ SS40 & 3.6 & I & 10.7 & 1 & 12.0 & I \\ SS42 & 30.9 & 41.0 & 36.3 & 52.0 (MA) & 21.2 & 27.1 \\ SS43 & 33.9 & 54.2 (MA) & 49.2 & 59.4 (MA) & 25.0 & 54.5 (MA) \\ SS44 & 62.7 (MA) & 23.3 & 50.7 (MA) & 12.1 & 48.1 & 3.2 \\ SS46 & 85.6 (HA) & 13.0 & 83.2 (HA) & 30.3 & 85.8 (HA) & 9.7 \\ SS50 & 30.2 & I & 57.9 (MA) & I & 12.3 & I \\ SS55 & 55.3 (MA) & I & 1 & I & 14.2 & I \\ SS62 & 99.8 (HA) & 27.2 & 51.4 (MA) & 32.2 & 67.5 (MA) & 31.8 \\ SS65 & NC & 1.4 & NC & 10.8 & NC & 14.2 \\ SS67 & 79.2 (HA) & 86.2 (HA) & 48.2 & 41.9 & 73.0 (MA) & 82.2 (HA) \\ SS68 & 39.2 & 55.2 (MA) & 36.4 & 23.3 & 26.9 & 54.4 (MA) \\ SS70 & 22.1 & 32.8 & 32.1 & 41.7 & 18.5 & 18.9 \\ SS73 & 28.4 & I & 6.6 & I & 9.1 & I \\ SS74 & 24.6 & 83.9 (HA) & I & 81.0 (HA) & 8.4 & 71.3 (MA) \\ SS75 & 19.5 & 22.2 & 41.0 & 4.9 & 7.4 & 28.1 \\ SS76 & 100.0 (HA) & 48.9 & 42.6 & 30.4 & 52.7 (MA) & 40.3 \\ SS77 & 94.7 (HA) & 72.9 (MA) & 82.0 (HA) & 53.0 (MA) & 78.3 (HA) & 69.2 (MA) \\ SS78 & 4.9 & I & 19.3 & 3.3 & 6.4 & I \\ SS79 & 26.2 & 5.1 & 1 & 12.4 & 8.4 & I \\ SS82 & 87.6 (HA) & 9.1 & 45.7 & 1.4 & 68.2 (MA) & I \\ SS83 & 49.3 & 8.8 & 27.7 & 32.5 & 51.0 (MA) & 16.5 \\ SS84 & 100.0 (HA) & 12.4 & 92.4 (HA) & 10.1 & 95.6 (HA) & 15.0 \\ control & 25.9 & 2.2 & 34.6 & 20.1 & 25.1 & 4.7 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Cytotoxic activity of the ethyl acetate fractions from liquid (EaL) and solid (EaS) cultures of the endophytic fungi isolated from _Smalanthus sonchitolius_.



## Page 7

against all cell lines (Table 3), but its direct _in vivo_ administration is difficult due to its poor water solubility and fast metabolization. Aphidicolin also may damage a fragile site of the mammalian genome [38, 39]. However, it is a valuable tool to study eukaryotic DNA synthesis and cell cycles.

_P. betae_ (SS84) EaL fraction actually showed maximal efficacy against all the three cancer cell lines and was

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compound (Fungus) & IC50 (μg/ml) [CI5s]a  \\ HCT-8 & MDA-MB435 & SF295 & HL-60 \\
**1** (NS) & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & 22.60 [18,57\(-\)27,64] \\
**2** (NS and PB) & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 \\
**3** (NS) & \textgreater{}0.05 [0.037\(-\)0.079] & 0.20 [0.116\(-\)0.367] & 0.16 [0.081\(-\)0.338] & 0.09 [0.063\(-\)0.174] \\
4 (PB) & 6.24 [4.96\(-\)7.85] & 14.11 [11.87\(-\)16.78] & 17.03 [11.40\(-\)25.43] & 5.29 [4.31\(-\)6.50] \\
5 (PB) & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 \\
6 (PB) & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 \\
**Doxorubicin** & 0.01 & 0.48 & 0.24 & 0.02 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Inhibitory effect on cultured cell growth of compounds isolated from _Nigrospora sphaerica_ (NS) and _Phoma betae_ (PB), endophytes in _Smallanthus sonchifolus_.

Figure 4: Structures of compounds isolated from _Nigrospora sphaerica_ and _Phoma betae_. Pimara-7,15-dien-3b-ol (1); ergosterol peroxide (2); aphidicolin (3); (22\(E\),24_H_)-ergosta-4,6,8(14),22-tetraen-3-one (4); 8-hydroxy-6-methoxy-3-methylisocumarin (5); dimethyl terephthalate (6).



## Page 8

considered highly active (Table 2). In liquid potato-sucrose medium, _P. betae_ is reported to produce an assortment of bioactive diterpenes [40, 41], including aphidicolin (3), an specific inhibitor of DNA polymerase. Hence, the low cytotoxic activity of SS84 EaS fraction was intriguing (Table 2) and led us to investigate its chemical composition. For this purpose the fungus was cultivated for two different time periods: for 20 days according to the general protocol and for 32 days leading to sporulation. EaS fraction from 20 day cultures was subjected to chromatographic procedures and the resultant subfractions were monitored by GC/MS and 1H NMR techniques. Several fatty acids were detected but only compound **2** was isolated corroborating the initial low activity. However, the EaS fraction resulting from 32 day cultures yielded compound **6**, which was identified as dimethyl terephthalate (Fig. 4) [42], and a subfraction that inhibited 100% the proliferation of tumor cell lines tested. The subfraction 1H NMR spectrum revealed a mixture of two substances in a 1:1 ratio, later separated and identified as (22E,24R)-ergosta-4,6,8(14),22-tetraen-3-one (compound **4**) and 8-hydroxy-6-methoxy-3-methyl-isocumarin (compound **5**) in accordance with literature data (Fig. 4) [43, 44]. When compounds **4** and **5** were tested alone they showed moderate and weak activities, respectively (Table 3). The low cytotoxicity of compound **4** against other tumor cell lines had been previously described [45, 46] but the results in this report suggest that isocoumarin (compound **5**) and ergosterol (compound **4**) are acting synergistically. In fact, it has been reported that an isocoumarin propionic acid derivative has recently entered clinical trials as an anticancer and anti-angiogenic agent with the property of potentiating or improving either the therapeutic effects of some chemotherapeutic drugs [47, 48] or radiotherapy [49]. Our results suggest that compounds **4** and **5** might be considered as hits for drug development of a novel anti-cancer combination therapy.

The amounts of pesticides employed in _S. sonchifolius_ cultivation are relatively small leading some authors to suggest that sesquiterpene lactones [50] and kaurene diterpenoids [51] occuring in plant leaves may act as resistance factors. In fact, the endophytes _P. betae_ and _N. sphaerica_ and their host have similar biosynthetic pathways [52, 53], and the fungal cytotoxic compounds may provide extra protection for the plant (Table 1). _N. sphaerica_ is also known to cause both reduction of spore germination [54] and growth inhibition of some pathogenic fungi, i.e, _Fusarium oxysporum_[55, 56], one of the isolated endophytic species in Yacon roots (Table 1). Therefore, maintenance of _N. sphaerica_ and _P. betae_ as endophytes seems to be an ecological benefit to _S. sonchifolius_.

## Acknowledgements

This study was funded by grants from the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) within the Biota-Bioprospecta-FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br), grant n\({}^{\circ}\) 04/07935-6, and the Brazilian Government's National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq). The authors thank Silvana Franca dos Santos for technical assistance. Margareth B. C. Gallo acknowledges FAPESP for the postdoctoral fellowship (grant n\({}^{\circ}\) 05/56259-6).

## References

- Valentova _et al._ (2007) Valentova, K., Truong, N.T., Moncion, A., Waziers, I. and Ulrichova, J., 2007. Induction of glucokinase mRNA by dietary phenolic compounds in rat liver cells in vitro. J. Agric. Food Chem., **55**, 7726 -7731.
- Schorr _et al._ (2007) Schorr, K., Merfort, I. and Costa, F.B., 2007. A novel dimeric melampolide and further terpenoids from _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ (Asteraceae) and the inhibition of the transcription factor NF-kappa B. Nat. Prod. Communic., **4**, 367 -374.
- Lin _et al._ (2003) Lin, F., Morifunt, H. and Kodama, O., 2003. Purification and identification of antimicrobial sesquiterpene lactones from Yacon (_Smallanthus sonchifolius_) leaves. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., **67**, 2154 -2159.
- Neves and Silva (2007) Neves, V.A. and Silva, M.A., 2007. Polyphenol oxidase from Yacon Roots (_Smallanthus sonchifolius_). J. Agric. Food Chem., **55**, 2424 -2430.
- Valentova _et al._ (2006) Valentova, K., Lebeda, A., Dolezalova, I., Jirovsky, D., Simonovska, B., Vovk, I., Kosina, P., Gasmanova, N., Dziechakerova, M. and Ulrichova, J., 2006. The biological and chemical variability of Yacon. J. Agric. Food Chem., **54**, 1347 -1352.
- Genta _et al._ (2005) Genta, S.B., Cabrera, W.M., Grau, A. and Sanchez, S.S., 2005. Subchronic 4-month oral toxicity study of dried _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ (yacon) roots as a diet supplement in rats. Food Chem. Toxicol., **43**, 1657 -1665.
- Pedreschi _et al._ (2003) Pedreschi, R., Campos, D., Noratto, G., Chirinos, R. and Cisneros-Zevallos, L., 2003. Andean yacon root (_Smallanthus sonchifolius_ Poepp. Endl.) fructo oligosaccharides as a potential novel source of prebiotics. J. Agric. Food Chem., **51**, 5278 -5284.
- Gallo _et al._ (2008) Gallo, M.B.C., Guimaraes, D.O., Momeso, L.S. and Pupo, M.T., 2008. Natural Products from endophytic fungi. In: Saikai, R., Bezbaruah, R.L. and Bora, T.C. (eds.), Microbial Biotechnology, pp. 139 -168. New India Publishing Agency, New Delhi, India.
- Firakova _et al._ (2007) Firakova, S., Sturdikova, M. and Muckova, M., 2007. Bioactive secondary metabolites produced by microorganisms associated with plants. Biologia, **62**, 251 -257.
- Guimaraes _et al._ (2008) Guimaraes, D.O., Borges, W.S., Kawano, C.Y., Ribeiro, P.H., Goldman, G.H., Nomizo, A., Thiemann, O.H., Lopes, N.P. and Pupo, M.T., 2008. Biological activities from extracts of endophytic fungi isolated from _Viguera arenaria


## Page 9

and _Tithonia diversifolia_. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol., **52**, 134-144.
* [11] Borges, K.B., Borges, W.S., Pupo, M.T. and Bonato, P.S., 2008. Stereoselective analysis of thioridazine-2-sulfoxide and thioridazine-5-sulfoxide: An investigation of rac-thioridazine biotransformation by some endophytic fungi. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., **46**, 945-952.
* [12] Borges, K.B., Borges, W.S., Pupo, M.T. and Bonato, P.S., 2007. Endophytic fungi as models for the stereoselective biotransformation of thioridazide. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., **77**, 669-674.
* [13] Borges, W.S. and Pupo, M.T., 2006. Novel anthraquinone derivatives produced by _Pboma sorghum_, an endophyte found in association with the medicinal plant _Tithonia diversifolia_ (Asteraceae). J. Braz. Chem. Soc., **17**, 929-934.
* [14] Jackson, M., Karwowski, J.P., Humphrey, P.E., Kohl, W.L., Barlow, G.J. and Tanaka, S.K., 1993. Calbistrins, novel antifungal agents produced by _Penicillium restriction_. 1. Production, taxonomy of the producing organism and biological activity. J. Antibiotics, **46**, 34-38.
* [15] Atlas, R.M., 1995. Handbook of Microbiological Media for the Examination of Food, 310 pp. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
* [16] Mosman, T., 1983. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. J. Immunol. Methods, **65**, 55-63.
* [17] Pohlit, A.M., Tigre, R.F., Cavalcanti, B.C., Moraes, M.O., Costa- Lotufo, L.V., Moraes, M.E.A., Santos, E.V.M., Morais, S.K.R., Nunomura, S.M. and Pessoa, C., 2007. Cytotoxic fractions from the leaves of _Tachia grandiflora_. Pharm. Biol., **45**, 429-433.
* [18] Gannibal, P.B., Klemsdal, S.S. and Levitin, M.M., 2007. AFPL analysis of Russian _Alternaria tenuissima_ populations from wheat kernels and other hosts. Eur. J. Plant Pathol., **119**, 175-182.
* [19] Chrysayi-Tokousbalides, M. and Kastanias, M.A., 2003. Cynodontin: a fungal metabolite with antifungal properties. J. Agric. Food Chem., **51**, 4920-4923.
* [20] Garcia-Pajon, C.M. and Collado, I.G., 2003. Secondary metabolites isolated from _Colletotrichum_ species. Nat. Prod. Rep., **20**, 426-431.
* [21] Gond, S.K., Verma, V.C., Kumar, A., Kumar, V. and Kharwar, R.N., 2007. Study of endophytic fungal community from different parts of _Aegle marmelos_ Correae (Rutaceae) from Varanasi (India). World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., **23**, 1371-1375.
* [22] Verma, V.C., Gond, S.K., Kumar, A., Kharvar, R.N. and Strobel, G., 2007. The endophytic mycoflox of bark, leaf, and stem tissues of _Azidractha indica_ A. Juss (Neem) from Varanasi (India). Microbial Ecol., **54**, 119-125.
* [23] White, I.R. and Backhouse, D., 2007. Comparison of fungal endophyte communities in the invasive panicoid grass _Hyparhenia hirta_ and the native grass _Bothriochlo macra_. Aust. J. Bot., **55**, 178-185.
* [24] Raviraja, N.S., Maria, G.L. and Sridhar, K.R., 2006. Antichicrobial evaluation of endophytic fungi inhabiting medicinal plants of the Western Ghats of India. Eng. Life Sci., **5**, 515-520.
* [25] O'Callaghan, M., Gerard, E.M., Waipara, N.W., Young, S.D., Glare, T.R., Barrell, P.J. and Conner, A.J., 2004. Microbial communities of _Solanum tuberosum_ and magainin-producing transgenic lines. Plant Soil, **266**, 47-56.
* [26] Liu, J.Y., Song, Y.C., Zhang, Z., Wang, L., Guo, Z.J., Zou, W.X. and Tan, R.X., 2004. _Aspergillus fumigatus_ CY018, an endophytic fungus in _Cynodon dactyl_ as a versatile producer of new and bioactive metabolites. J. Biotechnol., **114**, 279-287.
* What decides? Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., **9**, 358-363.
* [28] Katyal, P., Khanna, P.K. and Kapoor, S., 2006. Toxicity of fungicides against _Agaricus bisporus_ and its mycopathogens. J. Mycol. Plant Pathol., **36**, 296-298.
* [29] Fudo, R., Ando, T., Sato, S., Kameyama, T. and Yamanaka, S., 1997. Isolation of isosequentiin as a fruiting body inducer for _Stigmatella aurantiaca_ from a soil fungus _Papulsapora_ sp. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., **61**, 183-184.
* [30] Bayman, P., Angulo-Sandoval, P., Baez-Ortiz, Z. and Lodge, D.J., 1998. Distribution and dispersal of _Xylaria_ endophytes in two tree species in Puerto Rico. Mycol. Res., **102**, 944-948.
* [31] Hu, K., Tan, F., Tang, K., Zhu, S. and Wang, W., 2006. Isolation and screening of endophytic fungi synthesizing taxol from _Taxus chinensis_ var. _mairei_. Ziran Kexueban, **31**, 134-137.
* [32] Bussaban, B., Lumyong, S., Lumyong, P., McKenzie, E.H.C. and Hyde, K.D., 2001. Endophytic fungi from _Amomum stemense_. Can. J. Microbiol., **47**, 943-948.
* [33] Weber, H.A. and Gloer, J.B., 1988. Interference competition among natural fungal competitors: an antifungal metabolite from the coprophilous fungus _Preussia fleshel-hakti_. J. Nat. Prod., **51**, 879-883.
* [34] Johnson, J.H., Meyers, E., O'Sullivan, J., Phillipson, D.W., Robinson, G., Trejo, W.H. and Wells, J.S., 1989. Culpin, a novel hydroquinone antibiotic of fungal origin. J. Antibiotics, **42**, 1515-1517.
* [35] Bok, J.W., Lermer, L., Chilton, J., Klingeman, H.G. and Towers, G.H.N., 1999. Antitumor sterols from the mycelia of _Cordcycenes sinensis_. Phytochemistry, **51**, 891-898.
* [36] Tian, G., Li, B., Wang, W., Wang, C. and Gong, K., 2005. Components of the essential oil of _Isidon henryi_ (hemsi) Kudo. Xibei Zhiwu Xuebao, **25**, 2543-2548.
* [37] Rizzo, C.J. and Smith, A.B., 1991. Aphidicolin synthetic studies: a stereocontrolled end game. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. I, **96**-979.
* [38] Palin, A.H., Critcher, R., Fitzgerald, D.J., Anderson, J.N. and Farr, C.J., 1998. Direct cloning and analysis of DNA sequences from a region of the Chinese hamster genome associated with aphidicolin-sensitivity fragility. J. Cell Sci., **111**, 1623-1634.
* [39] Michaelis, M., Zimmer, A., Handjou, N., Cinatl, J. and Cinatl, J.Jr., 2005. Increased systemic efficacy of aphidicolin encapsulated in liposomes. Oncol. Rep., **13**, 157-160.
* [40] Oikawa, H., Toshima, H., Ohashi, S., Konig, W.A., Kenmoku, H. and Sassa, T., 2001. Diversity of diterpene hydrocarbons in fungus _Phoma betae_. Tetrahedron Lett., **42**, 2329-2332.
* [41] Ichihara, A., Oikawa, H., Hayashi, K., Hashimoto, M., Sakamura, S. and Sakai, R., 1984. 3-deoxyaphidicolin and 

## Page 10

aphidicolin analogues as phytotoxins from _Phoma betae_. Agric. Biol. Chem., **48**, 1687-1689.
* [42] Chenot, E., Bernardi, D., Comel, A. and Kirsh, G., 2007. Preparation of monoalkytetrephthalates: an overview. Synth. Commun., **37**, 483-490.
* [43] Fujimoto, H., Nakamura, E., Okuyama, E. and Ishibashi, M., 2004. Six immunosuppressive features from an Ascomycete. _Zopfella logicauda_, found in a screening study monitored by immunomodulatory activity. Chem. Pharm. Bull., **52**, 1005-1008.
* [44] Kumagai, H., Amemiya, M., Naganawa, H., Sawa, T., Ishizuka, M. and Takeuchi, T., 1994. Biosynthesis of anti-tumor antibiotic, cytogenin. J. Antibiotics, **47**, 440-446.
* [45] Chen, J.-J., Chou, E.-T., Duh, C.-Y., Yang, S.-Z. and Chen, I.-S., 2006. New cytotoxic tetrahydrofuran- and dihydrofuran-type ligands from the stem bark of _Beilschmedia stangii_. Planta Med., **72**, 351-357.
* [46] Kwon, H.C., Zee, S.D., Cho, S.Y., Choi, S.U. and Lee, K.R., 2002. Cytotoxic ergosterols from _Paecilomyces_ sp. J300. Arch. Pharmacol., Res., **25**, 851-855.
* [47] Yuan, H., Junker, B., Helquist, P. and Taylor, R.E., 2004. Synthesis of anti-angiogenic isocumarins. Curr. Org. Chem., **1**, 1-9.
* [48] Agata, N., Nogi, H., Millohlen, M., Kharbanda, S. and Kufe, D.W., 2004. 2-(8-hydroxy-6-methoxy-1-oxo-1H-2-benzopyran-3-yl)propionic acid, a small molecule isocumarin, potentiates dexamethasone-induced apoptosis of human multiple myeloma cells. Cancer Res., **64**, 8512-8516.
* [49] Salloum, R.M., Jaskowiak, N.T., Mauceri, H.J., Seetharam, S., Beckett, M.A., Koons, A.M., Hari, D.M., Gupta, V.K., Reimer, C., Kailuri, R., Posner, M.C., Hellman, S., Kufe, D.W. and Weichselbaum, R.R., 2000. NM-3, an isocumarin, increases the antitumor effects of radiotherapy without toxicity. Cancer Res., **60**, 6958-6963.
* [50] Inoue, A., Tamogami, S., Kato, H., Nakazato, Y., Akiyama, M., Kodama, O., Akatsuka, T. and Hashidoko, Y., 1995. Antifungal melampolides from leaf extracts of _Smallanthus sonchofilus_. Phytochemistry, **39**, 845-848.
* [51] Kakuta, H., Seiki, T., Hashidoko, Y. and Mizutani, J., 1992. Ent-kaurenic acid and its related compounds from glandular trichome exudate and leaf extracts of _Polymia sonchofila_. Biosci. Biotech. Biochem., **56**, 1562-1564.
* [52] Oikawa, H., Nakamura, K., Toshima, H., Tayamasu, T. and Sassa, T., 2002. Proposed mechanism for the reaction catalyzed by a diterpene cyclase, aphidicolan-16-beta-ol synthase: experimental results on biomimetic cyclization and examination of the cyclization pathway by ab initio calculations. J. Am. Chem. Soc., **124**, 9145-9153.
* [53] Yao, Q., 2007. Biosynthetic Studies of Fungal Diterpenes Antibiotics. Master Dissertation. Oregon State University. 203 pp.
* [54] Perello, A., Simon, M.R. and Arambarri, A.M., 2002. Interactions between foliar pathogens and the saprophytic microflora of the wheat (_Trittium aestivum_ L) phylloplane. J. Phytophatol., **150**, 232-243.
* growth inhibition of some phytopathogenic fungi by organic extracts from _Nigrospora oriaez_ (Berkeley and Broome) Petch. J. Basic Microbiol., **31**, 69-73.
* [56] Kim, J.-C., Choi, G.J., Park, J.-H., Kim, H.T. and Cho, K.Y., 2001. Activity against plant pathogenic fungi of phonolactone isolated from _Nigrospora sphaerica_. Pest Manag. Sci., **57**, 554-559.



