# 10.1080@14786419.2011.647020.pdf

## Page 1



# Natural Product Research: Formerly Natural Product Letters

Publisher: Taylor & Francis

Information Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

W.J. Andrioli, M.S. Santos, V.B. Silva, R.B. Oliveira, D.A. Chagas-Paula, J.A. Jorge, N.A.J.C. Furtado, M.T. Pupo, C.H.T.P. Silva, R.M.Z.G. Naal, G.J.K. Bastos

Departamento de Ciencias Farmaceuticas, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Avenida do Cafe, s/n, CEP 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brasil Departamento de Fisica e Quimica, Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brasil Instituto Nacional de Ciencia e Tecnologia em Bioanalittica, Universidade de Campinas, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brasil Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciencias e Letras de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brasil Published online: 12 Jan 2012.

1. To cite this article: W.J. Andrioli, M.S. Santos, V.B. Silva, R.B. Oliveira, D.A. Chagas-Paula, J.A. Jorge, N.A.J.C. Furtado, M.T. Pupo, C.H.T.P. Silva, R.M.Z.G. Naal, G.J.K.



## Page 2

of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, resulting, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

## Page 3

(\delta\)-Lactam derivative from thermophilic soil fungus exhibits _in vitro_ anti-allergic activity

W.J. Andrioliabel=e1]jkbastos@fcfrp.usp.br

M.S. Santoslabel=e2]santos@fcfrp.usp.br

V.B. Silvalabel=e3]v.b.silva@fcfrp.usp.br

R.B. Oliveiralabel=e4]r.b.silva@fcfrp.usp.br

D.A. Chagas-Paulalabel=e5]d.A.J. Jorgelabel=e6]d.J.A.J.C. Furtadolabel=e7]h.A.J.C. Furtadolabel=e8]f.T.P. Puglabel=e9]c.H.T.P. Silvalabel=e10]f.M.Z.G. Naalabelabel=e10]J.K. Bastosabel=e11]J.K. Bastosabel=e2]J.K.

###### Abstract

From cultures of thermophilic soil fungus _Humicola grisea_ var _thermoidea_, a \(\delta\)-lactam derivative (3-(2-(4-hydroxyethyl)-2-oxoethyl)-5,6-dihydroxypyridin-2(1H)-one) that displayed anti-allergic activity was isolated, which was predicted by _in silico_ computational chemistry approaches. The _in vitro_ anti-allergic activity was investigated by \(\beta\)-hexosaminidase release assay in rat basophilic leukaemia RBL-2H3 cells. The \(\delta\)-lactam derivative exhibited similar anti-allergic activity (IC\({}_{50}\) = 18.7 \(\pm\) 6.7 \(\mu\)M) in comparison with ketotifen fumarate (IC\({}_{50}\) = 15.0 \(\pm\) 1.3 \(\mu\)M) and stronger anti-allergic activity than azelastine (IC\({}_{50}\) = 32.0 \(\mu\)M). Also, the MTT cytotoxicity assay with RBL-2H3 cells showed that \(\delta\)-lactam does not display cytotoxicity at concentrations lower than 50 \(\mu\)M. This study suggests that the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative has the potential to be used as a lead compound in the development of anti-allergic drugs for clinical use in humans.

Humicola grisea var thermoidea; thermophilic fungus; \(\delta\)-lactam derivative; _in silico_; anti-allergic activity

## 1 Introduction

Currently, important fungal metabolites are successfully employed in the clinical setting, including \(\beta\)-lactams, the anti-hypercholesterolaemic drug lovastatin and its derivatives, the immunosuppressant cyclosporin and ergotamine. Pharmaceutical and medical aspects of these valuable drugs have been comprehensively reviewed (Misiek and Hoffmeister, 2007). The _Humicola_ genus includes several species of thermophilic soil fungi that are able to degrade complex natural substrates. Furthermore, _Humicola grisea_ var _thermoidea_ is an important producer of thermostable enzymes that have a wide application in biotechnological studies (Dantas-Barbosa, Araujo, Moraes, Vainstein, & Azevedo, 1998).

As part of our continuous investigation of new metabolites from fungi, we recently analysed an ethyl acetate culture extract of _H. grisea_ and isolated a \(\delta\)-lactam derivative in a pure form by a combination of repeated column chromatography (CC) on silica gel.



## Page 4

We have evaluated the therapeutic potential of a \(\delta\)-lactam derivative by predicting its potential biological activities _in silico_ by computational chemistry approaches and have undertaken _in vitro_ assays to corroborate the selected prediction.

## 2 Results and discussion

The complete structural assignment of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative (Figure 1) was accomplished by spectral analysis. The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectral data were compared with previously published data (Gopichand and Schmitz, 1979), which confirmed our structure assignments. The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum displays a pair of two-hydrogen doublets at \(\delta\) 6.88 and 7.96 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.9 Hz), respectively, characterising four hydrogens in _ortho_ positions in the _p_-substituted aromatic system. In addition to the aromatic hydrogen signals, the triplet at \(\delta\) 6.61 (1H, t, \(J\) = 4.2 Hz), attributable to the \(\beta\) hydrogen of an \(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated carbonyl system, is compatible with the presence of one vinyl hydrogen. This hydrogen is coupled to a broad two-hydrogen multiplet at \(\delta\) 2.44 (2H, m), which in turn is coupled with a two-hydrogen triplet appearing at \(\delta\) 3.45 (2H, t, \(J\) = 7.3 Hz). Irradiation of the signal at \(\delta\) 2.44 not only collapses the triplets at \(\delta\) 6.61 and 3.45, but also sharpens a broad two-hydrogen singlet at \(\delta\) 3.93 (2H, bs). These hydrogen signals correspond to the \(\delta\)-lactam ring. The \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (CD\({}_{3}\)OD) spectrum contains 13 carbon atoms signals. Among the quaternary carbons, one is attributed to the amide carbonyl (\(\delta\) 168.4, C-1), a second described to ketone carbonyl (\(\delta\) 198.6, C-8) and the third quaternary carbon linked to a hydroxyl group (\(\delta\) 164.0, C-4\({}^{\prime}\)).

These data have allowed us to propose a \(\delta\)-lactam moiety for the compound, in addition to the _p_-hydroxybenzoyl moiety, which was corroborated by the H-C correlations observed in the HMBC (heteronuclear multiple bond correlation) experiment. The union of a \(\delta\)-lactam moiety with that of the _p_-hydroxybenzoyl moiety was confirmed by HMBC correlations of the hydrogens at \(\delta\) 7.96 and \(\delta\) 3.93 with the carbon at \(\delta\) 198.6. The mass spectrum (MS) with \(m/z\) = 232.0980 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) suggested the molecular formula C\({}_{13}\)H\({}_{13}\)NO\({}_{3}\) and the optical rotation measurements resulted in [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}^{27}\) -7.4 (\(c\) = 1.0, MeOH). All these results are in agreement with the structure (Figure 1) proposed for the isolated compound. The \(\delta\)-lactam derivative (3-(2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-oxoethyl)-5,6-dihydropyridin-2(1H)-one) was first isolated from an algae-infested Caribbean sponge, _Halichondria melanodecia_, and its structure was elucidated on the basis of \({}^{1}\)H-NMR and MS data only (Gopichand Schmitz, 1979). This is the first time that the above-mentioned \(\delta\)-lactam derivative has been isolated from fungi culture and identified by \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR, HMQC (heteronuclear multiple quantum correlation) and HMBC analysis, high resolution mass spectrometry and optical rotation.

Figure 1: Chemical structure of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative isolated from rice medium culture of \(H\). _grisea_ var _thermoidea_.



## Page 5

The use of _in silico_ predictions is an important tool in the development of new drugs. In this regard, _in silico_ prediction performed with PASS (prediction of activity spectra of substances) for the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative indicated several possible biological activities, and among them the anti-allergic one (Table 1). Therefore, it was decided to undertake _in vitro_ anti-allergic assays using three protocols to confirm the prediction.

Despite the use of different approaches in drug discovery, natural products still provide new templates for clinical assays (Butler, 2004), including new anti-allergic drugs. In anti-allergic activity studies, \(\beta\)-hexosaminidase (\(\beta\)-hex) release is an effective method for monitoring different responses of mast cells such as exocytose signal transduction, biological activity of new drugs and antigen detection (Naal, Tabb, Holowka, & Baird, 2004). The amount of \(\beta\)-hex increases significantly when a drug either stimulates cells or causes cell death (Schwartz, Austen, & Wasserman, 1979). Thus, the \(\beta\)-hex enzyme assay is a highly appropriate tool to assess the potentiality of drugs to inhibit mast cell degranulation.

The \(\beta\)-hex release assay demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative on mast cell degranulation is dose dependent (IC50 = 18.7 +- 6.7 uM) (Figure 2a) and possesses a similar activity compared with ketotifen fumarate (IC50 = 15.0 +- 1.3 uM) (Figure 2b) and a stronger anti-allergic activity than azelastine (32.0 uM) (Lee et al., 2007),

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline \hline  & & & & Number of related & compounds in \\ Activity & Effects & \(P_{\text{a}}\) & \(P_{\text{i}}\) & the database \\ \hline Anti-dyskinetic Membrane integrity agonist & Anti-dyskinetic Anti-dyskinetic Anti-viral (HIV), anti-allergic anti-inflammatory anti-perruritic anti-cezematic anti-seborrhoeic and anti-epileptic & 0.744 & 0.009 & 16 \\ Nucleus-specific & Anti-viral (HIV), anti-allergic anti-inflammatory anti-perruritic anti-cezematic anti-seborrhoeic and anti-epileptic & 0.755 & 0.081 & 16 \\ Nucleus-specific & Anti-inflammatory anti-inflammatory anti-perruritic anti-cezematic anti-seborrhoeic and anti-epileptic & & & \\ Nucleus-specific & Anti 

## Page 6

both used as reference drugs in this study. Azelastine and ketotifen have been recently classified as multiple action drugs, suggested to combine antihistaminic, mast cell stabilisation and anti-inflammatory effects (Lambiase, Micera, & Bonini, 2009). The mechanism(s) by which both drugs inhibit mast cell activation remain unclear but one suspected mechanism is the blocking of IgE-regulated calcium channels, stabilising the cell and preventing the release of histamine and related mediators (Lambiase et al., 2009; Williams, Crandall, & Sheppard, 2010). In addition, inhibition of intracellular Ca\({}^{2+}\) elevation levels leads to the inhibition of Ca\({}^{2+}\)-dependent PKC, which is also critical for granule exocytosis (Kimata, Shichijo, & Miura, 1999).

The effects of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative on the activity of \(\beta\)-hex were also examined to clarify whether its effect was due to inhibition of enzyme activity or degranulation. As shown in Figure 3(b), the active compound weakly inhibits the enzyme activity of \(\beta\)-hex, since 50 uM of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative causes only 44% enzyme inhibition, demonstrating that the reduction on quantified \(\beta\)-hex, in the presence of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative, is mostly attributable to the capacity of the compound to inhibit the secretion of \(\beta\)-hex from the RBL cells. Furthermore, the incubation of RBL-2H3 cells, in the presence of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative (0.02-50 uM), for 24 h did not affect the cell viability, assessed using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) cytotoxicity assay. As shown in Figure 3(a), only a small reduction in cell viability (15%) was observed after cell treatment with the highest drug concentration (50 uM).

The inhibitory activity of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative against mast cell degranulation indicate that it is a promising candidate for the development of anti-allergic agent with the required action mechanism. Furthermore, the _in vitro_ cytotoxic concentration against RBL-2H3 cells was much higher than the effective (_in vitro_) anti-allergic ones. Therefore, the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative seems to be safe for future applications, but additional studies to certify both the acute and chronic toxicities of this compound are necessary.

## 3 Experimental

### General experimental procedures

1H- and 13C-NMR spectra were recorded in CD3OD using a Bruker Avance 400 MHz NMR spectrometer (Bruker; Karlsruhe, Germany) with TMS as an internal standard,

Figure 3: (a) Cytotoxicity of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative on RBL-2H3 cells determined by MTT assay. The percentage of cell viability was calculated relative to the untreated control. The cells (\(1.0\times 10^{5}\,\mathrm{cells}\,\mathrm{mL}^{-1}\)) were incubated with the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative in 5% CO2 for 24 h, at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C. (b) Effects of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative on \(\beta\)-hex enzyme activity. Inhibition levels at 18 μM (IC50) and 50 μM Qc were equal to 28 and 44%, respectively, indicating that the activity of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative is mainly due to its ability to inhibit degranulation.



## Page 7

MS analyses were performed at high resolution on an ultrOTOFq-ESI-TOF Mass Spectrometer Bruker Daltonics (Billerica, MA, EUA). The MS analysis was accomplished using collision energy of 25 eV. Optical rotation analysis was undertaken on a Jasco Digital Polarimeter - DIP 370. HPLC chromatography was carried on a Shimadzu equipment (SCL-10Avp, LC-10AD and SPD-M10Avp DAD, Japan) using reverse phase column CLC-ODS (M) - 4.6 x 250 mm2 Shimadzu. CC was carried out on silica gel 60 F254 and 60 H (Merck; Darmstadt, Germany). Precoated plates of silica gel 60 F254 (Merck; Darmstadt, Germany) were used for analytical purposes and the spots were detected with a UV lamp at 254 and 366 nm and by spraying with 50% H2SO4 followed by heating.

### Cultivation, extraction and isolation

The _Humicola_ strain was isolated from a Brazilian soil sample (Minas Gerais, Brazil) and classified as _H. grisea_ var. thermopidea on the basis of morphological and physiological characteristics as described by Cooney and Emerson (1964). The isolated strain is deposited at the Laboratory of Microbiology and Cellular Biology, University of Sao Paulo. The production of secondary metabolites was carried out by inoculation of rice medium (90 g) with 4 x 104 conidia g-1. Cultures (40 flasks) were incubated for 90 days at 40degC.

The metabolites were extracted through maceration with ethanol. The ethanol extract was filtered and concentrated under vacuum, furnishing the crude ethanol extract (16.0 g), which was partitioned with hexanes and ethyl acetate, in sequence. This procedure afforded 6.2 and 4.0 g of each fraction, respectively. The ethyl acetate fraction was subjected to vacuum liquid chromatography over silica gel 60H and eluted with a mixture of hexanes-EtOAc in the order of increasing polarity (0-100%) to yield a total of eight fractions. The fifth subfraction (439 mg) was again submitted to vacuum liquid chromatography and eluted with a mixture of hexanes-EtOAc in the order of increasing polarity (0-100%) to yield a total of eight fractions. The third subfraction (154 mg) was flash-chromatographed over silica gel 60, using an isocratic mobile phase (hexanes/ethyl acetate/methanol 25:69:6), which gave 46 fractions. Fractions 10-21 were combined (77 mg) and analysed by HPLC. Multiple injections of combined fractions obtained from flash chromatography onto a reverse phase column CLC-ODS (M) - 4.6 x 250 mm2 Shimadzu was carried out, and elution was accomplished with methanol/water (10:90 to 100%) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min-1 over 23 min, thereby yielding the _d_-lactam derivative (10 mg).

3-(2-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)-2-oxoethyl)-5,6-dihydropyridin-2(1H)-one (_d_-lactam derivative) (1): white solid, m.p. 235.0-235.5degC, UV (MeOH): _l_max (log _e_) = 218 (4.13) and 273 (3.77) nm; IR (KBr): _v_max = 3377, 3200, 1680 and 1635/cm; 1H-NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) \(d\) 2.44 (m, 2H, CH2), 3,45 (t, \(J\) = 7.3 Hz, 2H, CH2), 3.93 (bs, 2H, CH2), 6.61 (t, \(J\) = 4.2 Hz, H, CH), 6.88 (d, \(J\) = 8.9 Hz, 2H, 2xCH) and 7.96 (d, \(J\) = 8.9 Hz, 2H, 2xCH); 13C-NMR (100 MHz, CD3OD): \(d\) 25.2 (C-4), 40.4 (C-7), 40.6 (C-3), 116.3 (C-2', 6'), 129.8 (C-1'), 131.0 (C-6), 132.0 (C-3',5'), 141.0 (C-5), 164.0 (C-4'), 168.4 (C-1) and 198.6 (C-8); HREIMS: _m/z_ 232.0980 [M + H]+ (calcd for C13H13NO3: 232.0974).

### Molecular modelling procedures and prediction of the biological activity spectrum

Conformational search was performed on the _d_-lactam structure by means of the systematic searching method using the Merck molecular force field molecular mechanics model, implemented in the Spartan 06 1.0.2 software (Spartan, 2006). The molecule was then fully optimised in the gas phase at the B3LYP/6-31 G* level of calculation.



## Page 8

The prediction of the possible biological activity spectrum was performed with the PASS server. PASS is a tool that predicts the possible biological effects of a compound on the basis of the structural formula using MNA (Multilevel neighbourhoods of atoms) descriptors, thus suggesting that the biological activity is a function of the chemical structure. The PASS algorithm method estimates the biological activity by comparing the structure of a new compound with a training set of approximately 46,000 well-known bioactive compounds. Only the activities with _P_a higher than 0.7 predicted for the \(\delta\)-lactam compound were considered.

### Anti-allergic assay

#### 3.4.1 \(\beta\)-hex release assay

RBL-2H3 cells (Barsumian, Isersky, Petrino, & Siraganian, 1981) were maintained and harvested as previously described (Naal et al., 2004). They were sensitised overnight with a five-fold excess of anti-DNP-IgE (Liu et al., 1980) at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C and washed twice in Tyrode's buffer containing 1 mg mL\({}^{-1}\) BSA (Acros Organics, NJ, USA).

The \(\beta\)-hex release assay was performed as described by Naal et al. (2004). IgE sensitised cells (1.5 x 10\({}^{5}\) cells mL\({}^{-1}\)) attached to microlitre wells were treated with 100 mL of each concentration (0.02-50.0 uM) of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative prepared in Tyrode's buffer (from 1.0 mg/mL stock solution in DMSO), followed by the addition of 100 uL of the antigen (final concentration equal to 0.1 ug mL\({}^{-1}\)) at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C, for 60 min. Finally, 100 uL of \(\beta\)-hex substrate, 4-methylumbelliferyl-_N_-acetyl-\(\beta\)-d-glucosamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) (final concentration equal to 1.2 mM), prepared in Tyrode's buffer, was added and the cells were incubated for 30 min, at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C. The reaction was stopped by placing the cells on ice. \(\beta\)-Hex activity was assessed by the measurement of its fluorescent product, umbelliferone, in a microplate reader (BioTek, Synergy HT, Winooski, VT, USA) at 360 nm excitation and 450 nm emission filters. The percentage of released \(\beta\)-hex was calculated using Equation (1) and was based on the total amount of released \(\beta\)-hex from cells disrupted with the surfactant Triton X-100. Spontaneous \(\beta\)-hex release was determined from cells in Tyrode's buffer in the absence of antigen stimulation. IC\({}_{50}\) values were determined graphically. The inhibitory effect of the \(\delta\)-lactam derivative on \(\beta\)-hex secretion was compared with that of ketotifen fumarate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).

\[\%\ \beta\text{-Hexosaminidase} = \frac{S - N}{T - N} \times 100\]

where \(S\) is the sample - fluorescence regarding released \(\beta\)-hex from (+) or (-) DNP-BSA treated cells, \(N\) normal - fluorescence from vehicle (Tyrode's buffer) and \(T\) total - fluorescence regarding released \(\beta\)-hex from Triton X-100 disrupted cells.

#### 3.4.2 \(\beta\)-hex inhibitory activity

An assay was performed in order to ensure that the anti-allergic activity of the \(\delta\)-lactam was due to the inhibition of \(\beta\)-hex release and not the \(\beta\)-hex activity. To this end, the cell suspension (1.5 x 10\({}^{5}\) cells mL\({}^{-1}\)) was sonicated and centrifuged. The enzyme solution (45 uL) and test sample solution (5 uL) were transferred to a 96-well plate and incubated with 50 uL of the substrate solution for 1 h, at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 200 uL of stop solution (0.1 M Na2CO3/NaHCO3, pH 10.0) and fluorescence was measured using the microplate reader.



## Page 9



#### 3.4.3 MTT assay

RBL-2H3 cells (2.0 x 104 cell per well) were seeded onto 96 well plates and incubated overnight. The medium was then removed and fresh medium, along with different tested concentrations of the _d_-lactam derivative (0.02-50.0 uM), were added to cultures in parallel. After 24 h of incubation, an MTT assay was performed using the modified method of Mosmann (1983). For instance, following the 24 h incubation, the cells were washed and added to 20 uL of MTT (5 mg/mL) and 180 uL culture medium, with an additional 4 h incubation at 37degC. Later on, the supernatant was dumped out and the formed insoluble formazan crystals were dissolved in DMSO and their optical densities were measured at 570 using a microplate reader. The optical density from the lactam derivative untreated cells was used as an indicator of 100% cell viability. The MTT assay assesses cell viability by measuring the activity of mitochondrial reductases to reduce the MTT salt into formazan, a process that only occurs for viable cells (Mosmann, 1983).

### Statistical analysis

Results for _b_-hex release were expressed as means +- SEM. The concentration of the tested compound that caused 50% of _b_-hex inhibition (IC50) was obtained using the Origin 8.0 software. One-way analysis of variance followed by Dunnet's test was used for statistical analysis. Differences were considered statistically significant at \(p\) < 0.05.

## 4 Conclusions

The results of the bioassay evaluations obtained in this study confirmed the anti-allergic potential of the _d_-lactam derivative predicted by the computational studies. Thus, the combination of molecular structure determination and computational predictions is a helpful and important tool for drug development. Our findings also provide new perspectives about the therapeutic use of _d_-lactam as an anti-allergic drug. In addition, this study reinforces the importance of studying metabolites from microorganisms in the search for lead compounds.

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to CAPES and CNPq for providing financial support and research fellowships. They also thank FAPESP for both scholarship and financial support (grant no. 04/07935-6). W.J. Andrioli and M.S. Santos contributed equally to this study.

## References

* [1]
* isolation of releasing and non-releasing clones. _European Journal of Immunology, 11_, 317-323.
* [3]Butler, M.S. (2004). The role of natural product chemistry in drug discovery. _The Journal of Natural Products, 67_, 2141-2153.
* [4]Cooney, D.G., & Emerson., R. (1964). Methods of isolation and culture. In D.G. Cooney & R. Emerson (Eds.), _Thermophilic fungi: An account of their biology_, _activities and classification_ (pp. 8-13). San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman and Company.
* [5]Dantas-Barbosa, C., Araujo, E.F., Moraes, L.M.P., Vainstein, M.H., & Azevedo, M.O. (1998). Genetic transformation of germinated conidia of the thermophilic fungus Humicola grisea var. thermoidea to hygromycin B resistance. _FEMS Microbiology Letters, 16_, 185-190.
* [6]Gopichand, Y., & Schmitz, F. (1979). Two novel lactams from the marine sponge _Halichondria melanodocia. Journal of Organic Chemistry, 44_, 4995-4997.
* [7]Kimata, M., Shichio, M., & Miura, T. (1999). Ca2+ and protein kinase C signaling for histamine and sulfoleukotrienes released from human cultured mast cells. _Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 257_, 895-900.



## Page 10

* [Lambiase, Micera,  BoniniLambiase et al.2009] Lambiase, A., Micera, A.,  Bonini, S. 2009. Multiple action agents and the eye: Do they stabilize mast cells? Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 9, 454-465.
* [Lee et al.2007] Lee, S.H., Bae, E.A., Park, E.K., Shin, Y.W., Baek, N.I., Han, E.J.,..., Kim, D.H. 2007. Inhibitory effect of epatilin and jacosidin isolated from Artemisia princeps in IgE-induced hypersensitivity. International Immunopharmacology, 7, 1678-1684.
* [Liu et al.1980] Liu, F.B., Ferry, E.L., Yamamoto, H., Molinaro, C.A., Sherman, L.A., Klinman, N.R.,  Katz, D. 1980. Monoclonal dinitrophenol specific murine IgE antibody: purification, isolation and characterization. The Journal of Immunology, 124, 2728-2736.
* [Misiek Hoffmeister2007] Misiek, M.,  Hoffmeister, D. 2007. Fungal genetics, genomics, and secondary metabolites in pharmaceutical sciences. Planta Medica, 73, 103-115.
* Application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. The Journal of Immunological Methods, 65, 55-56.
* [Naal et al.2004] Naal, R.M.Z.G., Tabb, J., Holowka, D.,  Baird, B. 2004. In situ measurement of degranulation as a biosensor based on RBL-2H3 mast cells. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 20, 791-796.
* [Schwartz et al.1979] Schwartz, L.B., Austen, K.F.,  Wasserman, S.I. 1979. Immunological release of beta-hexosaminidase and beta-glucuronidase from purified rat serosal mast-cells. The Journal of Immunology, 123, 1445-1450.
* [SpartanSpartan2006] Spartan06. Spartan06. _full v.1.0.3, Tutorial and user's guide_. USA: Wavefunction, Inc.
* [Williams et al.2010] Williams, P.B., Crandall, E.,  Sheppard, J.D. 2010. Azelastine hydrochloride, a dual-acting anti-inflammatory ophthalmic solution, for treatment of allergic conjunctivitis. Clinical Ophthalmology, 4, 993-1001.



