# 10.1016@0031-9422(75)85051-5.pdf

## Page 1



# A stillbene and two flavanones from _Derris_ _Rariflora_+
Footnote †: Part 47 in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Leguminosae”. For Part 46 see Ref. 1. Sponsored by Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonía, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, and by Ministério do Planejamento (Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos S.A.) and Associção Brasileira da Indústria Farmaceutica through Academia Brasileira de Ciências.

Raimundo Braz Filho, Otto R. Gottli.jer

Ayssor P. Mourao

# Abstract

The wood of the vine _Derris_ _rariflora_ (Leguminosae-Lotoideae) contains 3,5-dimethoxy-4-prenylstil-pene, (2S)-5,7-dihydroxy-6-prenylflavanone and (2S)-5-hydroxy-7-methoxy-6-prenylflavanone.

_Derris_ _rariflora_ (Mart.) Macbr. (Leguminosae-Lotoideae), trivial name "timbo-rana", can be found in vast regions of the Amazon valley, from the Guianas, the brazilian States of Para and Amazonas to Peru [2]. The species is not used for fish poisoning and, indeed, TLC examination of extracts of subterranean and aerial parts of this vine revealed the absence of rotenone. Fractionation of the ethanolic wood extract led to 3 novel compounds, the stilbene (**1**) and the flavanones (**2a**) and (**2b**). The structure of the stilbene derivative, C21H24O21, was deduced from its PMR and MS. Oxidation led to benzoic acid, confirming the presence of the phenyl group. The additional aromatic ring must bc symmetrically substituted since its 2 aromatic and 6 methoxyl protons give rise to PMR singlets. Double resonance experiments established the lack of coupling between the aromatic and the benzylic methylene protons, eliminating one of the two symmctrical altcrnatives in favour of 1a.

The structures of the (2S)-flavanones, C20H20**O4** (**2a**) and C21H22O4** (**2b**), were deduced from ORD,

## Page 2

PMR and MS. Their interrelation was demonstrated by methylation of **2a** with CH2N2 which afforded **2b**. This methyl ether was used in the experiments which led to the allocation of the phenyl substituent to C-6 in preference to C-8. Although treatment with acid produced etherification of the C-5 hydroxyl by the side chain, as shown by the IR carbonyl frequency shift (_v_max 1642-1670 cm-1), this test was not considered conclusive proof for the _ortho_-position of OH and phenyl groups. In the flavanone series acid catalyzed rearrangement could invalidate its significance. Pyridine-induced solvent shifts have been advocated to determine the location of hydrogen or alkyl substituents in the vicinity of phenolic hydroxyls [3]. The quantiative conclusions of this work are, however, not applicable to cases in which the hydroxyl can chelate with an adjacent carbonyl. Thus the pyridine shifts for the flavanones (**3**) and (**4**), whose preparation [4], separation and identification [5] have been achieved, are very close, respectively -027 ppm (H-6) and -0*22 ppm (H-8). Absolute resonance values in pyridine, however, are more significant. While in CDCl3 the H-6 and H-8 signals are very close (**2**, t 4:04, **4**, t 4:00), in pyridine the H-6 signal appears at lower field (_t_ 3:73) than the H-8 signal (_t_ 3:82). Thus in the pyridine spectrum of 7-_O_-methylpinocembrin (**2c**), the 3:73 signal must be attributed to H-6 and the 3:78 signal to H-8. The pyridine spectrum of the isolate shows ofcourse only one of these signals. Since this occurs at \(t\) 3:77, it can be correlated only with H-8. The strong pyridine solvent shift (D -0*21 ppm) of the preynlmethylene resonance is also consistent with the _ortho_-relationship of the 5-hydroxyl and alkyl groups in ring A of **2b**, and, consequently, also **2a**.

## Experimental

_Isolation of the constituents of_ Derris rarillora _wood_. A wood sample of a specimen, identified by the botanist W. Rodrigues was collected near Manaus, Amazonas State, dried, powdered (24 kg) and extracted with EtOH. Evaporation of the solvent gave a residue (200 g) which was extracted exhaustively with hot petrol. The solution was filtered and the solvent evaporated. The residue was extracted with acetone. The solution was filtered and the solvent evaporated. The residue (30 g) was chromatographed on silica (500 g), giving the following products with the indicated solvents: oil (perd-C6H6, 9:1); (1) (80 mg, period-C6H6, 5:2); (2b) (16 mg, period-C6H6, 1:1); (2a) (110 mg, _C_H6H6); situated (80 mg, _C_H6H6, 8:2).

3,5-Diminolexyl-4-preynltilbene (1), m.p. 84-86 (hexane). (Found: M, 308-177

## Page 3

4-5 Hz, H-2), 6-78 (_dd_, J 170 and 11:0 Hz, H-3), 7-13 (_dd_, \(J\) 170 and 4:5 Hz, H-3), 7-7-8-3 (_m_, _C_H-3), 8:38, 8-47 and 8:62 (s, 3, 3, 2c, Gibbs test: positive, PMR (CDCL3); \(\tau\): -203 (s, OH), 2:56(s, C\({}_{\text{H}}\),A\({}_{\text{s}}\)), 3:90 (s, H-6, H-8), 4:59 (_dd_, \(J\) 110 and 4:5 Hz, H-3), 6:20 (s, OO), 6-97 (_dd_, \(J\) 170 and 11:0 Hz, H-3), 7:20 (_dd_, \(J\) 170 and 4:5 Hz, H-3). PMR (C\({}_{\text{s}}\)D\({}_{\text{s}}\)N, \(\tau\)): 3-73 (_d_, \(J\) 20 Hz, H-6), 3:78 (_d_, \(J\) 2:0 Hz, H-8), 4:50 (_dd_, \(J\) 110 and 50, H-2), 6:32 (s, OMe), 6-92 (_dd_, \(J\) 170 and 11:0 Hz, H-3), 7:15 (_dd_, \(J\) 170 and 50 Hz, H-3).

_Acknowledgement_--The MS were registered by Dr. A. Aragao Craveiro by courtesy of Prof. E. Wenkert, Rice University, Houston, Texas, U.S.A.

## References

* (1) Galina, E. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1974) _Phytochemistry_**13**, 2591.
* (2) Ducke, A. (1949) in _As Leguminosas da Amazonia Brasileira_, 2nd Edn, No. 18, p. 196. Boletim Tecnico do Instituto Agronomico do Norte, Belem.
* (3) Demarco, P. V., Farkas, E., Doddrell, D., Mylari, B. L. and Wenkert, E. (1968) _J. Amer. Chem. Soc._**90**, 5480.
* (4) Bandaranayake, W. M., Crombie, L. and Whiting, D. A. (1971) _J. Chem. Soc._ (C) 804.
* (5) Allcluiah, I. B. de, Braz Filho, R., Gottlieb, O. R. and Scattone, Z. M. G., unpublished.



