# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)00248-X.pdf

## Page 1

Pyrano chalcones and a flavone from _Neoraputia magnifica_ and their _Trypanosoma cruzi_ glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase-inhibitory activities

Daniela M. Tomazela

Monica T. Pupo

Edna A.P. Passador

M. Fatima das G.F. da Silva

Paulo C. Vieira

Joao B. Fernandes

Edson Rodrigues Fo

Glaucius Oliva

Jose R. Pirani

dmfs@power.ufscar.br Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Instituto de Fisica de Sao Carlos, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas, Departamento de Botanica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

###### Abstract

The fruits of _Neoraputa magnifica_ var. _magnifica_ afforded three new flavonoids: 2'-hydroxy-4,4',-dimethoxys-5',6'-(2',2''-dimethylpyrano)chalcone, 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4'-trimethoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethlypyrano)chalcone, and 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5',7'-dimethoxy-flavone which were identified on the basis of spectroscopic methods. The known flavonoids 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5'-tetramethylpyrano)chalcone, 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5',6'-pentamethoxychalcone, 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5',6,7'-trimethoxyflavone, 3',4',5',5',7'-pentamethoxyflavone and 3',4',5',5',7'-pentamethoxyflavone were also identified. The latter flavone was the most active as glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase-inhibitor (c) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

keywords: _Neoraputia magnifica_; Rutaceae; Flavonoids; Biochemical systematics; _Trypanosoma cruzi_; Glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase-inhibitory activity +
Footnote †: journal: Phys. Rev. B

## 1 Introduction

As part of our continuous investigation into the chemical composition of Brazilian _Neoraputia_ (Engler) Emmerich species, we recently reported the isolation of eight polymethoxylated flavones and one flavanone from _N. alba_ (Engler) Emmerich (Arruda et al., 1991, 1993), four polymethoxylated flavones, 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5,6'-pentamethoxychalcone (**1**) and 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5'-tetraethoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)chalcone (**2**) from _N. magnifica_ var. _magnifica_ (Engler) Emmerich (Passador et al., 1997). The isolation of these interesting new chalcones combined with our taxonomic interest in the Rutaceae stimulated an investigation of other organs of _N. magnifica_ var. _magnifica_.

Chagas' disease, caused by the protozoan _Trypanosoma cruzi_, is estimated to affect some 16-18 million people,mostly from South and Central America, where 25% of the total population is at risk (World Health Organization). Control of the insect vector (_Triotoma infestans_) in endemic areas has led to the virtual elimination of transmission by insect bites, and, as a consequence, blood transfusion and congenital transmission are currently the major causes for the spread of the disease. Besides low efficacy, the drugs currently available, nifurtimox and benzonidazole, have strong side effects (Souza et al., 1998). The bloodstream form of the parasite _T. cruzi_ has no functional tricarboxylic acid cycle, and it is highly dependent on glycolysis for ATP production (Souza et al., 1998). This great dependence on glycolysis as a source of energy makes the glycolytic enzymes attractive targets for trypanocidal drug design. Thus, the three dimensional structure of the enzyme was determined (Souza et al., 1998). GAPDH catalyses the 

## Page 2

oxidative phosphorylation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Glycosomal GAPDH shows potential target sites with significant differences compared with the homologous human enzyme, and inhibitors have been designed, synthesised, obtained from natural sources, and tested. In order to find blocking agents, chalcones and flavones isolated from _N. magnifica_ were assayed and evaluated by interaction with the enzyme GAPDH from _T. cruzi_.

## Results and discussion

The hexane extract of the ripe fruits of _N. magnifica_ var. _magnifica_, afforded _g_-tocopherol and three chalcones. One was characterised as 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5-tet-menthoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)chalcone (**2**) by comparison with both published data and an authentic sample (Passador et al., 1997). Placement of the chromene ring between C-5' and O-6' in **2** was determined on the basis of the following data. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) showed features of a chromene ring (_d_ 6.60 and 5.47 vinylic protons, and a singlet at \(d\) 1.50, 6H, assigned to a pair of magnetically equivalent methyl groups) and signals for four methoxy groups. The assignment of one singlet to H-2 and H-6 (_d_ 6.86, 2H) suggested that three methoxy groups are attached to the B-ring. From a biosynthetic point of view, the remaining methoxy group could be attached to C-4' or C-6' of the A-ring. The spectrum also revealed a singlet at \(d\) 14.24 corresponding to one chelated hydroxyl, thus attached to C-2'. Furthermore, a singlet at \(d\) 6.07 (1H) clearly indicated the A-ring to be 2',4',5',6'- or 2',3',4',6'- tetrasubstituted. From the HMBC experiments (Table 2) the observed correlations between the hydroxyl proton at \(d\) 14.24 and the 13C signals at \(d\) 105.9 (_J_3), 167.9

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l} H & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** \\ \hline
3′ & 6.2 \(d\) (2.4) & 6.07 \(s\) & 6.06 _s

## Page 3

(\(J^{2}\)) and 92.5 (\(J^{3}\)) led to their assignments as C-1\({}^{\prime}\), C-2\({}^{\prime}\) and C-3\({}^{\prime}\), respectively, thus indicating that the unsubstituted carbon must be vicinal to C-2\({}^{\prime}\). The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (Table 3) showed a signal for only one methoxy group attached to the _ortho_-disubstituted carbon (\(\delta\) 63.1) which was assigned to the 4-OMe functionality. This implies that the methoxy group in the A-ring is located at C-4\({}^{\prime}\) (\(\delta\) 55.9), and therefore established the position of the chromene ring to be between C-5\({}^{\prime}\) and O-6\({}^{\prime}\). Moreover, the existence of any correlation between the \({}^{1}\)H signal at \(\delta\) 6.07, assigned to H-3\({}^{\prime}\) (by HSQC and HMBC), and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 102.9 (C-5\({}^{\prime}\)), confirmed the position of the chromene ring between C-5\({}^{\prime}\) and O-6\({}^{\prime}\). The mass spectrum and elemental analysis data for **2** are reported here for the first time (see also Scheme 1 and Section 3).

Chalcone (**3**) exhibited similar NMR spectra to that of **2** (Tables 1 and 3). In addition to signals described for the A-ring of **2**, the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum revealed the presence of a 1,4-disubstituted phenyl moiety (\(\delta\) 7.56 \(d\), \(J\)= 8.6 Hz, H-2 and H-6; 6.93 \(d\), \(J\)= 8.6 Hz, H-3 and H-5). The presence of a fragment ion at \(m\)/\(z\) 161 (Scheme 1) in the mass spectrum for **3**, associated with cleavage between the A-ring and C-\(\beta^{\prime}\), clearly indicated the presence of one methoxy group in the B-ring. The signal of H-2/H-6 (\(\delta\) 7.56) showed a one-bond correlation (by HSQC) with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 130.0, and a long-range correlation (by HMBC, Table 2) with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l l l l l} \hline C & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & C & **5** & **6** & **7** & **8** \\ \hline
1 & 131.2 & 130.8 & 128.4 & 128.0 & 2 & 160.5 & 160.7 & 160.8 & 160.2 \\
2 & 105.7 & 105.3 & 130.0 & 109.4 & 3 & 108.9 & 107.8 & 107.5 & 108.7

## Page 4

161.1 (\(J^{3}\)), thus indicating the methoxy group to be located at C-4 and permitting the assignment of the signal at \(d\) 161.1 to C-4. HSQC experiments also showed correlations of the signal of H-3/H-5 (_d_ 6.93) with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(d\) 114.5. In addition, the signal of H-a (_d_ 8.02) showed cross peaks with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(d\) 128.4, indicating this signal to C-1.

For **2**, placement of the chromene ring was apparent from the \(J^{3}\) couplings observed between the hydroxyl proton (2'-OH) and the \({}^{13}\)C signal for C-3', indicating that the unsubstituted carbon must be vicinal to C-2'. HMBC experiments with **3** did not detect any correlations of the hydroxyl signal with the A-ring carbons. However, the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **3** (Table 3) revealed resonances for C-1' to C-6' and C-1'' to C-5'' in close agreement with the resonances for the corresponding carbons in **2**. A singlet at \(d\) 6.06 (1H) showed a one-bond correlation (HSQC) with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(d\) 92.7, permitting the assignment of these signals to H-3' and C-3', respectively, when compared with **2**. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **3** did not show any signal for methoxy groups attached to the _ortho_-disubstituted carbon (ca \(d\) 63); they were observed at \(d\) 55.4 and 55.8. This implies that the methoxy in the A-ring was located at C-4' and established the position of the chromene ring to be between C-5' and O-6'. The signals at \(d\) 55.4 and 55.8 were then assigned to 4'-OMe and/or 4-OMe. Based on the above evidence, the correlations from H-3' to the \({}^{13}\)C signals of C-5' (_d_ 103.1) and C-1' (_d_ 106.4) were consistent with the angular structure for **3**. The new natural product is, therefore, 2'-hydroxy-4,4'-dimethoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)chalcone (**3**).

Chalcone (**4**) also showed spectral characteristics of a 2'-hydroxy-4'-methoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)chalcone (Tables 1 and 3). HMBC experiments (Table 2) with **4** also did not detect a relationship between the 2'-OH signal at \(d\) 14.34 to the A-ring carbons. However, the chemical shifts of the A-ring and chromene carbons were comparable with those for **2** and **3** (Table 3). As discussed above, the signals of the methoxy groups at \(d\) 55.8 and 56.1 (6H) supported the chromene ring to be between C-5' and O-6'. This was also confirmed by the HMBC experiments, which showed correlations of the H-3' signal (_d_ 6.07) with the resonances of C-2' (_d_ 167.4) and C-1' (_d_ 106.3).

The mass spectrum of **4** gave significant fragments for _m/z_ 191 and 233 (Scheme 1) requiring the presence of two methoxy groups in the B-ring. This was supported by the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum which showed signals for three methoxy groups (_d_ 3.94, 3H, \(s\); 3.93, 3H, \(s\); 3.86, 3H, _s_) and for three protons giving rise to an AB spin system (_d_ 7.16, _d, J_ = 2.0 Hz, H-2; \(d\) 6.90, _d, J_ = 8.3 Hz, H-5; \(d\) 7.20, _dd, J_ = 2.0 and 8.3 Hz, H-6). From the HMBC experiments (Table 2), the observed correlation 

## Page 5

between the b-proton at d 7.76 and the 13C signals at d 109.4 (_J_3) and 123.3 (_J_3) led to their assignments as C-2 and C-6, respectively. The spectrum also showed a correlation of H-6 at d 7.20 with the 13C signal at d 149.0 (_J_3), confirming a methoxy group at C-4 and showing that this signal can be attributed to C-4. The existence of a correlation between the 1H signal at d 7.16, assigned to H-2, and the 13C signal at d 153.4 determined the position of the other methoxy group at C-3 and permitted the assignment of this signal to C-3. The structure of the new natural product was thus established as 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4'-trimethoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano) chalcone (**4**).

It has been noted that the H-b and C-b of a chalcone are more deshielded than the H-a and C-a resonances (Agrawal, 1989). Both are affected by changes in the B-ring substitution and C-a also by the presence or absence of a 2'- or 6'-oxysubstituent. HSQC experiments of 1-**4** showed correlations of 1H signals at ca d 8.0 and 7.7 to the 13C signals at ca d 126 and 142, respectively, indicating apparent anomalies. The methine proton at ca d 7.7 showed cross peaks with the C-2 and C-6 signals (Table 2), so permitting the assignment of the upfield signal at ca d 7.7 to H-b. The anisotropic effect of the 5',O-6'-chromene substituent on the H-a caused a downfield shift above the usual range for 2',6'-oxysubstituted chalcones, this resulting in the H-a proton being more deshielded than H-b.

The dichloromethane extract of fruits on successive chromatographic separation afforded the five flavonoids, 3',4',5',5',7-pentamethoxyflavanone (Passador et al., 1997), 3',4',5',5',7-pentamethoxyflavone (**5**) (Passador et al., 1997), 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5',5,6,7-tetramethylavone (**6**) (Arruda et al., 1993), 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5,6,7-trimethoxyflavone (**7**), and 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5,7-dimethoxyflavone (**8**). The latter appears to be new.

Compound **6** has been isolated from _Agteratum convizoides_ (Vyas and Mulchandani, 1986) and _N. alba_ (Arruda et al., 1993); however, its 13C NMR data are reported here for the first time (Table 4). The HSQC and HMBC experiments on **6**, permitted the assignments of all carbons (Tables 2 and 3). A singlet at d 6.55 (1H) showed a one-bond correlation with the 13C signal at d 107.8, and a long-range correlation with the 13C signals at d 126.0 (_J_3), 160.7 (_J_2), 177.1 (_J_2) and 112.9 (_J_3) permitting their assignments as H-3, C-3, C-1', C-2, C-4 and C-10, respectively. Two doublets at d 7.06 and 7.07 were coupled to each other and showed a long-range correlation with the C-2 and C-1' signals, thus indicating these two hydrogens were attached to C-2' and C-6'. The 1H NMR spectrum revealed a signal for three methoxy groups at d 3.98 (6H) and 3.99 (3H); however, in HSQC (d 62.2, 56.9, 56.3) and HMBC experiments these signals appeared as a broad singlet. The observed correlations between the methoxy protons at d 3.98/or 3.99 and the 13C signal at d 143.8 (_J_3), which showed cross peaks with the 1H signal at d 7.07, led to their assignments as 5'-OMe, C-5' and H-6'. The signal at d 7.06 was then assigned to H-2'. HSQC experiments permitted the assignments of 13C signal at d 100.4, 106.6 and 56.3/or 56.9 to C-2', C-6' and 5'-OMe, respectively. HMBC experiments also confirmed the B-ring to have a methylenedioxy group between C-3' and C-4' by the cross peaks with the 1H signal of OCH2O at d 6.08 with the 13C signals at d 149.5 and 138.1, which showed correlations with H-2' and the latter (d 138.1) with H-6'. The signals at d 149.5 and 138.1 were then assigned to C-3' and C-4', respectively. The 13C signal at d 102.2 could be attributed to OCH2O by HSQC.

The 13C NMR spectrum showed signals for two methoxy groups at d 61.5 and 62.2. Thus implies that the methoxy groups in the A-ring are located at C-5, C-6 and C-7, since the 1H signal at d 6.78 (1H) for the unsubstituted methine indicated that this proton must not be vicinal to C=O (C-4). Thus, the observed one-bond correlation between the signal of H-8 (d 6.78) and the 13C signal at d 96.2 led to the assignment of C-8 to this resonance. The methoxy protons at d 3.92 showed a one-bond correlation with the 13C signal at d 61.5, and a long-range correlation with the 13C signal at d 140.4 (_J_3), suggesting the assignment of the latter signal to C-6 or C-5. The presence of a correlation between the signal of H-8 and the 13C signal at d 140.4 (_J_3) clearly indicated this signal to be at C-6. The signal for C-7 was established as d 157.7 by the existence of a correlation

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Compound & Concentration (μg/ml) & Absorbance & Specific activity (U/mg) & \% Inhibitory activity \\
**5** & 30 & 0.345 & 24.65 & 46 \\  & 50 & 0.136 & 9.72 & 80 \\  & 100 & 0.009 & 0.64 & 99 \\ Control & 30 & 0.641 & 45.80 & \\  & 50 & 0.670 & 47.87 & \\  & 100 & 0.560 & 40.01 & \\
**6** + **7** & 25 & 0.343 & 20.24 & 54 \\

## Page 6

between the H-8 resonance and this \({}^{13}\)C signal (\(J^{2}\)), which also showed a cross peak with the methoxy protons at \(\delta\) 3.98/or 3.99 and the latter with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 56.3 or 56.9. In the same way, the signal for C-5 emerged from analysis of the correlation between the methoxy signal at \(\delta\) 3.98/or 3.99 (\(\delta\) 62.2 by HSQC) and the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 152.6, which did not show a correlation with the H-8 signal. The H-8 signal also showed a cross-peak with the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 154.4 (\(J^{2}\)), which was attributed to C-9, since it was the only carbon to be assigned in the A-ring.

Flavone **8** exhibited a B-ring spin system in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum for 3',4'-substitution (\(\delta\) 7.54, _dd_, \(J\) = 1.8 and 0.4 Hz, H-2'; \(\delta\) 6.98, _dd_, \(J\) = 8.1 and 0.4 Hz, H-5'; \(\delta\) 7.51, _dd_, \(J\) = 8.1 and 1.8, H-6'). This spectrum also showed signals for a _meta_-coupled A-ring protons (\(\delta\) 6.55, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.3 Hz, H-6; \(\delta\) 6.78, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.3 Hz, H-8), two methoxy groups (\(\delta\) 3.85, \(s\), 6H) and one methylenedioxy group (\(\delta\) 6.07, \(s\), 2H). The retro-Diels-Alder (RDA) (Chen et al., 1997) fragments of this flavone gives a good indication of the substitution patterns of the A- and B-rings (Scheme 2). Thus, a combination of \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectral data and the fragment ions at \(m/z\) 146 (70%) and 180 (5%) fully support the presence of a 3',4'-methylenedioxy substituent in the B-ring and a 5,7-dimethoxy system in the A-ring.

HSQC experiments permitted assignments of all protonated carbons (Table 3). However, the \({}^{13}\)C signals at \(\delta\) 96.8 and 93.7 were attributed to C-6 and C-8, and the \({}^{1}\)H signals at \(\delta\) 6.55 and 6.78 to H-6 and H-8, respectively, by comparison with the resonances for the corresponding carbons and hydrogens in 3',4',5',5',5'-pentamethoxyflavone (**5**). The quaternary carbons of the A- and C-rings (\(\delta\) 160.2, C-2; 176.6, C-4; 161.3, C-5; 164.4, C-7; 160.1, C-9; 109.7, C-10) were also assigned by comparison with those of **5** (\(\delta\) 160.5, C-2; 177.5, C-4; 161.0, C-5; 164.1, C-7; 159.9, C-9; 109.3, C-10), whose assignments were aided by \({}^{13}\)C-\({}^{1}\)H COSY and long-range \({}^{13}\)C-\({}^{1}\)H COSY spectra (Kinoshita and Firman, 1997). The signal for C-3' was established as \(\delta\) 148.9 by its comparison with the resonance for the corresponding carbon in **6**. The signal at \(\delta\) 150.6 was then assigned to C-4'. The structure of flavone **8** was thus established as 3',4'-methylenedioxy-5,7-dimethoxyflavone. Flavone **5** was previously obtained from _N. alba_ (Arruda et al., 1993) and _Murraya paniculata_ (Rutaceae) (Kinoshita and Firman, 1997).

3',4'-Methylenedioxy-5,6,7-trimethoxyflavone (**7**, age-conyllavone A) has been found previously in _Ageratum convzoides_ (Asteraceae) (Vyas et al., 1986). However, its \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data have not been reported previously in the literature. The chemical shifts of the A- and B-ring carbons were comparable with those for **6** and **8**, respectively (Table 3).

All phytochemical studies on _Neoraputia_ genus have been undertaken in our laboratory, and isolation procedures used in these studies should have revealed rutaceous alkaloids, coumarins and limonoids if they had been present. However, it is premature to use the absence of other classes of compounds as an argument to remove _Neoraputia_ to the Citroideae, which produces a considerable number of highly oxygenated flavones (Passador et al., 1997; Silva, et al., 1988). Clearly much more detailed phytochemical investigations of _Neoraputia_ species will be essential for a better understanding of its chemotaxonomic position in the Rutaceae.

Some compounds were evaluated for their ability to inhibit the enzymatic activity of the protein glycosomal GAPDH from _T. cruzi_ (Table 4). Chalcone **2** was separated from **4** and flavone **6** from **7** by R-HPLC; however, they were obtained in very small amount. Thus, only the initial inhibitory activity of these mixtures were evaluated. GAPDH activity was only inhibited by 45% when the mixture of **2** and **4** was added to the assay system at a concentration of 105 mg/ml, suggesting that these chalcones act as weak inhibitors. The mixture of **6** and **7** completely inhibited the enzymatic activity (by 100%) at 100 mg/ml.

The activity of flavone **5** was comparable to that of the mixture of **6**-**7**, reducing the enzymatic activity by 99% at 100 mg/ml. The 50% inhibitory concentration value (IC50) was 81 mM.

Highly oxygenated flavones appear to possess the structural requirements for inhibiting trypanosomal 

## Page 7

GAPDH. However, to develop an effective blocking agent from the natural product lead compounds, it is necessary to determine as precisely as possible, how the tested compounds occupy the active site and at the same time how they make specific interactions with the amino acids of the target enzyme. For this purpose co-crystal-lization experiments with flavone **5** have been undertaken, both in laboratory and under microgravity conditions, in the NASA Space Shuttle during mission STS-91, in May 1998. Unfortunately, we did not have any success with flavone **5**, and effective crystallization was observed only for a rutaceous coumarin. The related crystallographic studies are in progress and will be reported separately.

Therefore, we still have not enough experimental evidence for developing a quantitative understanding of the structural basis of the specificity in the catalytic-site-activity relationships among flavones and the enzyme GAPDH. Further crystallization experiments as well as solution studies by NMR spectral analysis are in progress.

## 3 Experimental

### General

NMR: on a Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as int. standard, HSQC: Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence (Ruiz-Cabello et al., 1992); PIEIMS: 70 eV, low resolution on a VG Platform II (Fisons) instrument; IR (KBr, BOMEN-Ft/IR); UV (Perkin-Elmer); R-HPLC: Recycling High-Performance Liquid Chromatography on a model Shimadzu LC-6AD; the column used was a Shim-pack Prep-Sil (H), 250 mm x 20 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100 A pore diameter; eluant: hexane-CH2Cl2-_iso_-ProH (15:5:1); flow rate: 3.0 ml/min; detection (Shimadzu SPD-6AV): UV \(\lambda\) 254 nm; Elemental analysis: on a EA 1108, CHNS-O (Fisons).

### Plant material

_Neoraputia magnifica_ var. _magnifica_ was collected in Espirito Santo, Brazil, and a voucher specimen (SPF 81-316) is deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas-USP-Sao Paulo.

### Isolation of compounds

Ground fruits (825 g) were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH. The conc. hexane extract was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using a hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient to give a mixture of fatty acids followed by 16 fractions. Fr 5 was rechromatographed on silica gel using hexane-CH2Cl2 gradient affording further frs. Fr 5-3 was rechromatographed as above, eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (15:5:1) yielding **1** (12 mg). The fraction containing **2** and **4** was then subjected to further flash chromatography as above, eluting with a hexane-Me2CO gradient, and then by R-HPLC (detection UV \(\lambda\) 254 nm) to give **2** (2nd peak, 1.9 mg) and **4** (1st peak, 2.0 mg), after recycling \(\times\)3. Fr containing **3** was applied to flash chromatography as above, eluting with a hexane-CH2Cl2 gradient, and then by prep. TLC (silica gel, hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (1:1:0.1) to yield pure **3** (6.1 mg).

The concd CH2Cl2 extract was subjected to CC over silica gel. Elution with a hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (1:1:0.2) afforded 16 frs. Fr 3 was subjected to flash chromatography on silica gel column, eluting with hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH (1:1:0.1) to afford 4 new frs. Fr 3-2 was treated as above, eluting with a hexane-EtOAc gradient, to afford 3',4',5',5,7-pentamethoxyflavanone (5.0 mg), after crystallization from MeOH. Fr 4 was recrystallized from MeOH and then purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, benzene-CH2Cl2-Me2CO, 7:5:2) to give a mixt. of 6 and 7. This mixt. was submitted to R-HPLC (detection UV \(\lambda\) 254 nm) to afford **6** (2nd peak, 2.0 mg) and **7** (1st peak, 2.5 mg), after recycling \(\times\)3. Fr 6 was crystallized from MeOH yielding **5** (30 mg). Fr 11 afforded **8** (15 mg) after crystallization from MeOH.

#### 3.3.1 2'-Hydroxy-3,4,4',5-tetramethylpyrano)calcone (2)

Yellow powder; EA: Found: C, 67.62; H, 6.04; O, 26.34. Calc. for C24H26O7; C, 67.59; H, 6.15; O, 26.26%; MS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 426 [M]+. (70), 411 [M-Me]+ (75), 233 (40): associated with cleavage between C-a and C-b', 232 (10), 217 [233-H-Me]+ (100), 221 (5): associated with cleavage between A-ring and C-b', 192 (20).

#### 3.3.2 2'-Hydroxy-4,4'-dimethoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)calcone (3)

Yellow powder; UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (CHCl3) nm: 290, 362; IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (KBr) cm-1: 3414, 1603, 1454, 1248, 615; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3); HMBC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 3. EA: Found: C, 72.05; H, 6.04; O, 21.91. Calc. for C22H2O5: C, 72.12; H, 6.05; O, 21.83%; MS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 366 [M]+. (60), 351 [M-Me]+ (70), 233 (25): associated with cleavage between C-a and C-b', 232 (5), 217 [233-H-Me]+ (100), 161 (5): associated with cleavage between A-ring and C-b', 132 (10).

#### 3.3.3 2'-Hydroxy-3,4,4'-trimethoxy-5',6'-(2'',2''-dimethylpyrano)calcone (4)

Yellow powder; UV \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) (CHCl3) nm: 294, 372; IR \(v_{\rm max}\) (KBr) cm-1: 3427, 1640, 1215, 759; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3); HMBC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 3. EA: Found: C, 69.67; H, 6.11; O, 24.22. Calc. for C23H24O6: C, 69.68; H, 6.10; O, 24.21%. MS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 396

## Page 8

[M]\({}^{+}\). (60), 381 [M-Me]\({}^{+}\) (70), 233 (30): associated with cleavage between C-a and C-b\({}^{\prime}\), 232 (10), 217 [233-H-Me]\({}^{+}\) (100), 191 (10): associated with cleavage between A-ring and C-b\({}^{\prime}\), 162 (15).

.3.4 3\({}^{\prime}\),4\({}^{\prime}\)-Methylenedioxy-5\({}^{\prime}\),5,6,7-tetramethoxylfavone (6)

Yellow powder; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(d\) 7.07 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.6 Hz, 6\({}^{\prime}\)), 7.06 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.6 Hz, 2\({}^{\prime}\)), 6.78 (1H, \(s\), 8); 6.55 (1H, \(s\), 3), 6.08 (2H, \(s\), OCH\({}_{2}\)O), 3.99 (3H, \(s\), OMe), 3.98 (6H, \(s\), 2\(\times\)OMe), 3.92 (3H, \(s\), OMe); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 4; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); HMBC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): H-2\({}^{\prime}\)\(\rightarrow\)C-1\({}^{\prime}\), C-3\({}^{\prime}\), C-4\({}^{\prime}\), C-6\({}^{\prime}\), C-2; H-6\({}^{\prime}\)\(\rightarrow\)C-1\({}^{\

## Page 9

Herdewijn, P., 1995. Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of analogs of 2'-deoxy-2'-(3-methoxybenzamide)ade-nosine, a selective inhibitor of trypanosomal glycosylated dehydro-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Journal of Medical Chemistry 38, 3838-3849.
* Chen et al. (1997) Chen, J., Montanari, A.M., Widmer, W.W., 1997. Two new poly-methylated flavones, a class of compounds with potential anticancer activity, isolated from cold pressed dancy tangerine peel oil solids. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry 45, 364-368.
* Kinoshita and Firman (1997) Kinoshita, T., Firman, K., 1997. Myricetin 5,7,3',4',5'-pentamethyl ether and other methylated flavonoids from _Murraya paniculata_. Phytochemistry 45, 179-181.
* Passador et al. (1997) Passador, E.A.P., da Silva, M.F. das G.F., Rodrigues, Fo E., Fernandes, J.B., Vieira, P.C., Pirani, J.R., 1997. A pyrano-chalcone and a flavone from _Neoraputia magnifica_. Phytochemistry 45, 1533-1537.
* Ruiz-Cabello et al. (1992) Ruiz-Cabello, J., Vuister, G.W., Moonen, C.T.W., van Gelderen, P., Cohen, J.S., van Zijl, P.C.M., 1992. Gradient-enhanced heteronuclear correlation spectroscopy. Theory and experimental aspects. Journal of Magnetic Resonance 100, 282-302.
* da Silva et al. (1988) da Silva, M.F. das G.F., Gottlieb, O.R., Ehrendorfer, F., 1988. Chemo-systematics of the Rutaceae: suggestions for a more natural taxonomy and evolutionary interpretation of the family. Plant Systematics and Evolution 16, 97-134.
* Souza et al. (1998) Souza, D.H.F., Garratt, R.C., Araujo, A.P.U., Guimaraes, B.G., Jesus, W.D.P., Michels, P.A.M., Hannaert, V., Oliva, G., 1998. _Trypanosoma cruzi_ glycosomal glyceroldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase: structure, catalytic mechanism and targeted inhibitor design. Federation of European Biochemical Societies Letters 424, 131-135.
* Vyas and Mulchandani (1986) Vyas, A.V., Mulchandani, N.B., 1986. Polyoxygenated flavones from _Ageratum conyoides_. Phytochemistry 25, 2625-2627.
* World Health Organization (1998) World Health Organization. Statistical Information System Website, at [http://www.who.ch./whosis/whosis.htm](http://www.who.ch./whosis/whosis.htm).



