# 10.1016@0031-9422(90)80024-B.pdf

## Page 1



# MOLLUSCIDAL QUINOLINE ALKALOIDS FROM _Galipea BRACTEATA_

Paulo C. Vieira

Permanent address: Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Carlos, SP, CEP 13560, Brazil.

Isao Kubo

###### Abstract

Four quinoline alkaloids were isolated from stems of _Galipea bracteata_. In addition to one new compound, 2-(3,_A_'-methylenedioxyphenylethyl)-quinoline, three were identified as the known compounds 2-_n_-propylquinoline, 2-_n_-pentylquinoline and 2-(1'-pentenyl)-quinoline. However, this is the first report of their isolation from a natural source. All alkaloids showed an inhibitory effect on shoot and root growth of lettuce (_Lactuca sativa_). Three of them also showed molluscicidal activity against the aquatic snail, _Biomphalaria glabrata_, involved in the transmission of schistosomiasis.

## Introduction

The Rutaceae is represented by a great number of species in tropical areas. Many of these species have never been the target of a photochemical investigation. In our continuing effort to find biologically active compounds we have investigated _Galipea bracteata_. In this paper we report the isolation and identification of one new alkaloid and three known ones from _G. bracteata_ collected in Minas Gerais, Brazil. The growth inhibitory effect against lettuce of the alkaloids, as well as, their molluscicidal activity are also described.

## Results and Discussion

The dichloromethane extract of the stems of _G. bracteata_ afforded four alkaloids 1-**4**. The combination of various routine 1H, 13C NMR and mass spectrometric analyses allowed us to attribute the formulas C12H13N. C14H17N. C14H15N and C18H15NO2 to compounds 1-**4**, respectively. 1H NMR (Table 1) showed signals of six aromatic protons for all compounds at \(\delta 7.24 + 0.04\), \(d\), \(J\) = 8.5 Hz, H-3; \(\delta 8.02 + 0.02\)_d_, \(J\) = 8.5 Hz, H-4; \(\delta 7.74 + 0.02\)_dd_, \(J\) = 7.8, 1.2 Hz, H-5; \(\delta 7.47 + 0.04\)_td_, \(J\) = 7.8, 1.2 Hz, H-6; \(\delta 7.66 + 0.04\)_td_, \(J\) = 7.8, 1.2 Hz, H-7 and \(\delta 8.01 + 0.01\)_d_, \(J\) = 7.8, H-8. An exception was the signal corresponding to H-3 of compound 3 at \(\delta 7.51\). The similarities of the chemical shifts and multiplicities for the four compounds suggest that a 2-substituted quinoline system is the structural basis for all compounds, and that the difference between them is the type of substituent attached to C-2. Compound **1** possesses a _n_-propyl moiety characterized by the signals in the 1H NMR at \(\delta 2.91\) (_t_), \(\delta 1.81\) (_sext_, \(J\) = 7.4 Hz), \(\delta 0.91\) (_t_), integrating 2:2:3, respectively. Confirmation of this unit can be taken from the 13C NMR signals at \(\delta 41.30\), \(23.25\) and \(13.99\), which can be attributed to C-1', C-2' and C-3', respectively.

Compounds **2** and **3** are very closely related to each other and to compound **1**. The mass spectra showed the parent peak at _m_/2 199 and 197 for **2** and **3** respectively, indicating that the difference between **2** and **3** is two hydrogen atoms. Analysis of the 1H NMR of both compounds showed that **2** has two more signals in the olefinic region [\(\delta 6.



## Page 2

= 7.8, 1.2 Hz), as well as by the presence of a methylenedioxy ring assigned to the signal at \(d\) 5.90 integrating for two protons. The presence of a piperonyl moiety is once more confirmed by the mass spectrum which show-cd a peak at _m_/_z_ 135. The parent peak of _m_/_z_ 277 requires a methylenedioxyphenylethyl as the substituent of this quinoline. The complete assignment of chemical shifts for all carbons are given in Table 2. The compounds 2-methyl(**5**) and 2-aminoquinoline(**6**) were used as models [1,2].

The alkaloids isolated showed inhibitory effects on the growth of lettuce seedlings and molluscicidal activity as determined according to the methods described previously [3,4]. All compounds at concentrations larger than 500 ppm inhibited both shoot and root growth in the lettuce test. At lower concentrations their activities were diminished. When the concentration was decreased to 100 ppm, only compounds **3** and **4** showed activity but at this concentration, **1** and **2** had no activity.

Molluscicidal activity was exhibited by compounds **2**-**4**. Compound **1** was not molluscicidal even at 100 ppm. Compound **4** had the most powerful molluscicidal activity killing snails at a concentration of only 5 ppm. Compounds **2** and **3** possessed activities at 20 and 10 ppm, respectively.

Our results suggest that the presence of a second aromatic ring at C-2 increases the activity of the compounds, and that the activity of 2-alkylquinolines depends on the length of the alkyl chain. It is important to note that very few examples of naturally occurring alkaloids have been found to exhibit molluscicidal activity [5], although recently, some potent molluscicidal alkaloids were isolated from members of the Meliaceae [6]. It is also important to mention that few species of the genus _Galipea_ have been studied. However, in a unique example presented by Mester [7], the alkaloids isolated were 2-substituted quinolines. We suspect that there should be a tendency for this genus to produce this class of compound.

## Experimental

### Isolation of constituents. Galipea bracetata

was collected in Minas Gerais, Brazil, a voucher is deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias, USP, Sao Paulo. Dried stems (920 g) were extd with CH2Cl2 at room temp. for 4 days. The ext was evapd to dryness yielding (5.567 g) of crude extract. A portion of this ext (1.463 g) was chromatographed over silica gel (50 g) and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (CH2Cl2, EtOHAc and MeOH). Alkaloids were found in fs 16-35. They were then sepd by low pressure chromatography on silica gel (Lichropenyl using hexane-EtOAc (49:1), affording **1** (31 mg), **2** (10 mg), **3** (15 mg) and **4** (113 mg).



## Page 3

2-n-_Propylquinoline_ (1) [83]. Oil. IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm min}\,{\rm cm}^{-1}\): 1615, 1600, 1500, 1430. 1H NMR: Table 1. \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 2. EIMS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 171 (55), 156 (100), 128 (50). 2-n-_Pentylquinoline_ (2) [9]. Oil. IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm min}\,{\rm cm}^{-1}\): 1615, 1600, 1500, 1460, 1430. \({}^{1}\)H NMR: Table 1. \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 2. EIMS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 199 (5), 170 (75), 156 (100), 128 (65). 2-(1'-_pentenyl_)-_Quinoline_ (3) [9]. Oil. IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm min}\,{\rm cm}^{-1}\): 1615, 1600, 1500, 1500. 1H NMR: Table 1. \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 2. EIMS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 197 (82), 182 (100), 168 (90), 143 (30). 2-(3', 4'-_methylenedioxyphenylethyl_)-_Quinoline_ (4). Mp 68-70 \({}^{\circ}\) (MeOH-H2O) IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm min}\,{\rm cm}^{-1}\): 1615, 1600, 1500, 1250. 1H NMR: Table 1. \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 2. EIMS \(m/z\) (rel. int.) 277 (100), 156 (20), 135 (70).

###### Acknowledgements.

We thank the Takasago Institute for Interdisciplinary Science, for NMR measurements. P. C. V. acknowledges CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Brazil) for the award of a scholarship.

## References

* [1] Shamma, M. and Hindenlang, D. M. (1979) _Carbon_-13 _NMR Assignments of Amines and Alkaloids_ p. 87. Plenum Press, New York.
* [2] Pfister, J. R. (1988) _J. Nat. Prod._**51**, 969.
* [3] Kamizaka, T., Higuchi, M., Taniguchi, M. and Asaka, Y. (1980) _Agric. Biol. Chem._**44**, 691.
* [4] Nakanishi, K. and Kubo, I. (1977) _Israel J. Chem._**16**, 28.
* [5] Marston, A. and Hostettmann, K. (1985) _Phytochemistry_**24**, 639.
* [6] Aladesanmi, A. J., Adewunni, C. O., Kelley, C. J., Leary, J. D., Bischoff, T. A., Zhang, X. and Snyder, J. K. (1988) _Phytochemistry_**27**, 3789.
* [7] Mester, I. (1983) in _Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutates_ (Waterman, P. G. and Grundon, M. F., eds), pp. 31-96. Academic Press, London.
* [8] Cervinka, O., Fabryova, A. and Matouchova, L. (1963) _Collection Czech. Chem. Commun._**28**, 535.
* [9] Spath, E. and Pikl, J. (1929) _Ber._**62B**, 2244.



