# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)84396-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Isoflavones from _Virola__CADUCIFOLIA_+
Footnote †: Part 8 in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Myristicae”. For Part 7 see Ref. [1]. Taken from part of the M.S. thesis presented by G.P. to the Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro. Sponsored by Ministério do Planejamento (Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos S.A.) through Academia Brasileira de Ciências.

Raimundo Braz F., Gentile Pedersen, Otto R. Gottlieb, Jose G. S. Maia

#Instituto de Ciencias Exatas, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro; Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo; Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico, Manaus, Brasil

###### Abstract

The Myristicaceae must be added to the small number of families which contain isoflavonoids; the previously unknown 5,7,2-trihydroxy-4'-methoxyisofluxone and 5,7-dihydroxy-2',4'-dimethoxyisofluxone having been found to co-occur with biochanin A in _Virola__CADUCIFOLIA_ W. Rodr.

In contrast to the near ubiquitous occurrence in higher plants of other flavonoids, isoflavonoids are confined very largely to the Leguminose. To the small list of other families in which they occasionally occur [2], the Myristicaceae must now be added. We have located isoflavones and even pterocarpans in several species [3] and are of the opinion that isoflavonoids constitute a general, rather than a sporadic, characteristic of this family.

The present report is concerned with _Virola__CADUCIFOLIA_ W. Rodr. _n.sp._[4], an arboreo species akin to _Virola__ALMINERIA_ Duke [5] called "ucuibba" near Manaus, Amazonas State. The benzene extract of a trunk wood sample was found to contain besides sidesiected, the typical _Virola_ constituents 1-(2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-phenyl)-3-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-propane (vindane) and 2-hydroxy-1-(2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-phenyl)-3-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-propane (vindanol) [5-7], as well as biochanin A (**1a**) [2] and two hitherto unreported compounds C15H6O2 (OH)3OH (**1b**) and C15H6O2(OH)2(OH)2(OH)2(Me)2(Me).

## 1 Introduction

The _Virola__CADUCIFOLIA_ W. Rodr. _n.sp._[4], an arboreo species akin to _Virola__ALMINERIA_ W. Rodr. _n.sp._[5] called "ucuibba" near Manaus, Amazonas State. The benzene extract of a trunk wood sample was found to contain besides sidesiected, the typical _Virola_ constituents 1-(2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-phenyl)-3-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-propane (vindane) and 2-hydroxy-1-(2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-phenyl)-propane (vindanol) [5-7], as well as biochanin A (**1a**) [2] and two hitherto unreported compounds C15H6O2 (OH)3OH (**1b**) and C15H6O2(OH)2(Me)2(

## Page 2



