# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000800007.pdf

## Page 1



# Limonoids from _Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil

Tereza A. N. Ribeiroa, Eliane A. da Silva Ndiayea, Eudes da S. Velozob, Paulo C. Vieira*,

Javier Ellenad and Paulo T. de Sousa Juniora

###### Abstract

Onze substancias foram isoladas das razes de _Spiranthera odoratissima_: dois novos limonoides, o limonoides ja conhecido limonina, tres alcaloides furoquinolinicos (dictamina, \(\gamma\)-fagarina e esquimianina), tres alcaloides \(\beta\)-indooquinazolnolics (rutaecarpina, evodiamina e 1-hidroxirutaecarpina), a cumarina aurapteno \(\beta\)-sitosterol. A elucidacao estrutural dessas substancias foi realizada atraves de tecnicas espectrais como IV e RMN em uma e duas dimensoes; as estruturas novas foram confirmadas por difracao de raios-X.

Eleven substances have been isolated from the roots of _Spiranthera odoratissima_, two new limonoids, the known limonoid limonin, three fluoroquinoline alkaloids, dictamine, \(\gamma\)-fagarina and skimminaine, three \(\beta\)-indooquinazoline alkaloids, rutaecarpine, evodiamine and 1-hydroxytutacarpine, the coumarin aurapten and \(\beta\)-sitosterol. Structure elucidation has been carried out by IR as well as 1D and 2D NMR; the new structures were also confirmed by X-ray crystallographic analyses.

Spiranthera odoratissima, Rutaceae, limonoids, alkaloids, X-ray diffraction 0103 - 5053 56.00+0.00

## Introduction

_Spiranthera odoratissima_ St. Hil., is a shrub found in the central Brazilian savannah, as well as in Bolivia.1 In Mato Grosso state it is known by the vernacular name of "manacd", being used in folk medicine to treat syphilis, rheumatism, kidney infections, urinary retention, abdominal pains, gout, acne and boil.2 This plant has already been investigated from chemistry viewpoint. From a specimen collected in Bahia were isolated fluoroquinoline alkaloids; coumarins and terpenes.3 The Rutaceae family is characterized by the abundance of anthranilic acid derived alkaloids coumarins, limonoids and flavonoids mainly.4

Footnote 1: e-mail: paulo@dq.ufscar.br

We have been interested in the chemistry of Rutaceae,58 and as part of ongoing work on this family, in this study we describe the isolation and the identification of two new limonoids, as well as the known limonin. Also described are the isolation and identification of the furoquinoline alkaloids \(\gamma\)-fagarine dictamine, skimminaine, the \(\beta\)-indooquinazoline alkaloids rutaecarpine, evodiamine and 1-hydroxy-rutaecarpine, the coumarin aurapten and \(\beta\)-sitosterol.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

Melting points were measured in a Mettler FP-80 apparatus and are uncorrected. Specific rotations were determined in a Perkin-Elmer 341 polarimeter. The IR spectra were obtained in a Bomem FT-IR MB100 equipment with the samples in KBr pellets. \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra were measured in Bruker AC-200 (200 MHz), ARX-400 (400 MHz) and Varian Mercury-300 (300 MHz) apparatus. The chemical shifts (\(\delta\)) are expressed in ppm and the coupling constants (\(J\)) in Hertz; TMS was used as

## Page 2

internal standard, as well as the residual hydrogen from the solvents (CDCl3 and DMSO-_d__b_). Radial preparative chromatography (RPC) was carried out with a Chromatotron apparatus and were performed with Merck Kiesegel 60 PF254. Column chromatography (CC) was performed with silica gel 60 (Merck, 63-230 _m_m), and flash column chromatography with silica (Merck, 43-63 _m_m). Analytical thin layer chromatography (TLC) was carried out with Merck Kiesegel 60 F254 (0.25 mm) plates.

### Plant material

The roots from _S. odoratissima_ were collected at Cuiabarao de Melgaco road (Km 1) in December 1999. A voucher specimen was deposited at Central Herbarium of Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso (registration # 24246).

### Extraction and isolation of compounds

The roots of _S. odoratissima_ (3.3 kg) were macerated at room temperature with dichloromethane (3 x 8L), with occasional stirring, during 7 days. The dichloromethane extract-DCE (126 g; 3.82%) was obtained after filtration and solvent removal _in vacuo_. Subsequent extraction was performed with methanol (3 x 8L) using the same procedure above, affording the methanol extract-ME (120 g; 3.64%).

An aliquot of DCE (20.0 g) was submitted to conventional acid-base extraction (HCl 1%; 4 x 100 mL) and the alkaloid fraction (190 mg) was chromatographed by RPC, in a 4 mm radial plate, with hexane-CHCl3 (8:2; 100 mL); CHCl3 (250 mL) and CHCl3-MeOH (95:5; 100 mL), affording 6 fractions. The fluoroquinoline alkaloids g-lagarine (15 mg), dictamine (8 mg) and skimminaine (30 mg) were isolated after washing fractions 2, 3 and 4 with Et2O.

Another DCE fraction (42.5 g) was filtered in a silica column (400 g) with petrol ether (0.5 L), CHCl2 (2 L), CHCl3 (1 L), CHCl3-MeOH (99:1; 2 L), CHCl3-MeOH (9:1; 1 L), MeOH (1 L) and MeOH-0.1%HOAc (0.5 L), affording fractions A to G, respectively.

Column chromatography (CC) was carried out on fraction B (23.0 g) employing the gradient solvent system: hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:1; 450 mL), CH2Cl2 (200 mL), CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1; 200 mL), (95:5; 200 mL), (9:1; 600 mL) and MeOH (200 mL), affording 8 fractions after TLC analysis. Fraction 2 [from hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:1)] was chromatographed by RPC (hexane- CH2Cl2 9:1; 7:3; 1:1), CH2Cl2 and CHCl3-MeOH (99:1), affording the coumarin aurapten (50 mg), after washing the crude hexane-CH2Cl2 (7:3) fraction with EtOH. Fraction 4 [from hexane-CH2Cl2 (99:1)] was submitted to medium pressure chromatography using the gradient solvent system: hexane-CH2Cl2 (2:8; 300 mL), (1:9; 70 mL), CH2Cl2 (150 mL), CH2Cl2-MeOH (9:1; 250 mL). Aurapten (109 mg) was obtained after washing with Et2O the combined hexane-CH2Cl2 (2:8) fractions; b-sitosterol was obtained after washing the combined hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:9) fractions with EtOH; **1** (30 mg) was obtained after washing the combined CH2Cl2-MeOH (95:5 and 9:1) fractions with EtOH.

Fraction D (10 g) was submitted to medium pressure chromatography using the solvent system: CH2Cl2 (300 mL), CH2Cl2-CH2CN (98:2; 200 mL), (95:5; 300 mL), (7:3; 200 mL); (1:1; 300 mL) and MeOH (200 mL). The combined CH2Cl2-CH2CN (98:2 and 95:5) fractions (2.5 g) were re-submitted to medium pressure chromatography employing the gradient hexane-CHCl3 (1:9; 400 mL), CHCl3 (200 mL), CHCl3-MeOH (95:5; 300 mL), (9:1; 300 mL), (1:1; 200 mL) and MeOH (200 mL). Limonin (**3**) (130 mg) precipitated after EtOH addition to the combined hexane-CHCl3 (1:1) and CHCl3 fractions. The supernatant liquid was chromatographed by CC in hexane-CHCl3 (2:8; 270 mL), CHCl3 (50 mL), CHCl3-CH3CN (8:2; 200 mL), (6:4; 150 mL), (3:7; 100 mL), CH3CN-EtOH (7:3; 100 mL) and (1:1; 150 mL). Skimminine (30 mg) was obtained from the combined hexane-CHCl2 (2:8) and CHCl3 fractions after solvent removal and washing the solid with EtOH. The combined CHCl3-MeOH (95:5) fractions were chromatographed by CC using CHCl2 (50 mL), CH2Cl2-EtOAc (8:2; 300 mL), (7:3; 300 mL), (3:7; 200 mL), EtOAc (200 mL), EtOAc-MeOH (8:2; 200 mL) and MeOH (100 mL). The combined CH2Cl2-EtOAc (8:2) and (7:3) fractions were submitted to RPC with CHCl3-MeOH (95:5), (9:1) and EtOAc-MeOH (9:1). Limonin (**3**) (60 mg) was obtained after solvent removal from fraction CHCl3-MeOH (9:1).

ME (30 g) was suspended in MeOH-H2O (7:3; 100 mL) and extracted with CH2Cl2 (3 x 100 mL), EtOAc (3 x 100 mL) and n-BuOH (3 x 100 mL). The CH2Cl2 fraction (2.7 g) was submitted to CC in CH2Cl2 (1.7 L), CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1; 2.2 L), (98:2; 0.8 L), (95:5; 1.5 L); (9:1; 0.7 L), (7:3; 0.6 L), (1:1; 0.8 L) and MeOH (0.9 L). The combined CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1) fractions (550 mg) were submitted to CC in CH2Cl2 (300 mL), CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1; 150 mL), (97:3; 50 mL), (95:5; 350 mL), (9:1; 150 mL), (1:1; 50 mL) and MeOH (50 mL). A precipitate (80 mg) was obtained by adding EtOH to the combined CH2Cl2 fractions. Flash CC was performed with this precipitate, employing CH2Cl2 (150 mL), CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1; 100 mL), (95:5; 100 mL), (1:1; 50 mL) and MeOH (50 mL). Rutaecarpine (**4**) (7 mg) was isolated after solvent removal from the combined CH2Cl2 fractions; evodianine (**5**) (5 mg) was isolated after solvent removal from the combined CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1) fractions. The combined CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1) was 

## Page 3

MeOH (95:5 and 1:1) fractions were submitted to flash CC in CH2Cl2 (40 mL) and CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1; 30 mL). 1-hydroxyrutacerpine (**6**) (4 mg) and **2** (7 mg) were isolated from the second CH2Cl2 fraction and the third CH2Cl2-MeOH (99:1), respectively.

### Compound (1)

[a]25 (CHCl2, _c._ 0.1): -26 degC. IR (KBr) _ν_max/ cm1: 3405, 1767, 1741, 1714. 1H and 13C NMR (CDC1): Tables 1 and 2.

### Compound (2)

[a]25 (CHCl2, _c._ 0.05): -20 degC. IR (KBr) _ν_max/cm1: 1766, 1742, 1707. 1H and 13C NMR (CDC1): Tables 1 and 2.

### Single crystal X-ray analysis

Low temperature X-ray diffraction data collections were performed at 120(2) K, on an Enraf-Nonius Kappa-CCD diffractometer equipped with an Oxford Cryosystem liquid N2 device, using graphite-monochromated MoK \(a\) radiation (0.71073 A). Data were collected up to 50deg in 2th, with a redundancy of 4 in the phi scans and omega scans with kappa offsets modes. The final unit cell parameters were based on all reflections. Data collections were made using the _COLLECT_ program;9 integration and scaling of the reflections were performed with the HKL Denzo-Scalepack system of programs.10 No absorption corrections were applied.

The structures were solved by direct methods with _SHELXS 86_1 and _SHELXS-97_.12 The models were refined by full-matrix least squares on F2 with _SHELXL-97_.13 All the hydrogen atoms were stereochemically positioned and refined with the riding model.12 Hydrogen atoms of the CH and CH2 groups were set isotropic with a thermal parameter 20% greater than the equivalent isotropic displacement parameter of the atom to which each one was bonded. This percentage was set to 50% for the hydrogen atoms of the CH3 groups. Data collections and experimental details for the complexes are summarized in Table 3. The programs _SHELXL-97_,13 and _ORTPE-314_ were used within WinGX15 to prepare materials for publication. Atomic coordinates, bond lengths and angles, and thermal parameters have been deposited at the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre (see below).

## Results and Discussion

Limonoid (**1**) has been isolated from the dichloromethane extract from the roots of _S. odoratissima_ as a white amorphous solid (mp 174-177 degC), presenting [a]25 (CHCl2): -26deg. The IR spectrum has shown absorptions at 3405 (OH), 1767 (lactone), 1741 (a,b-unsaturated ester) and 1714 (ketone).

1H NMR spectrum presented signals related to the b-substituted furan ring, where H-21 and H-23 appeared as multiplets at d 7.41 and at d 7.36, respectively. The b-furan hydrogen H-22 appeared as a double doublet at d 6.37 (_J_= 1.7, 0.8 Hz). The hydrogen H-17, from the d-epoxylactone ring, was observed at d 5.54 (s, 1H).

The 1H and 13C NMR spectra from (**1**) has shown similarities with the correlated spectra of (**3**), also isolated in this study, as shown in Tables 1 and 2. The absence of two doublets, associated to the geminal hydrogens at C-19, very common in structures related to (**3**), displaying a A,D-_seco_ ring,16 when linked with the low intensity, quaternary carbon signal observed at d 182.5, from the DEPT experiment, was a good indication for the presence of a carbonyl group at C-19 in **1**. HMBC spectrum has shown long distance coupling (_P_') between H-1, H-9 and C-19, confirming that C-19 in **1** is oxidized.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} H & **1**a** & **2**a** & **3** \\
1 & 6.65 d (12.4) & 6.64 d (12.5) & 4.03 sI \\
2 & 6.12 d (12.4) & 6.14 d (12.5) & 2.66 d (16.8, 1.8) \\
2 & – & – & 2.98 dd (16.8, 3.8) \\
5 & 3.09 dd (10.4, 2.5) & 3.0 bd (9.8) & 2.23 dd (15.8, 3.2) \\
6ax & 3.24 dd (18.4, 10.4) & 3.40 dd (18.6, 9.8) & 2.85 d (15.8) \\
6eq & 2.74 dd, (18.4, 2.5) & 2.73 dd (18.6 e 1.2) & 2.46 dd (15.8, 3.2) \\
9 & 3.60 s & 3.76 s & 2.56 m \\
11 & 4.51 bd (6.7) & 5.66 m & 1.81 m \\
12ax & 1.83 d (15.0) & – & – \\
12eq & 1.61 m & 1.65 m & 1.50 m \\
15 & 4.17 s & 4.20 s & 4.03 s \\
17 & 5.54 s & 5.41 s & 5.47 s \\
18 & 1.02 s & 1.06 s & \(\times 11.7\) s \\
19 & – & – & 4.464/4.47 d (13.0) \\
21 & 7.41 m & 7.39 m & 7.40 m \\
22 & 6.37 dd (1.7, 0.8) & 6.34 m & 6.35 m \\
23 & 7.36 m & 7.39 m & 7.40 m \\
28 & 1.49 s & 1.44 s & 1.63 s \\
29 & 1.44 s & 1.36 s & 1.17 s \\
30 & 1.16 s & 1.16 s & \(\times 10.7\) s \\
31 & 3.71 s & 3.72 s & – \\
33 & – & 2.10 s & – \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: 1H NMR spectral data for compounds **1-3**

## Page 4

The DEPT 13C NMR spectrum presented two signals related to methylenic carbons at \(d\) 38.1 (C-6) and \(d\) 41.2 (C-12). HMBC experiment has shown H-6 correlation with C-7 (_d_ 207.3; _J_') and C-4 (_d_ 87.6; _J_'). The methylenic hydrogen H-6 resonated at \(d\) 3.24 (dd, \(J\) = 18.4, 10.4 Hz, H-6av) and \(d\) 2.74 (dd, \(J\) = 18.4, 2.5 Hz, H-6av); COSY spectrum has shown coupling of both hydrogen with H-5 at \(d\) 3.09 (dd, \(J\) = 10.4, 2.5 Hz).

Reasonably similar values have been observed when comparing the 13C NMR data for rings B and D in compounds (**1**) and (**3**) (Table 2). DEPT experiment, however, presented three signals related to methylenic carbons in (**3**) and only two signals related to methylenic carbons in (**1**). The hydroxyl group, shown to be present in (**1**) by the IR spectrum, nevertheless, should be located at C-11 or C-12 in ring C. Furthermore, the carbonic hydrogen appeared as a broad doublet at \(d\) 4.51 (_J_ = 6.7 Hz, 1H), which has been associated to \(d\) 66.4 signal (HSQC), indicating that H-11 couples only with one H-12eq. No coupling was observed between H-11 and H-9 and H-12av. The HMBC spectrum showed a long distance coupling (_J_') with C-8 (_d_ 48.5), confirming that the hydroxylated carbon is C-11. The \(a\) stereochemistry of the OH group was determined by X-ray crystallography (Figure 2). The H-12 methylenic hydrogens were observed at \(d\) 1.83 (d, \(J\) = 15 Hz, H-12av) and \(d\) 1.61 (m, H-12eq). HMBC showed long range coupling (_J_') between H-12av

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} C & **I** & **2** & **3** \\
1 & 151.6 & 152.1 & 79.1 \\
2 & 123.2 & 123.1 & 35.6 \\
3 & 165.5 & 165.9 & 169.1 \\
4 & 87.6 & 84.9 & 80.2 \\
5 & 49.9 & 49.8 & 60.4 \\
6 & 38.1 & 38.6 & 36.3 \\
7 & 207.3 & 208.2 & 206.1 \\
8 &

## Page 5

with C-9 (\(\delta\) 43.9), C-14 (\(\delta\) 65.1), C-17 (\(\delta\) 77.8) and C-18 (\(\delta\) 19.2).

Four singlets (3H) relative to the methyl groups, were observed at \(\delta\) 1.02 (H-18), \(\delta\) 1.16 (H-30), \(\delta\) 1.44 (H-29) and \(\delta\) 1.49 (H-28). The correct attribution of each methyl group position was carried out by using HMBC and HSQC experiments. The long distance correlation of \(\delta\) 1.02 (Me-18) with C-12 (\(\delta\) 41.2), C-13 (\(\delta\) 36.5), C-14 (\(\delta\) 65.1), C-17 (\(\delta\) 77.8), and \(\delta\) 1.16 (C-30) with C-7 (\(\delta\) 207.3), C-8 (\(\delta\) 48.5), C-9 (\(\delta\) 43.9) and C-14 (\(\delta\) 65.1), could be easily observed in HMBC spectrum.

The structure presented for compound (**1**) was definitely confirmed by single crystal X-ray diffraction (Figure 2).

The second new limonoid (**2**), was obtained from the methanol extract of the roots of _S. odoratissima_, as a white solid presenting a high mp (> 300 degC) and [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}\)25 -20 (CHCl3). The IR spectrum presented absorptions at 1766 (lactone), 1742 (\(\alpha\),\(\beta\)-unsaturated ester) and 1707 (ketone).

Compound (**2**) 'H NMR spectrum presented high similarity with the one from compound (**1**), indicating a limonoid with a \(\beta\)-substituted furan ring, as shown by the two \(\alpha\)-furan hydrogen at \(\delta\) 7.39 (\(m\)) and the \(\beta\)-furan hydrogen at \(\delta\) 6.34 (\(m\)). An additional signal was observed at \(\delta\) 2.10 (\(s\), 3H), being attributed to the presence of an extra methyl group in (**2**).

\({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum presented 29 signals, showing that compound (**2**) should have two more carbons than the analogous (**1**); a quaternary carbon at \(\delta\) 170.5 and a methyl group at \(\delta\) 21.2 were observed by the DEPT experiment indicating the presence of an acetyl group in this compound.

These 'H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data, in association with the absence of a hydroxyl absorption in IR spectrum led to the conclusion that the hydroxyl group was esterified in (**2**). Single crystal X-ray diffraction has confirmed the proposed structure for (**2**) (Figure 3).

The known compounds were identified through comparison of their spectral data with the ones in the literature, limonin (**3**),17 dictamnine, skimmianine;18 the \(\beta\)-indooquinazoline alkaloids rutaecarpine (**4**), evodiamine (**5**)19 and 1-hydroxytruaecarpine (**6**),20 and the coumarin aurapten.21 The isolated alkaloids and limonoids have been described as typical metabolites from the Rutaceae.22

## Supplementary Information

Crystallographic data (excluding structure factors) for the structures in this paper has been deposited with the

Figure 1: Limonoids isolated from the roots of _S. odoratissima._

Figure 4: \(\beta\)-Indoloquinazoline alkaloids isolated from the roots of _S. odoratissima._

Figure 3: _ORTP_-31\({}^{\rm st}\) diagram of compound (**2**), showing the atoms labeling and the 50% probability ellipsoids.

Figure 2: _ORTP_-31\({}^{\rm st}\) diagram of compound (**1**), showing the atoms labeling and the 50% probability ellipsoids.



## Page 6

Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre as supplementary publication no CCDC 238939 and 238940. Copies of the data can be obtained, free of charge via www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/conts/retrieving.html (or from the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre, CCDC, 12 Union Road, Cambridge CB2 1EZ, UK; fax: +44 1223 336033; or e-mail: deposit@ccdc.cam.ac.uk).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are grateful to Dr. Antonio Gilberto Ferreira from Laboratorio de Ressonancia Magnetica Nuclear (Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos) for obtaining NMR spectroscopic data. Financial assistance from FAPEMAT, CAPES, CNPq, FAPESP is acknowledged.

## References

* (1) Pirani, J.R.; _Estudos Taxonomicos de Rutaceae_, Departamento de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil,1999.
* (2) De- La Cruz, M.G.F.; _MSc Dissertation_, Instituto de Saude Coletiva, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Brazil,1997.
* (3) Freitas, C.M.D.; Lucchese, A.M.; Silva, F.S.; Velozo, E.D.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2003**, _31_, 805.
* (4) Waterman, P.G.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1999**, _27_, 395.
* (5) Sartor, C. F. P.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Rodrigues-Filho, E.; Cortez, D.A.G.; _Pityochemistry_**2003, 63**, 185.
* (6) Biavatti, M. W.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Victor, S. R.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Albuquerque, S.; Caracelli, I., Zukerman-Schpector, J.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2002**, _13_, 66.
* (7) Biavatti, M. W.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J.B.; Albuquerque, S.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2002**, _65_, 562.
* (8) Santos, C. S.; Januario, A.H.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Pirani, J.R.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**1998**, \(9\), 39.
* (9) Enraf-Nonius, _COLLECT_. Nonius BV: Delft, The Netherlands, 1997-2000.
* (10) Otwinowski, Z.; Minor, W. In _Methods in Enzymology;_ Carter Jr., C. W.; Sweet, R.M., eds.; Academic Press: New York, 1997, vol. 276, p. 307.
* Program for Crystal Structure solution_, Institut fur Anorganische Chemie der Universitat, Tammenstrasse 4, D-3400 Gottingen, Germany, 1986.
* (12) Sheldrick, G.M.; SHELXS-97, Program for Crystal Structure Resolution, University of Gottingen, Germany, 1997.
* (13) Sheldrick, G.M.; _SHELXL-97, Program for Crystal Structures Analysis_, University of Gottingen, Germany, 1997.
* (14) Farrugia, L. J.; _J. Appl. Cryst._**1997**, _30_, 565.
* (15) Farrugia, L. J.; _WinGX. An Integrate System of Windows Programs for the Solution, Refinement and Analysis of Single Crystal X-Ray Diffraction Data_. Department of Chemistry, University of Glasgow, Scotland, 1997-2003
* (16) Champagne, D. E.; Koul, O.; Isman, M. B.; Scudder, G. G. E.; Towers, G. H. N.; _Pityochemistry_**1992**, _31_, 377.
* (17) Biavatti, M. W.; Vieira, P.C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Albuquerque, S.; _Z. Naturforsch._**2001**, _56c_, 570.
* (18) Facundo, V. A.; da Silveira, A. S. P.; Braz Fo., R.; Pinto, A. C.; Rezende, C. M.; _Quim. Nova_**2005**, _28_, 224.
* (19) Bergman, J.; Bergman, S.; _J. Org. Chem._**1985**, _50_, 1246.
* (20) Ayafor, J. F.; Sondengam, B. L.; Ngadjui, B. T.; _Pityochemistry_**1982**, _21_, 2733.
* (21) Agrawal, A.; Siddiqui, I. R.; Singh, J.; _Pityochemistry_**1989**, _28_, 1229.
* (22) Wattanapiromsakul, C.; Forster, P. I.; Waterman, P. G.; _Pityochemistry_**2003**, _64_, 609.



