# 10.1139@v81-400.pdf

## Page 1



# Erystrine-\(N\)-oxide and erythrarine-\(N\)-oxide, two novel alkaloids from _Erythrina mulungu_

Maria Helena Sarragiotto, Hemogenes Letto Filho, Leitao Filho, and Anita J. Marsaioil

Departamento de Morfologia e Sistermenta Vogetais, Instituto de Biologia, UNICAMP, 13100 Campinas, SP, Brasil. _Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, CP 1170, 13100 Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brasil_

###### Abstract

_Erythrina mulungu_ (Leguminose) is a medicinal plant used in folk medicine as a nervine sedative, febrifuge, and antiasthmatic (1). These pharmacological activities are very similar to those shown by _E. parajeeta_ (2) and seem to be due to the presence of spiroamine alkaloids. These compounds, usually referred to as Erythrina alkaloids, have been exhaustively investigated from phytochemical (3), synthetic (4), biosynthetic (5), and spectroscopic (mass (6), gc-mass (3), 'H nmr (7)) points of view; 13C nmr spectroscopy, though, has not yet been fully applied (4, 8).

We now wish to report the isolation of five major alkaloids (1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) from the methanol extract of _Erythrina mulungu_ flowers, as well as their 13C nmr data.

Compounds 1, 2, and 3 were identified as erystrine 1 (9), erythrarine 2 (10), and hypaphorine 3 (10). Compounds 1-3 are common constituents of the Erythrina species. Their identifications were based on previously published spectroscopic data and confirmed by their 13C nmr spectra analysis.

The shift assignments, listed in Table 1, were made by standard chemical shift theory and analysis of the SFORD and fully coupled spectra (11). 1-(_p_ - Methoxyphenyl)-6,7-dimethoxytetrahydroisouinoline 6 (12) and 1-a-bromo-15,16-dimethoxycis-erythrinan-2,8-dione-2-ethylenacetal 7 (8) were used as models.

Comparison of the carbon signals of 1 with the corresponding signals of erythrarine 2 shows agreement for all, except for those at 128.3, 64.3, and 51.2 ppm which were assigned to C-12, C-11, and C-10 respectively. Similar changes are observed, in C-a and C-b, when an axial hydroxyl group is introduced to 5-a-cholest-8(14)-en-3-b-ol 8, i.e. 8 to 9 (13). This corroborates the pseudo axial hydroxyl

## Page 2

group at C-11 in erthartrine **2**, previously suggested on the basis of 'H nmr data and [a]b correlation with related alkaloids (10).

Compound **4** was isolated as an oily brown substance of molecular formula C15H23NO4 (M+ 329.1595) as determined by high resolution mass spectrometry. The ir (max 1610 cm-1) and the uv spectra (\(\Omega_{\max 231}\) (14 000) and 278 (2900) nm) were almost identical with those of erygarine **1** (9) and erythrarine **2** (10). The mass spectrum showed significant ions at _m_/_e_ 329 (M+), 313 (M+ - 16), 298 (M+ - 16 - 15), 282 (M+ - 16 - 31), 269, 239 (100), 165, 152.

Based on these data an erythrinan carbon skeleton of the 1-6 diene type was assumed. The 'H nmr spectrum of 4, in deuteriochloroform, revealed two aromatic proton singlets at 6.83, 6.76 and three methoxy group singlets at 3 3.43 (3H), 3.84 (3H), and 3.95 (3H). The presence of three olefinic proton signals at 5 5.92 (broad singlet, H-7), 6 6.30 (broad doublet, \(J\) = 10 Hz, H-1), and 6 8.66 (d, \(J\) = 3 Hz, low field arm of a double doublet partially covered by one of the aromatic singlets, H-2) co-reporated the assumption of a diene system in the molecule. On irradiation at 8 4.10 (H-3) the double doublet at 8 2.14 (H-4e, \(J\)8-4e = 5.5 Hz; \(J\)4-4e = 11 Hz) collapsed to a doublet, the large multi at 5 3.08-3.36 (3 superimposed proton signals) was simplified, and the low field arm of the H-2 signal collapsed to a singlet. Further irradiation at 5 3.20 (H-4a) and 6 2.14 (H-4e) allowed the assignment of this ABXY system to that depicted in ring A of **4**.

These results were comparable with those of erythrarine **12** (7) and erthartrine **2** (10) except the H-4a chemical shift (

## Page 3

oxide structure for compound 4. Further confirmation of structure 4 was accomplished by treating 1 with _m_-chloroperbenzoic acid. The resulting _N_-oxide was identical in all aspects (ir, 'H nmr) to the natural product 4.

Compound 5 was isolated as an oil of molecular formula C19H23NOs (M+ 345.1602) as determined by high resolution mass spectrometry. This compound exhibited the uv (Omax 278 (2900), 231 (14 000 nm) and ir (vmax 1610, 3250 (OH) cm-1) absorption bands attributable to the 1-6 diene moiety and an hydroxyl group respectively. The 1H nmr spectrum (deuterichloroform) showed the presence of the following functional groups: three methoxyl groups (d 3.38, 3.78, and 3.92, each 3H, s), two aromatic protons (d 6.68 and 7.08, each 1H, s), and three methines (d 5.82 (broad singlet, 1H), 6.18 (d, \(J\) = 10 Hz), and 6.74 (dd, \(J\) = 10 and 2 Hz)), the latter characteristic of a 1-6 diene erythrina skeleton.

On irradiation at d 2.09 (dd, \(J\)3a-4e = 5 Hz, \(J\)4e-4a = 10.5 Hz), the triplet at d 3.16 (_J_4a-4e = 10.5 Hz, \(J\)3a-4e = 10.5 Hz) collapsed to a doublet. Conversely, irradiation of the triplet at d 3.16 changed the double doublet at d 2.09 to a doublet. In compound 5, as in erystorine-_N_-oxide, H-4a (part of the ABX system of ring A) is shifted downfield (d5d 1.31 ppm) when compared to that of erythrantine 2. This supports an _N_-oxide structure. Finally, the existence of a carbonicic proton at C-11 was suggested, based on the signal at d 5.28 (d, \(J\)10a-11a = 15 Hz, H-11a).

The 13C nmr spectrum of 5 (Table 1) when compared to that of 2 revealed deshieldings (Dd2-5 15.2, 15.9, and 14.7 ppm at C-10, C-5, and C-8 respectively) and shieldings (Dd2-5 9.5, 4.5, and 2.2 ppm at C-4, C-7, and C-12 respectively) analogous to those observed in the transformation of erystorine 1 into erystorine-_N_-oxide 4. Based on these arguments, we assumed compound 5 was erythrantine-_N_-oxide. Confirmation was obtained by treating erythrantine with _m_-chloroperbenzoic acid. The resultant synthetic _N_-oxide and the natural product 5 showed superimposable ir and 1H nmr spectra.

The absolute configuration at C-3 and C-11 of 5 was established as follows. Methylation of the oily _N_-oxide 5 with sodium hydride - methyl iodide afforded the _O_-methyl derivative 13, whose 1H nmr spectrum analysis revealed the presence of an additional methoxyl group at d 3.64. As observed in 4 and 5, the ABX system of ring A appears at d 5.20 (dd, \(J\)4e-4a = 11 Hz, \(J\)4e-3a = 5.5 Hz, H-4e), 3.34 (t, \(J\)4e-4a = 11 Hz, \(J\)4a-3a = 11 Hz, H-4a). The 1NDOR technique was used to identify H-3. Using the central peak of the triplet at d 3.34 as the observed transition, responses were obtained at d 5.20.00 and d 4.30. Consequently H-3 must be at d 4.30. Using the INDOR technique and observing the peak at d 5.80 (broad, _S_-7), H8a and H8a were detected at d 4.20. Finally, observing each line of the doublet at d 5.16 (d, \(J\) = 15 Hz, H-11), responses were obtained at d 4.40. Thus, from d 4.60 to d 4.10 are located signals corresponding to H10a, H10a, H3, H8a, H8a. Finally the large coupling (_J_ = 15 Hz) of the carbonicic proton was indicative of an axial proton at H-11.4 The analysis of the 13C nmr spectrum of 13 was also carried out. The comparison of the d values for 13 with the d values for d revealed the concordance of all carbon shifts except for C-10, C-11, and C-13, where the methylation occurred. Furthermore, the C-11 and C-3 shifts (74.4 and 75.3 ppm respectively) suggested equatorial methoxyl groups at both carbons, thus corroborating the pseudo axial H-11.

Treatment of 13 with triethylphosphite in benzene produced the tertiary base erythrine 12, which showed [a]0 and 1H nmr data analogous to that reported in the literature (7). The absolute configurations at C-11 and C-3 of 12 were determined by a crystallographic study. This indicates that indeed 5 and 12 have the same absolute configurations at C-3 and C-11.

This is the first time erythrina _N_-oxides have been reported. The possibility that these _N_-oxides might be artefacts could not be ignored. Therefore fresh flowers were collected and extracted with cold methanol and the crude extract was immediately analyzed by thin layer chromatography. The presence of the _N_-oxides showed that in fact they are natural products. The water solubility of the _N_-oxides and the current methods for isolation of water soluble alkaloids are probably responsible for the lack of examples of erythrina-_N_-oxides in the literature.

Interestingly, _N_-oxidation of each of the alkaloids erystorine 1 and erythrantine 2 yielded only one of the two possible (considering inversion at the bridgehead nitrogen (16)) _N_-oxides. In fact the _N_-oxides 4 and 5 are those produced by introduction of oxygen from the more accessible convex face of the molecules 1 and 2, and this can be shown in the 13C nmr by the C-4 shielding (Dd  = 9.5 ppm) and in the 1H nmr by the H-4a deshielding (Dd  = 1.30 ppm) effects produced when _N_-oxidation of the tertiary bases occurs, similar to those observed when going from 10 to 11 (14).



## Page 4



## Experimental

The \({}^{1}\)H nmr spectra were determined on a Varian T-60 or a Varian XL 100 spectrometer using CCDs, solutions (unless otherwise indicated) and Me,Si as an internal standard, chemical shifts are expressed in 8 and coupling constants (\(J\)) are given in Hertz (s = singlet, d = triplet, m = multiplet). The \({}^{1}\)C nmr spectra were recorded in CDCl, solutions on a Varian XL-100 spectrometer operating at 25.2 MHz in the Fourier transform mode; the values are in parts per million dowulfield from Me,Si (6(Me,Si) = 8(CDCl3) + 76.9); low resolution mass spectra were obtained with a Fimagni Model 1015/SL spectrometer; optical rotations were measured in a Carl Zeiss photoelectric polarimeter. All melting points were determined on a Reichert between-stage microscope and are uncorrected. Infrared spectra were run on a Perkin-Elmer 337 spectrophotometer using thin films or KBr pellets. Merck silica gel HP was utilized for thin layer plates (14) and spots were visualized by spraying Dragonedford solution (17) followed by MeOH/H2SO4 and heating at 110degC.

The _Erythrust mulaug_ flowers were collected in 1979 at "Fazendola Santa Elias" (Campinas, SP, Brazil) and dried at 40degC for 36 h. The finely ground flowers (690.060) were then extracted with methanol yielding 55.60 g of cafact extract, which was adsorbed on cellulose (120.00 mg) and eluted with hexane (5.67 g), chloroform (7.066), chloroform-methanol 1: (123.33 g), and methanol (7.52 g). Column chromatography through silica gel afforded the alkaloids, further purified using preparative layer chromatography.

Erythrature 1 (0.17) gas was isolated in 0.31% yield and was identified by ir (0.19) mass (6), and \({}^{1}\)H nmr (9 spectra; uv \(\lambda_{\max}\) (EOH) (6): 2.30 (120, 280) (3300 nm; ir vKBr): 1610 cm-1; (H r mr < 6.86 h, 1-1),

## Page 5

Fred Fujiwara for the 100 MHz \({}^{1}\)H nmr spectra, to Concerta Kascheres for the mass spectra, to Dr. John A. Stephens from Monsanto Agricultural Products Co., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A. for the high resolution mass spectra, and to Profs. Edmundo A. Ruveda, Francisco de A. M. Reis, and Albert J. Kascheres for helpful suggestions.

We acknowledge financial support from FAPESP (Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo) and FINEP (Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos).

## References

* [1]A. Balbach, "As Plantas Curam". Ediocese " A Edificacao de LaTe", "Sao Paulo, Brasil.
* [2]S. Ghosal, K. R. Dutri, and S. K. Bhattacharya, J. Pharm. Sci. 61, 1724 (1972).
* [3]R. T. Hagenavers, R. D. Johnson, D. S. Millionton, M. H. Mondal, W. BEAWES, L. Becker, C. Young, and K. L. Henghart, L. Loyola, 37, 41 (1974).
* [4]A. Monson, M. Epc, C. Wolff, T. Clausen, and H. G. Villebuer. Chem. Ber. 112, 1126 (1979).
* [5]A. G. M. Barener, D. H. R. Barton, G. Franckowiak, D. Papaioannou, and D. Wlodowson, J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 662 (1979).
* [6]R. B. Boar and D. A. Wlodowson. J. Chem. Soc. B, 1591 (1970).
* [7]D. H. R. Barton, P. N. Jenkins, and D. A. Wlodowson. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 391 (1970).
* [8]A. Monsanto, H. G. Villebuer, C. Fischer, M. Epe, B. Epe, and C. Wolff. Chem. Ber. 112, 1110 (1979).
* [9]K. Ito, M. Haehara, Y. Jinno, and H. Furukawa. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 24, 52 (1976).
* [10]M. M. El-Oeber, A. A. All, and M. M. Mottaleb. Lloyda, 41, 243 (1978).
* [11]J. B. Stromberas. Carbon-13 nmr spectroscopy. Academic Press, New York : 1972; G. C. Levy and G. L. Nelson. Carbon-13 nuclear medicine resonance for organic chemists. Wiley-Interscience, New York : 1972.
* [12]A. J. Mansabidi, E. A. Ruveda, and F. de A. M. Reis. Phytochemistry, 17, 1655 (1978).
* [13]M. Tsuda, E. J. Parrish, and G. J. Schroepper, Jr. J. Org. Chem. 44, 8 (1979).
* [14]R. M. Peisensk and M. Shamma. Lloyda, 43, 305 (1980).
* [15]J. D. Phillipson and S. S. Handa. Lloyda, 41, 385 (1970).
* [16]E. D. Berendman and Y. Morgon. Tetrahedron, 32, 2617 (1976).
* [17]J. H. Harborne. Phytochemical methods. J. Wiley & Sons Inc., New York : 1973.
* [18]C. T. Rizziu. "A Flora de Cermado", Symposium on "Cerrado", _Edited by Edgard Blucher and EDUSP_. 1971, pp. 105-154; M. B. Ferreira and W. R. C. D'assatrpa.
* [19]Leguminosae em Minas Gerais II. O Genero _Eyrhrina_ L.", xxvutin Botanic National Congress. Belo Horizonte, Brasil. 1978. pp. 59-74.



