# 10.1021@np4006822.pdf

## Page 1



# Mycoleptones A-C and Polyketides from the Endophyte Mycoleptodiscus indiacus

Willian J. Andrioli, Raphael Conti, Magali J. Araujo, Riccardo Zanasi, Bruno C. Cavalcanti, Viviane Manfrim, Juliano S. Toledo, Daniele Tedesco, Manoel O. de Moraes, Claudia Pessoa, Angela K. Cruz, Carlo Bertucci, Jose Sabino, Dhamnika N. P. Nanayakkara, Monica. T. Pupo, Jairo K. Bastos

Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Departamento de Antibioticos, Universidade Federal do Pernambuco, 50670-901, Recife, PE, Brazil Department of Chemistry and Biology, University of Salerno, 84084, Fisciano, Italy Departamento de Fisiologia e Farmacologia, Universidade Federal do Ceara, 60430-270, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, 40126, Bologna, Italy Instituto de Fisica, Universidade Federal de Goias, 74001-970, Goiania, GO, Brazil National Center for Natural Products Research, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi 38677, United States

###### Abstract

Three new azaphilones with an unusual methylene bridge, named myelopentones A, B, and C (2, 4, and 5), were isolated from cultures of _Mycoleptodiscus indiacus_, a fungus associated with the South American medicinal plant _Borreia verticillata_. Additionally, four known polyketides, austdiol (1), eugenitin (3), 6-methoxyeugenin (6), and 9-hydroxyeugenin (7), were also isolated. The structural characterization of compounds was carried out by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, high-resolution mass spectrometry, electronic circular dichroism spectroscopy, time-dependent density functional theory calculations, and X-ray crystallography. Compounds 1-9 were weakly active when tested in antileishmanial and cytotoxicity assays.

E-nodophytic microorganisms live inside the tissues of host plants without apparently harming them and are a promising source of bioactive compounds.1, 2, 3, 4 Species of _Mycoleptodiscus_, such as _M. indicus_, _M. terrestris_, and _M. shericus_, are commonly isolated as endophytes; they are probably latently phytopathogenic and may become phytopathogenic when the host plant is subjected to stress.5_M. indicus_, a tropical to subtropical species, occurs in leaves of different host plants, mainly monocyclotendus. _M. indicus_ is associated with large spreading lesions on leaves of _Zamia_ spp_, an American cycad, and other monocyclotendous plants.6_M. indicus_ has occasionally been reported to infect humans and canines, causing septic arthritis and skin infections.7

In this paper, the isolation, structural characterization, and biological activity of secondary metabolites from cultures of _M. indicus_, an endophytic fungus isolated from the leaves from _Borreia verticillata_ (Rubiaceae), are reported. Three new azaphilones, named myelopentones A, B, and C (2, 4, and 5), were isolated and fully characterized; in addition, four known polyketides, namely, austdiol (1), eugenitin (3), 6-methoxyeugenin (6), and 9-hydroxyeugenin (7), were isolated and identified, and the acetylated derivatives of austdiol (8) and mycoleptone A (9) were synthesized (Figure 1).

## 2 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Seven secondary metabolites of _M. indicus_ were isolated, four of which were identified as austdiol, eugenitin, 6-methoxyeugenin, and 9-hydroxyeugenin by comparison of experimental spectroscopic data with literature values.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 6

## Page 2

head-to-tail acetate units, and possesses two C1 units introduced from _S_-adenosylmethionine.17 A wide range of interesting biological activities of azabilones, such as antimicrobial, antifungal, antiviral, antioxidant, cytotoxic, nematicidal, and anti-inflammatory, have been reported in the literature;14,17 their nonselective biological activities may be related to the production of vinylogous _g_-pyridones.18

Three of the isolated metabolites are previously unreported azabilones and were named myelopentores A, B, and C (2, 4, and 5). Mycoleptone A (2) was isolated as a yellow powder, and the complete structural characterization was carried out by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS), electronic circular dichroism (ECD) spectroscopy, time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) calculations, and single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies (Figure 2). The UV spectrum of 2 displays maximum absorptions at 254 nm (log \(e\) 2.90) and 361 nm (log \(e\) 2.83), revealing the presence of an extended conjugated system, characteristic of azabilones. Compound 2 displays similar 1H and 13C NMR spectra to austdiol,8,9 with the replacement of the aldehyde signals (_d_H 9.99 and _d_C 189.3) by methylene signals (_d_H 3.26 and _d_C 18.5) at position C-5. The 1H NMR spectrum exhibits two signals at _d_H 7.30 and 6.25 due to hydrogen atoms on the pyran ring, two hydroxyl hydrogens at _d_H 5.66 (OH, d, \(J\) = 4.6 Hz) and 4.93 (OH, s), a methine signal at _d_H 4.22 (1H, d, \(J\) = 4.6 Hz), a methylene signal at _d_H 3.26, and two methyl signals at _d_H 2.07 and 0.91. The 13C NMR spectrum displays signals for 12 carbons atoms, 11 of which refer to two atoms each: two signals due to methyl carbon atoms (_d_C 19.2 and 18.8), five signals from the skeleton of the polybenzrong ring (_d_C 157.8; 143.5; 141.0; 120.7 and 104.6), and four signals from the skeleton of the cyclohexenone, with one signal due to ketone carbonyl groups (_d_C 197.8; IR _m_max 1667 cm-1), one due to quaternary unsaturated carbon atoms (_d_C 112.7), and two due to oxygenated carbon atoms (_d_C 75.6 and 71.0). The remaining signal refers to a methylene group (_d_C 18.5). The heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation (HMRBC) spectrum shows key correlations of CH2-10 to C-4a, C-5, C-6, C-4a', C-5', and C-6', revealing the attachment of two azaphilone units through a methylene bridge at position C-5 (Table 1). Furthermore, the presence of four hydroxyl groups was confirmed by acetylation with pyridine-Ac2O to afford the tetracapted derivative (9). NMR spectroscopy identifies the structure of 2 as being formed by two astditol units linked by a methylene group, generating a compound with the molecular formula C23H24O8 as determined by HRMS ([M + H]+ at _m_/_z_ 429.1543). The chemical structure explains the simplicity of the 1H and 13C NMR spectra, in which the signal intensities are doubled, except for the methylene group.

Compound 2 is a chiral molecule having four asymmetric carbons and a formal binary symmetry axis. An accurate analysis of the eight enantiomeric pairs of 2 reveals that two pairs are formed by nonoptically active _meso_ structures and two more pairs are repeated twice; as a result, four pairs of enantiomers and two _meso_ structures are possible. Since the reliable assessment of the absolute configuration of a compound is achieved when the theoretical chiroptical properties19 of all the possible optically active diastereomers are determined,20 quantum-mechanical (QM) calculations were performed on four diastereomers of 2 (Figure 3): (7\(R\),85,7'_R_,8'_'_S_)**-2 (2A), (7\(R\),8_,8'_T_,8_'_R_'_R_)**-2 (2B), (7\(R\),8_,8_'_T_,8_'_S_,8'_S_'_S_)**-2 (2C), and (7\(S\),8\(S\),7_'S_,8_'S_'_S_)**-2 (2D). QM calculations were carried out

Figure 1.: Mycoleptones A–C and polyketides from _Mycoleptodiscus indicus._

Figure 2.: ORTEP representation of mycoleptone A (atom displacement at 30% probability). Hydrogen atoms are represented by spheres of arbitrary radius.



## Page 3

using density functional theory (DFT) and its time-dependent extension (TD-DFT); detailed results are reported in the Supporting Information. DFT geometry optimization (Table 2) yielded two equilibrium conformers having D_E_QAM <= 2 kcal mol-1 for diastereomers **2A**, **2B**, and **2C**, while a single equilibrium conformer within the same threshold energy was found for diastereomers **2D**. The most populated conformers of **2A** (Figure 4) display similar geometric features: the azaphilone units are oriented in an "open folder" conformation, the pyran oxygen atoms are pointing toward opposite directions, and all the hydroxy groups are equatorial and form intramolecular hydrogen bonds with each other and with the ketone carbonyl groups. The main difference lies in the direction of the axial methyl groups on C-7 and C-7, which point outside the molecular cavity for **2A**-**e** and inside for **2A**-**b**.

The experimental ECD spectrum of **2** in methanol (Figure 5) shows four bands. The broad positive band centered at 372 nm has a strong contribution from the n - _p_a* transitions of the ketone carbonyls, which are affected by the chiral environment around these groups. The positive band at 311 nm with a shoulder around 285 nm, the sharp negative peak at 252 nm, and the positive peak at 228 nm are due to \(p\) - _p_a* transitions of the conjugated system, which are affected by the chirality of the rings and by the mutual orientation of the azaphilone units. The theoretical ECD spectra of the diastereomers of **2** (Figure 6) displayed different patterns, reflecting their different stereochemistry. The comparison between the calculated spectrum of **2A** and the experimental spectrum of **2** (Figure 7) shows that TD-DFT calculations are able to reproduce the experimental pattern of the transitions in the high-energy region, considering that transition energies are usually underestimated by PBE0.21 The transitions in the low-energy region are not reproduced, suggesting that QM calculations are unable to describe the chiral environment of the ketone moieties, in particular hydrogen-bonding interactions with hydroxy groups and solvent molecules, with adequate accuracy. On the other hand, the theoretical ECD spectra of the remaining diastereomers (reported in the Supporting Information) are unable to reproduce the experimental ECD pattern in the high-energy region: on this basis, a (7R,8S,7'R,8'S) absolute configuration can be predicted for **2**.

Compound **2** crystallizes with two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit (Figure 2); the X-ray geometric parameters selected for comparison with the precursor austdiol are listed in Table 3. The C-5--C-10 distance was elongated upon change of hybridization to sp3 for atom C-10, and the C-5--C-4a distance was shortened, increasing the double-bond character. The pyran rings are almost planar with an rmsd from the mean plane of 0.03 A, while the cyclohexenone rings adopt a twisted envelope conformation with atoms C-7 and C-7 as flap atoms. The X-ray structure of **2** shows that the azaphilone units have the same absolute configuration as austdiol,22 retaining the stereochemistry of the chiral centers as (7R,8S); moreover,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c}  & & myolpetone A (2)a & & myolpetone B (4)a & & myolpetone C (5)a & \\ position & _δ_c mult. & _δ_a (J min Hz) & HMBCa & _δ_c mult. & _δ_a (J m Hz) & HMBCa & _δ_c mult. & _δ_a (J m Hz) & HMBCa \\
1 & 143.



## Page 4

DFT conformer **2A**-**b** shows a close resemblance to the crystallographic structure of **2.** On the basis of the foregoing evidence, the structure of mycoelptone A (**2**) was therefore elucidated as (7\(R\),8,5,7',R_,8')-5-[(7',8'-dihydroxy-3',7'-dimethyl-6'-oxo-7',8'-dihydroxy-6'-H'-isochromen-5'-yl)methyl]-7,8-dihy-droxy-3,7-dimethyl-7,8-dihydro-6'H-isochromen-6-one.

The molecular formula of mycoelptone B (**4**) was determined as C23H2O8 by a combination of HRMS, 1H and 13C NMR, homonuclear correlation (COSY), heteronuclear multiple-quantum correlation (HMQC), and HMBC spectroscopies. The 1H NMR spectrum contains five doublets, four singlets, two double doublets, and one multiplet; some similarities with the 1H NMR spectrum of **2** are observed, with the presence of two hydrogen atoms on the pyran ring at _d_H 7.43 (1H, d, \(J\) = 1.8 Hz) and 6.63 (1H, s), an oxygenated sp3 methine group at _d_H 4.42 (1H, d, \(J\) = 1.8 Hz), a CH2 group at _d_H 3.60 (1H, d, _f_gm = 15.0 Hz) and 3.53 (1H, d, _f_gm = 15.0 Hz) due to the methylene bridge at position C-10 connecting the azapholine unit to a dihydroisocoumarin moiety, and two methyl signals at _d_H 2.22 and 1.10. For the dihydroisocoumarin moiety, the 1H NMR spectrum displays an oxygen-bearing methine hydrogen at _d_H 4.55 (1H, m), a methylene group at _d_H 3.17 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 16.0, 3.0 Hz) and 2.60 (1H, d, \(J\) = 16.0, 11.0 Hz), and two methyl groups at _d_H 2.06 (3H, s) and 1.44 (3H, d, \(J\) = 6.2 Hz). The 13C NMR spectrum of **4** displays signals for 23 carbon atoms: one signal due to the methylene bridge (_d_C 20.7), 11 signals belonging to the azaphilone moiety as in **2**,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c}  & conformer & \(\bar{\alpha}_{1}\) (deg)a  & \(\bar{\alpha}_{2}\) (deg)b  & \(\bar{\beta}\) (deg)c  & d (Å)a  & \(\bar{\Delta}\)f (Å)a [FOOTNOTE:a]Footnote a: C-10–C.



## Page 5

and 11 signals belonging to the dihydroxyicocumarin moiety. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR data reveal six resonances for sp\({}^{2}\) carbon atoms being part of a benzene ring, two of them characterized by a downfield shift due to the hydroxy substituents (C-6' at \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 160.2; C-8' at \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 160.9) and the presence of a carbonyl group at \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 171.2 (C-1'; IR \(\nu_{\rm max}\) 1652 cm\({}^{-1}\)). The structural features of the lactone ring were determined from the \({}^{1}\)H-1H COSY spectrum based on the couplings between H2-4' and H-3', as well as between H-3' and H2-9'. The HMBC correlations of CH2-4' to \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 136.8 (C-5'), \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 100.1 (C-8'), \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 75.0 (C-3'), and \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 19.6 (C-9') proved the connection of the two units. In addition, the HMBC spectrum displays relevant correlations from CH2-10 (\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.60, 3.53) to \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 199.3 (C-6), 143.7 (C-4a), and 112.8 (C-5) from the azaphilome moiety and to \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 160.9 (C-8'), 160.2 (C-6'), and 116.5 (C-7') from the dihydroxyicouarn moiety, characterizing the connection between the two units by a methylene bridge to afford the compound (7R,8S)-5-[(6',8'-dihydroxy-3',5'-dimethyl-1'-oxoisochroman-7'-yl)methyl]-7,8-dihydroxy-3,7-dimethyl-7,8-dihydro-6H-isoc-chromen-6-one.

The molecular formula of mycobacteria C (5) was deduced as C23H2O8 by HRMS analysis in combination with \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectroscopies. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum displays nine singlets and two doublets; as in compounds **2** and **4**, the methylene group at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.74 (1H, d, \(J\) = 15.0 Hz) and 3.46 (1H, d, \(J\) = 15.0 Hz) connects two moieties, the azaphilome and chromone units. The azaphilome moiety shows five uncoupled hydrogen atoms at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 7.52 (H-1), 7.03 (H-4), 4.25 (H-8), 2.25 (H-9), and 1.00 (H-10); the chrome moiety displays four uncoupled hydrogen atoms at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 13.06 (H-5'), 6.13 (H-3'), 2.37 (H-9'), and 2.00 (H-10'), the sharp singlet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 13.06 being interpreted as a hydrogen-bonded phenol hydroxy group. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum confirms 23 carbon signals, namely, four methyl, one methylene, four methylene, and 14 quaternary carbon signals. The chrome moiety displays one ketone carbonyl group (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 181.8; IR \(\nu_{\rm max}\) 1690 cm\({}^{-1}\)) and four quaternary aromatic (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 153.5, 107.8, 105.0, and 103.1), two oxygenated aromatic (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 161.1 and 156.6), two unsaturated (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 167.2 and 107.9), and two methyl (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 20.2 and 8.5) carbon atoms. The structure of the chrome portion was determined on consideration of the molecular formula, double-bond equivalents, and the downfield shifts of the carbon signals at C-2' and C-8a' (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 167.2 and 153.5). The HMBC spectrum of **5** revealed relevant correlations of CH2-10 (\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.74, 3.46) to \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 200.5 (C-6), 144.3 (C-4a), and 112.1 (C-5) from the azaphilome moiety and to \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 161.1 (C-7'), 156.6 (C-5'), and 107.8 (C-6') from the chrome moiety, revealing the

Figure 5: Experimental UV and ECD spectra of mycoleptone A (19 \(\mu\)M in MeOH, 1 cm path length).

Figure 6: Theoretical ECD spectra of the diastereomers of mycoheptone at the PBE0/6-311++G(2d,2p)/IEPEPM(MeOH)//B97D/6-311++G(2d,2p)/IEPEPM(MeOH) level (\(\chi_{\rm QM}\)-based conformational averaging, \(\Delta\sigma\) = 0.3 eV). Solid: **2A**. Dash-dotted: **2B**. Dotted: **2C**. Dashed: **2D**.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} \hline parameter & mycoleptone A (**2**) & australoid (**1**) \\ \hline C-1–C8a & 1.337(8) Å & 1.338(3) Å \\ C-3–C4a & 1.341(8) Å & 1.345(3) Å \\ C-5–C4a & 1.373(7) Å & 1.399(2) Å \\ C-5–C-6 & 1.433(8) Å & 1.432(3) Å \\ C-5–C-10 & 1.533(7) Å & 1.455(2) Å \\ C-4a–C–5–C-6 & 118.6(5)\({}^{\circ}\) & 124.3(2)\({}^{\circ}\) \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Selected Bond Distances and Angles for Mycoleptone A and Austdiol, As Determined by X-ray Crystallography

Figure 7: Theoretical ECD spectrum of **2A** and comparison with experimental data. Solid: experimental ECD spectrum of **2** (19 \(\mu\)M in MeOH, 1 cm path length). Dotted: theoretical ECD spectrum of **2A** at the PBE0/6-311++G(2d,2p)/IEPEPM(MeOH)//B97D/6-311++G(2d,2p)/IEPEPM(MeOH) level (\(\chi_{\rm QM}\)-based conformational averaging, \(\Delta\sigma\) = 0.3 eV).



## Page 6

connection of both skeletons and featuring **5** as (7\(R\),8S): 5- [(5',7'-dihydroxy-2',8'-dimethyl-4'-oxo-4'H-chromen-6'-yl]-methyl]-7,8-dihydroxy-3,7-dimethyl-7,8-dihydro-6H-isochromen-6-one.

The presence of a methylene bridge is very uncommon among natural compounds, and only a few azaphilone dimers have been reported showing such a feature.15 Dicitrinones A-C23 were isolated from _Penicillium citrinum_, a volcano as-derived fungus: the presence of a single sp3 carbon bridge, either a methine or methylene group, was proposed to derive from the carboxyl group of citrinin through decarboxylation, reduction, and Friedel-Crafts alkylation mediated by a polyketide biosynthetic pathway. The methylene bridge in aspergilone B,24 an azaphilone dimer that was isolated from a marine-derived fungus of the _Aspergillus_ species, was hypothesized to derive from a formaldehyde biosynthetic pathway; the same hypothesis was proposed for the biosynthesis of xyloketal F2,25 a dimer isolated from a mangrove fungus of the _Xylaria_ species.

The condensation of two austdiol units to form mycyclotpone A (**2**) is consistent with a possible biosynthetic pathway similar to the one proposed for dicitrinone C23 (Figure 8). One austdiol unit may undergo decarbonylation, while the aldehyde group of the second austdiol unit may be reduced to a reactive carbocation species: the two units may then react by Friedel-Crafts alkylation. Similar pathways may also explain the condensation of the dihydroisocumarin and chromone units with an austdiol unit in mycyclotpones B (**4**) and C (**5**), respectively. Due to the limited number of methylene-bridged azaphilones discovered to date, however, a general biosynthetic pathway cannot be postulated, and the biologically mediated mechanisms of such reactions are unknown.

The results of antileishmanial and cytotoxicity tests on the isolated compounds are shown in Table 4. Compounds **1-9** exhibit no significant activity against _Leishmania donovani_ and _Leishmania major_ compared to the standard antileishmanial drugs Geneticin (_L. major_), amphotericin B, and pentamidin (_L. donovani_). Mycolpetone B (**4**) was the most cytotoxic metabolite (PC3 cells: IC50 = 7.1 +- 3.8 _m_M), but its activity was lower than that of doxorubicin, the reference compound for cytotoxicity assays.

## EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

### General Experimental Procedures

Optical rotations were measured in CHCl3 MeOH, or DMSO using a Jasco DIP-370 digital polarimeter at room temperature; IR spectra were recorded with KBr discs using a Bruker Tensor 27 FTIR spectrometer. UV spectra were measured in CHCl3 MeOH, and DMSO on a Varian Cary 50 Bio UV-visible spectrophotometer. The HPLC system consisted of a Shimadzu SCL-10Avp multisolvent delivery system, a SPD-M10Avp photodiode array detector, an Intel Celeron computer for analytical system control, data collection, and processing, and a Shim-pack CLC-ODS(M) reversed-phase column (250 x 4.5 mm i.d.; 5 _m_m particle size) protected by a Pelligural LC-18 cartridge. The NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance DXR-400 spectrometer operating at 400 MHz for 1H NMR and 100 MHz for 15C NMR in CDCl3, CO3D, or DMSO-_

## Page 7

were carried out at 0.2 nm intervals using a 1 nm spectral bandwidth, a 20 nm min-1 scan rate, and a 4 s time constant.

**Fungal Material.** The fungus was isolated as an endophyte from the medicinal plant _Borreira verticillatta_ (L.) G. F. W. Meyer, belonging to the Rubiaceae family, and is native to South America. Five specimens of _B. verticillatta_ with a healthy appearance were collected from the campus of the Federal University of Pernambuco (UFPE) (34deg56'57deg W; 8deg25'53deg S) in January 2006, approximately 43 cm in height and bearing flowers. Then, the samples were taken to the laboratory and processed in 24 h. A voucher specimen of the plant (No. 42.234/UFPE) was identified and deposited at the Herbarium Professor Geraldo Mariz, UFP, Department of Botany, UFPE, Recife, Brazil. The isolate was identified as _Mycolleostasis_ index based on sequence analysis of the ITS region of the cDNA (GenBank accession number GU220382.1).

**Cultivation, Extraction, and isolation.**_M. indicus_ was grown on potato dextrose agar plates for 7 days at 30 degC. Then, 10 plugs were transferred to five Erinemeyer flasks (500 mL), each containing 100 mL of potato dextrose broth prepared with distilled water. Flasks were shaken on a rotary shaker at 30 degC and 120 rpm for 48 h. Next, 10 mL was transferred to each of 50 flasks containing 90 g of solid medium (rice-out). These were grown for 30 days. On day 30, the mycelial mass was macerated with ethanol overnight and filtered. The filtrate was concentrated under vacuum to obtain a crude ethanol extract (22 g), which was partitioned with three times equal volumes of hexane and CH2Cl2, respectively, yielding hexane (6 g) and dichloromethane fractions (6.9 g). The CH2Cl2 fraction was suspended in MeOH and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 min, furnishing a precipitate fraction (3870 mg) and a soluble fraction (3030 mg). The precipitate fraction was subjected to the chromatography over a silica gel column (30 x 3.5 cm i.d.) using a MeOH-CH2Cl2 gradient to yield 67 fractions, which were combined on the basis of their TLC profiles into seven fractions: A (19 mg), B (33 mg), C (2968 mg), D (100 mg), E (210 mg), F (285 mg), and G (109 mg). Fraction C (2968 mg) yielded anadid (2830 mg), after crystallization in MeOH, and fraction E afforded mycoletrone A (2, 200 mg) by precipitation. The soluble fraction (3030 mg) was subjected to gel filtration on a Sephadex LH-20 column (50 x 3 cm i.d.) using MeOH as the mobile phase, furnishing 10 fractions (S1-S10). Fraction S6 (280 mg) was washed with MeOH, yielding eugenintin (50 mg). The soluble portion was subjected to chromatography over a silica gel column (25 x 2 cm i.d.) using a MeOH-CH2Cl2 gradient. Forty-two fractions were collected and combined on the basis of their TLC profiles to yield nine fractions. The fourth fraction (S6.4, 28 mg) was purified by preparative silica gel TLC using hexane-ethyl acetate (70:30, v/v) as eluent to furnish myelotrone B (4, 10 mg) and myelocetrone C (5, 2 mg). Fraction S5 (461 mg) was subjected to chromatography over a silica gel column (25 x 2 cm i.d.) eluted with a gradient of MeOH in CH2Cl2. Thirty fractions were collected and combined on the basis of their TLC profiles to yield 10 fractions. The fourth fraction (S5.4, 60 mg) was purified by preparative silica gel TLC using hexane-ethyl acetate (70:30, v/v) as eluent to provide 6-methoxyegenin (14 mg). The fifth fraction (S5.5, 4 mg) was subjected to reversed-phase HPLC using CH2CN-H2O (10:90 to 100:0, v/v) as choline phase at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min over 23 min, yielding 9-hydroxyegenin (2 mg).

**Acclation of Austoichi and Mycoletrone A (2).** A solution containing austral (80 mg), pyridine (2 mL), and Ac2O (3 mL) was stirred at room temperature for 8 h. H2O (6 mL) was added into the reaction mixture, which was subsequently extracted with CH2Cl2, the organic layer was evaporated to give a yellow, amorphous solid (140 mg), which was purified by preparative TLC eluted with a mixture of CH2Cl2-MeOH (98:2, v/v) to afford the diacetylated derivative (8, 80.7 mg). Acetylation of myeloprone A (2, 25 mg) was performed in a similar manner, yielding the tetraacetylated derivative (9, 20 mg).

**Quantum-Mechanical Calculations.** Conformational analysis on the selected diastereomers of 2 was performed in two steps. In the first step, a preliminary conformer distribution was determined by molecular mechanics (MM) calculations at the MMFF94s26 level using the Spartan'02 software.27 In the second step, DFT28,29 geometry optimizations were performed on the MM conformers having relative energies (D_E_BM) within a threshold value of 3 kcal mol-7. DFT calculations were carried out at the B97D/6-311++G(2d,2p) level100-33 using the Gaussian 09 software package.34 The Boltzmann distribution of conformers at 298.15 K and 1 atm was then calculated from the relative electronic energies (D_E_BM). TDDFT35 calculations were carried out at the PBE0/6-311+G(2d,2p) level131-33,36-38 using the Gaussian 09 software package.34 All calculations were performed using the IEFPCM continuum solvation model39,40 for MeOH. Rational strengths (R) and excitation wavelengths (_l_) were calculated for the lowest 50 excited states on the optimized geometries having D_E_BM <= 2 kcal mol-1. Theoretical ECD spectra were then obtained by approximation of \(R\) values to Gaussian functions with a half-bandwidth at D_E_max/e (D_D_G) of 0.3 eV, summation over all excited states, and conformational averaging, according to the Boltzmann distribution of conformers (_I_QM).41

**Crystallographic Structure.** Crystals of **2** suitable for X-ray analysis were obtained by crystallisation from a methanol solution. A colorless prismatic crystal of approximate dimensions 0.3 x 0.2 x 0.2 mm3 was used for the experiment. X-ray data were measured on an Enar-Nonins CAD-4 diffractometer employing graphite-monochromated Cu Ka radiation (_l_ = 1.5418 A) at 298 K and operating in the _σ_=0 scan. Crystal data: C3H2O3O3 \(M\) = 428.42, triclinic, space group \(P\)1, \(a\) = 10.473(6) \(A\), \(b\) = 11.223(3) \(A\), \(c\) = 11.429(2) \(A\), \(a\) = 60.65(2)3, \(b\) = 89.83(3)3, \(g\) = 67.57(4)9, \(V\) = 1055.5(9) \(A\)3_2, \(Z\) = 2, _D_c = 1.348 g/cm3, _F_(000) = 452, and _r_(Cu Ka) = 0.86 mm-1. All tested crystal samples showed germination, and the sample used for data collection was visually homogeneous, but it showed pseudomerhedral twinning, which caused partial superposition of structure factors leading to high residuals during the structure refinements. A total of 8384 reflections were collected (4273 unique bins 96.26% of Friedel mates) in the _θ_ range 4.56deg to 73.92deg and index ranges \(h\) from 15 to -15, \(k\) from -24 to 25, and \(l\) from -15 to 15. Cell refinement and data reduction were performed with the XCAD4 software suite. The structure was solved and refined using the Wing2K with SHELX97 suite.42,43 Structure refinement was performed on \(P\)1 by full-matrix least-squares calculations. Non-hydrogen atoms were refined anisotropically, and all hydrogen atoms were placed in idealized coordinates and refined as riding atoms with isotropic parameters relative to their parent atoms. The final refinement residuals were \(R\)1 = 0.091 (_w_R1 = 0.32) for 6964 observed reflections with \(l\) > 2_σ_(_I_), 575 variable parameters, and three restraints, being \(R\)1 = 0.11 (_w_R_2 = 0.32) for all unique reflections with Gof = 1.41. The absolute structure Flack parameter was 0.1(3), indicating that the chiral sense was correctly chosen, although this number was not reliable, given the large standard deviation, in the absence of strong anomalous scatterers.

**Biological Assays.** The microplate Alarm-Blue assay was used to determine growth inhibition against _L. donovanii_.44 Antleishmaninal (_L. major_) and cytotoxicity assays against human colon cancer (HCT-8) cells, human leukemia cancer (HL-60) cells, human melanoma cancer (MDA-MB435) cells, human prostate cancer (PC3) cells, human glioblastoma cancer (SF-95) cells, and human lymphocyte cells were assessed employing a colorimetric method.44

Footnote 44: endopeptidase (_P_1, \(a\), \(b\),

## Page 8

\({}^{11}\)C NMR reported in Table 1; HRMS _m/z_ 451.1363 [M + Na]+ (caled for C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{20}\)O\({}_{4}\) + Na+, 451.1363).

_Mycoloptone C (S)_: brown, amorphous solid; \([a]^{15}\) +95 (c 0.2, DMSO), UV (MeOH) _l_max (log \(c\) 2) 234 (3.17), 297 (3.15), 321 (3.17) nm; IR (KV) _l_max 2920, 2360, 1690, 1573, 1478 cm-3; \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR reported in Table 1; HRMS _m/z_ 427.1387 [M + H]+ (caled for C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{20}\)S\({}_{4}\) + H'; 427.1387 [M + H]+ (caled for _d-Methovequention (6)_: white, solid powder; mp 155-158 \({}^{\circ}\)C; \([a]^{15}\)) \(C\) (0 _

## Page 9

Foresman, J. B.; Ortiz, J. V.; Cioslowski, J.; Fox, D. J. _Gaussian 09_, Revision A.02; Gaussian, Inc.: Wallingford, CT, 2009.
* (35) Bauernschmitt, R.; Ahlrichs, R. _Chem. Phys. Lett._**1996**, 256, 454-464.
* (36) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. _Phys. Rev. Lett._**1996**, 77, 3865-3868.
* (37) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. _Phys. Rev. Lett._**1997**, 78, 1396.
* (38) Adamo, C.; Barone, V. _J. Chem. Phys._**1999**, 110, 6158-6169.
* (39) Tomasi, J.; Mennucci, B.; Cances, E. _J. Mol. Struct. (THEOCHEM)_**1999**, 464, 211-226.
* (40) Tomasi, J.; Mennucci, B.; Cammi, R. _Chem. Rev._**2005**, 105, 2999-3093.
* (41) Stephens, P. J.; Harada, N. _Chirality_**2010**, 22, 229-233.
* (42) Farrugia, L. J. _J. Appl. Crystallogr._**1999**, 32, 837-838.
* (43) Sheldrick, G. M. _Acta Crystallogr._**2008**, A64, 112-122.
* (44) Mikus, J.; Steverding, D. _Parasitol. Int._**2000**, 48, 265-269.
* (45) Mosmann, T. _J. Immunol. Methods_**1983**, 65, 55-63.



