# 10.1023@B_JOEC.0000042400.14451.08.pdf

## Page 1



# Behavioral changes in workers of the

Leaf-cutting ant _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ INDUCED BY

CHEMICAL COMPONENTS OF _Eucalyptus maculata_ LEAVES

A. L. MARSARO, Jr., R. C. SOUZA, T. M. C. DELLA LUCIA, J. B. FERNANDES, M. F. G. F. SILVA, and P. C. VIEIRA

# Abstract

The response of _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ Forel workers to essential oils, epicuticular wax and hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate, and methanol extracts of _Eucalyptus maculata_ was evaluated. Hexane extracts of _E. maculata_ interfered with the recognition mechanism among workers. The main active compounds identified from this plant were the sesquiterpenes elemol and b-eudesmol. These compounds may be responsible for the resistance of this species to ant attack.

## Introduction

Leaf-cutting ants live in obligatory symbiosis with a basidiomycete fungus and they grow on fresh leaves harvested by workers. The fungus provides ants with nutrients (Martin et al., 1969) and enzymes (Boyd and Martin, 1975). The ants, in turn, supply the fungus with a variety of substrates (Weber, 1972) and stimulate symbiotic fungal growth (Martin et al., 1975). Leaf-cutting ant workers obtain a significant part of their nutrients from plant polysaccharide hydrolysis products produced by the action of extracellular enzymes released by the fungus (Silva et al., 2003).



## Page 2

Leaf-cutting ants in the genera _Atta_ and _Acromyrmex_ are considered a threat to Brazilian agriculture (Wilson, 1980). They are the most severe pests in the more than 6 million ha of _Eucalyptus_ plantations in Brazil (Siqueira, 1990; Della Lucia and Fowler, 1993). Although these ants are highly polyphagous, some plants escape their attack. This apparent resistance may be due to the presence of secondary metabolites such as tannins and terpenoids that are toxic to the ant-fungus symbiosis. According to Hubbell and Wiemer (1983), caryophyllene epoxide extracted from _Hymenopteraaea courbaril_ is toxic to the ant's own fungus and also repellent to the ants. Such double toxicity also occurs when leaf-cutting ants are fed daily with _Ricinus communis_ (Hebling et al., 1996). Some active compounds such as _trans_-\(\beta\)-ocimene from _Astronium graveolens_ (Chen et al., 1984) or the saponins from _Dioscorea cayenensis_ (Febvay et al., 1985) act merely as ant repellents. Other plant compounds act as fungicides, e.g., sesamine (Bueno et al., 1990) and other unidentified compounds extracted from _Canavalia ensiformis_ (Hebling et al., 2000). Anjos and Santana (1994) observed biting and mutilation of body parts by workers of _Atta laevisata_ and of _Atta sexdens rubropolosa_ exposed to leaves of four species of _Eucalyptus_, including _E. maculata_.

Our study aimed at isolating and identifying chemical components extracted from leaves of _E. maculata_ that induce aggression in nestmates of _A. sexdens rubropolosa_. We also describe the behavior of ants exposed to different concentrations of the most active component.

## Methods and Materials

_Biological Material_. _E. maculata_ leaves were collected during May (dry and winter season) from the middle of the tree canopy in a Eucalyptus stand at the campus of the Federal University of Vicosa. Leaves were placed onto ice and transported to the Chemistry Department of the Federal University of Sao Carlos, in Sao Paulo State, Brazil, where the leaf extracts were prepared.

Five colonies of _A. sexdens rubropolosa_, maintained in the laboratory for 2 years at 25 +- 5degC, 75 +- 5% RH, and 12:12 (L:D), were used in our experiments. These colonies were housed in glass chambers interconnected by transparent hoses 3 cm in diameter and connected to a foraging arena (Della Lucia et al., 1993). Each colony had approximately 18 l of fungus, distributed in six chambers, along with abundant brood and thousands of workers. The colonies were supplied daily with water and leaves or flowers of several plant species such as _Ligustrum japonicum_, _Tecoma stans_, _Acalifa wilkesiana_ and _Rosa_ spp.

_Extraction of Essential Oil and Epicuticular Wax_. Essential oil was extracted from _E. maculata_ leaves (400 g) by steam distillation for 4 hr in a Clevenger apparatus using 1 l water (German Pharmacopoeia), yielding 3.17 mg (0.79%). Epicuticular waxes were extracted from 60 fresh leaves immersed three times for 30 sec in CH2Cl2 at room temperature. The resulting solution was filtered

## Page 3

and dried; the solvent was removed under reduced pressure and yielded 190 mg (0.0812 mg/cm\({}^{2}\)).

Chemical AnalysisThe active sesquiterpenes (Figure 1) were extracted from _E. maculata_ leaves (4.4 kg) with hexane (5 l), followed by chromatography on a silica gel flash column by elution with a gradient of hexane (8.3 g), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) (10 g), EtOAc (1.5 g), and methanol (0.2 g, 1 l of each solvent). The hexane and CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) fractions were combined (18.3 g) and refractionated on silica gel, using CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) as eluent, yielding four fractions (fraction 1, 1.3 g; 2, 1.7 g; 3, 3.2 g; and 4, 5.8 g). Compounds from fraction 4 (400 mg, mixture of compounds 1-6, Figure 1) were isolated, first by flash chromatography on silica gel yielding three fractions. Fraction 4-2 (279 mg) was fractionated by TLC on silica gel coated with 10% of AgNO\({}_{3}\) and eluted with Hex:EtOAc 7:3 to yield elemol (62 mg), \(\beta\)-eudesmol (63 mg), and mixture A (92 mg of \(\alpha\)-eudesmol, \(\beta\)-eudesmol, guaiol epimer, \(\gamma\)-eudesmol, and hinesol).

The mixture of sesquiterpenes and pure compounds were analyzed on a Shimadzu QP 5000 mass detector running in the EI (electron impact ionization) scan mode, equipped with HP-1 fused-silica columns (25 m \(\times\) 0.2 mm-ID, 0.11-\(\mu\)m film thickness); temperature program: 100\({}^{\circ}\)C for 1 min to 250\({}^{\circ}\)C at the rate of 5\({}^{\circ}\)C/min and 10 min at 250\({}^{\circ}\)C; splitless injector 225\({}^{\circ}\)C; detector 250\({}^{\circ}\)C. Spectra were obtained in electron impact mode at 70 eV.

Retention IndexCalculations of the Retention Index were performed using a Shimadzu 17A equipped with DB-5 fused-silica columns (30 m \(\times\) 0.25 mm-ID, 0.25-\(\mu\)m film thickness); helium was used as the carrier gas at a constant flow rate of 0.9 ml/min; the oven temperature was held at 100\({}^{\circ}\)C for 1 min, increased at the

Figure 1: Chemical structures of the sesquiterpenes identified in the most active fraction of the _E. maculata_ leaf extract.



## Page 4

rate of 5\({}^{\circ}\)C/min to the final temperature of 250\({}^{\circ}\)C, and held for 10 min; injector 225\({}^{\circ}\)C and flame ionization detector (FID) 300\({}^{\circ}\)C. Calculation of retention indexes was achieved through coinjection with C\({}_{9}\)-C\({}_{22}\)\(n\)-hydrocarbons (van dan Dool and Kratz, 1963). Identification of the oil constituents was made on the basis of their retention indexes (Adams, 1995) and by comparison of mass spectra with the NIST library.

_Bioassays_. Bioassay 1 was conducted with the essential oil (4 mg/ml) and epicuticular wax (5 mg/ml), obtained from fresh leaves, as well as with hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate, and methanol extracts (100 mg/ml), from air-dried leaves. Bioassay 2: fractions 1-4 of the hexane extract (10 mg/ml). Bioassay 3: subfractions 4-1 to 4-3 (8.5 mg/ml). Bioassay 4: pure compounds elemol and \(\beta\)-eudesmol or mixture A of sesquiterpenes (1 mg/ml). A total of four bioassays were carried out to guide the isolation of pure compounds. The refractionations were performed from the most active sample in the biological assays. Bioassays were conducted using five laboratory colonies of \(A\). _sexdens rubropilosa_. These bioassays had the purpose of directing the fractionation necessary to isolate the active compounds. They were carried out as follows:

(1) Leaves used as substrates for the colonies were removed 6 hr before the tests were initiated. (2) Filter-paper fragments in the shape of either a rectangle, a square, or a triangle, each 6 cm\({}^{2}\) in area, were prepared as: (a) control, impregnated with the solvent (square); (b) blank (rectangle); and (c) the treatment to be assayed, using 100 \(\mu\)l of the solution of extract or pure compound (triangle). \(A\). _sexdens_ exhibits no preference among these shapes (Santana et al., 1990). (3) After solvent evaporation, two filter-paper fragments of each of the three different geometric shapes were placed on to three glass slides and then placed into the colony foraging arena at equal distances from the nest entrance. The positions of the three slides were periodically alternated to avoid learning. (4) Observations were made for 30 min after paper placement, by three observers who also alternated their position as to what to observe at each test (Santana et al., 1990). Number of aggression groups formed, the number of ants per group, and number of mutilated ants in each group were recorded. (5) A total of five replicates were performed per treatment in each of the five colonies of \(A\). _sexdens rubropilosa_. The overall average was used in the analyses.

An aggression group was defined as two or more nestmates undergoing biting and mutilation, leading to death. These groups were collected and placed, individually, into 10-ml vials (2 cm in diam). Later, the number of aggression groups formed and the total number of mutilated ants per group in the 30-min observation period were counted.

An experiment with each of the five ant colonies was conducted to better describe the entire sequence of behavioral acts performed by workers of \(A\). _sexdens rubropilosa_ from the moment the paper fragment treated with the most active fraction of the leaf extract (1.0 mg/ml) was placed into the arena,

## Page 5

to the time when interaction ceased. The experiment was recorded on VHS to aid in the description and facilitate measuring the time spent performing various acts.

An additional experiment was designed to evaluate the effect of various concentrations of the most active fraction on the alteration of workers' behavior. Paper fragments were treated with increasing concentrations of \(\beta\)-eudesmol (0, 10, 100, 500, and 1000 \(\mu\)g/ml) corresponding to 0, 0.17, 1.67, 8.33, and 16.67 \(\mu\)g/cm\({}^{2}\). Three observations were conducted for each experimental concentration in each of the five colonies.

## Results and Discussion

### Bioassays

All materials tested in Bioassay 1 showed some degree of bioactivity, with the exception of the epicuticular wax (Table 1). The hexane extract was the most active and further investigation was done using this extract for fractionation.

In Bioassay 2, most of the treatments showed some effect on worker behavior, with the exception of the ethyl acetate and methanol fractions. Fraction 4 showed

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Bioassay & Treatment & Number of groups & Number of mutilated ants \\
1 & Epicticular wax & 0 & 0 \\ Essential oil & 2.2 \(\pm\) 1.5 & 3.6 \(\pm\) 3.3 \\ Hexane extract & 15.2 \(\pm\) 5.6 & 21.6 \(\pm\) 13.7 \\ CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract & 3.6 \(\pm\) 2.7 & 7.0 \(\pm\) 6.7 \\ EtOHAc extract & 6.8 \(\pm\) 4.3 & 17.4 \(\pm\) 14.6 \\ Methanol extract & 3.8 \(\pm\) 2.0 & 4.6 \(\pm\) 3.0 \\
2 & Hexane 1 & 5.0 \(\pm\) 4.3 & 6.6 \(\pm\) 6.3 \\ Hexane 2 & 9.8 \(\pm\) 6.5 & 18.4 \(\pm\) 17.4 \\ CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) 3 & 10.0 \(\pm\) 6.2 & 18.4 \(\pm\) 16.9 \\ CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) 4 & 23.0 \(\pm\) 11.1 & 111.8 \(\pm\) 69.3 \\ Fraction EtOAc & 0 & 0 \\ Fraction methanol & 0 & 0 \\ Subfraction 4-1 & 0 & 0 \\ Subfraction 4-2 & 42.8 \(\pm\) 22.9 & 224.2 \(\pm\) 144.9 \\ Subfraction 4-3 & 0 & 0 \\
4 & Elemol & 47.4 \(\pm\) 16.5 & 140.2 \(\pm\) 72.2 \\ \(\beta\)-eudesmol & 84.2 \(\pm\) 13.2 & 285.8 \(\pm\) 58.2 \\ Mixture A (\(\alpha\)-eudesmol, & 25.2 \(\pm\) 4.6 & 46.6 \(\pm\) 9.0 \\ \(\beta\)-eudesmol, guaiol epimer, & & \\ \(\gamma\)-eudesmol, and hinesol) & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1. Number of Groups Formed and Number of Mutilated Ants, \(\pm\) Standard Error, 30 min After the Ants Were Exposed to the Treatments During the Four Bioassays (\(N=5\))

## Page 6

larger numbers of groups and of mutilated ants than the entire hexane extract, even though this fraction was used at one tenth the concentration (10 vs. 100 mg/ml). Therefore, this fraction appeared to concentrate the compounds responsible for the alteration in behavior.

In Bioassay 3, we determined that fractions 4-1 and 4-3 failed to influence the ants. Fraction 4-2 was extremely active and was, therefore, selected for further fractionation. All subfractions tested in Bioassay 4 showed a high degree of activity.

The active fractions from _E. maculata_ leaves were identified as the sesquiterpenes elemol and \(\beta\)-eudesmol, and the mixture \(\alpha\)-eudesmol, \(\beta\)-eudesmol, guaiol epimer, \(\gamma\)-eudesmol, and hinesol. Identification of sesquiterpenes (**1-6**, Figure 1) was based on comparison of the reported mass spectrometry, retention index [el-emol: 1550 and 1549; \(\beta\)-eudesmol: 1654 and 1649; \(\alpha\)-eudesmol: 1655 and 1652; guaiol epimer: 1632 and 1595 (Guaiol); \(\gamma\)-eudesmol: 1634 and 1630; hinesol: 1642 and 1638, respectively for observed and literature (Adams, 1995)], and \({}^{1}\)H, and \({}^{13}\)CNMR data for elemol (Su et al., 1995), \(\beta\)-eudesmol (Jolad et al., 1988), and \(\alpha\)-eudesmol (Chou et al., 1989).

Elemol and \(\beta\)-eudesmol were the most active ingredients in Bioassay 4; the latter compound produced the highest number of aggression groups and mutilated ants. \(\beta\)-Eudesmol, at 1 mg/ml, induced the formation of 5.5 times more groups than the hexane extract at the concentration of 100 mg/ml. The ratio between the numbers of mutilated ants for these two treatments was 13:2.

Our results demonstrate that the sesquiterpenes present in foliar extracts of _E. maculata_ (viz. elemol and \(\beta\)-eudesmol) are the main compounds involved in this eucalyptus resistance. Some _Eucalyptus_ species, such as _E. acmeniodes_ and _E. torelliana_ among others, are known to be more resistant to leaf-cutting ants than other species because they somehow interfere with foraging by workers (Anjos and Santana, 1994). _E. maculata_ is also avoided by these ants in nature and, induces the aggressive behavior we observed.

_Behavioral Sequence of_ A. sexdens rubropilosa _Workers After Exposure to \(\beta\)-Eudesmol_. Upon exposure, the ant touches the impregnated filter-paper with antennae, walks over the filter paper, and cleans antennae and tarsi with the mandibles. Time spent = 23.70 \(\pm\) 1.84 sec. The ant behaves as if alarmed: it displays open mandibles and is very excited. When an ant encounters a nestmate that had already been in contact with the paper, it touches the other with its antennae and then attacks, most frequently legs, but also other body parts. Time spent = 8.30 \(\pm\) 0.68 sec. The attacked worker then counter-attacks, and an aggression group is formed. Time spent = 3.80 \(\pm\) 0.39 sec. After formation of the first group, ants that are walking over the filter-paper near that group become excited, display open mandibles, and attack other ants, thus forming new groups; the number of ants on and around the papers increases. Time spent = 29.24 \(\pm\) 0.03 min. After 30 min of observation, a large number of aggression groups are seen on the arena 

## Page 7

(with at least two ants in each), along with a large number of mutilated ants, missing legs, antennae, and abdomens.

_Behavioral Response of_ A. sexdens rubropilosa _Workers to Different Concentrations of \(\beta\)-Eudesmol_. A linear dose-response in the number of aggression groups formed (Figure 2) and the number of mutilated ants (Figure 3) was observed. Behavioral modification of the leaf-cutter _A. cephalotes_ was reported by Hubbell and Wiemer (1983) upon exposure to concentrations of caryophellene epoxide 10 times higher than normal. According to these authors, ants jumped or reared back into the arena and began intense grooming. Our results also demonstrated that higher order response of aggressive behavior correlates with concentration of \(\beta\)-eudesmol. The aggressive response suggests that the chemicals may interfere with nestmate recognition. Nestmate recognition has been widely studied (Carlin and Holldobler, 1987; Lahav et al., 1999; Lenoir et al., 1999) and is thought to result from a mixture of endogenous (genetic) and exogenous (environment) factors to produce a Gestalt odor (Crozier and Dix, 1979). The relative importance of each of these factors varies with species, although little is known about it in leaf-cutting ants (Jutsum et al., 1979; Viana et al., 2001; Hernandez et al., 2002). \(\beta\)-Eudesmol might interfere with nestmate recognition by changing hydrocarbon profiles or by blocking olfaction. Elucidation of the mechanism at the physiological level could result in alternative control strategies against this pest species.

Figure 2: Scatterplot and estimated values of the relationship between number of aggression groups and concentration of \(\beta\)-eudesmol.



## Page 8

In summary, the sesquiterpenes elemol and \(\beta\)-eudesmol interfered with the mechanism of nestmate recognition among workers of \(A\). _sexdens rubropilosa_; \(\beta\)-eudesmol was the most active. Exposed ants became aggressive. The presence of these compounds in \(E\). _maculata_ suggests that they could be responsible for resistance of this plant to the ant attack. A means for introducing this compound into the nest via granulated baits or thermofogging should be investigated, in an attempt to control ants, when they become a nuisance.

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors thank the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) for scholarships and financial support and PRONEX/MCT-FINEP for financial support. The authors express their gratitude to Dr. Phil Stansly and Rosa Muchovej, University of Florida, Southwest Florida Research and Education Center, for valuable comments and revision of this manuscript.

## References

* Adams (1995)Adams, R. P. 1995. Identification of Essential Oil Components by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectroscopy. Allured, New York.
* Anjos and Santana (1994)Anjos, N. and Santana, D. L. Q. 1994. Alteracoes deleterias no comportamento de _Atta laevigata_ (F. Smith) e _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_ Forel (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), causadas por folhas de _Eucalyptus_ spp. _An. Soc. Entom. Brasil_ 23:25-30.
* Boyd and Martin (1975)Boyd, N. D. and Martin, M. M. 1975. Faecal proteinases of the fungus-growing ant _Atta texana_: Their fungal origin and ecological significance. _J. Insect Physiol._ 21:1815-1820.

Figure 3: Scatterplot and estimated values of the relationship between percentage of mutilated ants and the decimal logarithm of the concentration of \(\beta\)-eudesmol.



## Page 9

* Bueno et al. (1990)Bueno, O. C., Hebling-Beraldo, M. J. A., Silva, O. A., Pagnocca, F. C., Fernandes, J. B., and Vieira, P. C. 1990. Toxic effect of plants on leaf-cutting ants and their symbiotic fungus, pp. 420-426, _in_ R. K. Vander Meer, K. Jaffe, and A. Cedeno (eds.). Applied Myrmecology: A World Perspective. Westview, Boulder, CO.
* Carlin and Holldobler (1987)Carlin, N. F. and Holldobler, B. 1987. The kin recognition system of carpenter ants (_Camponotus_ spp.) II. Larger colonies. _Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol._ 20:209-217.
* Chen et al. (1984)Chen, T. K., Wiemer, D. F., and Howard, J. J. 1984. A volatile leafcutter ant repellent from _Astronium graveolens. Naturwissenschaften_ 71:97-98.
* Chou et al. (1989)Chou, T. S., Lee, S. J., and Yao, N. K. 1989. Total synthesis of racemic selina-3,7(11)-diene, \(\alpha\)-silenene and \(\alpha\)-eudesmol. _Tetrahedron_ 45:4113-4124.
* Crozier and Dix (1979)Crozier, R. H. and Dix, M. W. 1979. Analysis of two generic models for the innate components of colony odour in social Hymenoptera. _Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol._ 4:217-224.
* Della Lucia and Fowler (1993)Della Lucia, T. M. C. and Fowler, H. G. 1993. As formigas cortadeiras, pp. 1-3, _in_ T. M. C. Della Lucia (ed.). As Formigas Cortadeiras. Folha de Vicosa, Vicosa, Brazil.
* Della Lucia et al. (1993)Della Lucia, T. M. C., Vilela, E. F., Anjos, N., and Moreira, D. D. O. 1993. Criacao de formigas cortadeiras em laboratorio, pp. 151-162, _in_ T. M. C. Della Lucia (ed.). As Formigas Cortadeiras. Folha de Vicosa, Vicosa, Brazil.
* Dool and Kratz (1963)Dool, H. van den and Kratz, P. D. 1963. A generalization of the retention index system including linear temperature programmed gas-liquid partition chromatography. _J. Chromatogr._ 11:463-471.
* Febuyar et al. (1985)Febuyar, G., Bourgeois, P., and Kermarrec, A. 1985. Antiappetants pour la fourmi attini, _Acromyrmex octospinosus_ (Reich) (Hymenoptera, Formicidae), chez certaines especies d'ignames (Dioscoreaceae) cultivees aux Antilles. _Agronomie_ 5:439-444.
* Hebling et al. (2000)Hebling, M. J. A., Bueno, O. C., Pagnocca, F. C., da Silva, O. A., and Maroti, P. S. 2000. Toxic effects of _Canavalia ensiformis_ L. (Leguminosae) on laboratory colonies of _Atta sexdens_ L. (Hym., Formicidae). _J. Appl. Ent._ 124:33-35.
* Hebling et al. (1996)Hebling, M. J. A., Maroti, P. S., Bueno, O. C., da Silva, O. A., and Pagnocca, F. C. 1996. Toxic effects of leaves of _Ricinus communis_ (Euphorbiaceae) to laboratory nests of _Atta sexdens rubropolosa_ (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). _Bull. Ent. Res._ 86:253-256.
* Hernandez et al. (2002)Hernandez, J. V., Lopez, H., and Jaffe, K. 2002. Nestmate recognition signals of the leaf-cutting ant _Atta laevigata. J. Insect Physiol._ 48:287-295.
* Hubbell and Wiemer (1983)Hubbell, S. P. and Wiemer, D. F. 1983. Host plant selection by an attine ant, pp. 233-254, _in_ P. Jaisson (ed.). Social Insects in the Tropics, Vol. 2. University of Paris Press, Paris.
* Jolad et al. (1988)Jolad, S. D., Timmermann, B. N., Hoffmann, J. J., Bates, R. B., Camou, F. A., and Siahaan, T. J. 1988. Sesquiterpenes glycosides and an acetogenin glucoside from _Lessingia glandulifera_. Phytochemistry 27:2199-2204.
* Jutsum et al. (1979)Jutsum, A. R., Saunders, R. S., and Cherrett, J. M. 1979. Intraspecific aggression in the leaf-cutting ant _Acromyrmex octospinosus_. _Anim. Behav._ 27:839-844.
* Lahav et al. (1999)Lahav, S., Soroker, V., and Hefetz, A. 1999. Direct behavioral evidence for hydrocarbons as ant recognition discriminators. _Naturwissenschaften_ 86:246-249.
* Lenoir et al. (1999)Lenoir, A., Fresneau, D., Errand, C., and Hefetz, A. 1999. Individuality and colonial identity in ants: The emergence of social representation concept, pp. 219-237, _in_ C. Detrain, J. L. Deneuborg, and J. M. Pasteels (eds.). Information Processing in Social Insects, 432 pp. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, Switzerland.
* Martin et al. (1975)Martin, M. M., Boyd, N. D., Gieselmann, M. J., and Silver, R. G. 1975. Activity of faecal fluid of a leaf-cutting ant toward plant cell wall polysaccharides. _J. Insect Physiol._ 21:1887-1892.
* Martin et al. (1969)Martin, M. M., Carman, R. M., and MacConnel, J. G. 1969. Nutrients derived from the fungus cultured by the fungus-growing ant _Atta columbica tonsipes_. _Ann. Ent. Soc. Am._ 62:11-13.
* Santana et al. (1990)Santana, D. L. Q., Della Lucia, T. M. C., and Zannucio, J. C. 1990. Influenza do formato de amostras de folhas de _Eucalyptus_ spp. na atrividade a formigas cortadeiras _Atta_ spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). _An. Soc. Entom. Brasil_ 19:72-80.



## Page 10

* Silva et al. (2003)Silva, A., Bacci, M., Jr., Siqueira, C. G., Bueno, O. C., Pagnocca, F. C., and Hebling, M. J. A. 2003. Survival of _Atta sexdens_ workers on different food sources. _J. Insect Physiol._ 49:307-311.
* Siqueira (1990)Siqueira, J. D. P. 1990. A attividade florestal como um dos instrumentos de desenvolvimento do Brasil, pp. 15-18, _in_ Congresso Florestal Brasileiro, VI. Campos do Jordao, SP. Anais.
* Su et al. (1995)Su, W.-C., Fang, J.-M., and Cheng, Y.-S. 1995. Sesquiterpenes from leaves of _Cryptomeria japonica_. _Photochemistry_ 39:603-607.
* Viana et al. (2001)Viana, A. M. M., Frezard, A., Malosse, C., Della Lucia, T. M. C., Errard, C., and Lenoir, A. 2001. Colonial recognition of fungus in the fungus-growing ant _Acromyrmex subterraneus subterraneus_ (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). _Chemoecology_ 11:29-36.
* Weber (1972)Weber, N. A. 1972. Gardening ants, the Attimes. _Am. Philos. Soc._ XX: 146.
* Wiemer (1985)Wiemer, D. F. 1985. Natural repellents of the leaf cutting ants. _Rev. Latinoam. Quim._ 16:98-102.
* Wilson (1980)Wilson, E. O. 1980. Caste and division of labor in leaf-cutter ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: _Atta_). _Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol._ 7:143-156.



