# 10.1016@j.jpba.2012.08.028.pdf

## Page 1



# _In vitro_ metabolism study of the promising anticancer agent the lignin (-)-grandisin

Gisele Baraldi Messiano, Renan Augusto da Silva Santos, Leandro De Santis Ferreira, Rodrigo Almeida Simoes, Valquiria Aparecida Polisel Jabor, Massuo Jorge Kato, Norberto Peporine Lopes, Monica Tallarico Pupo, Anderson Rodrigo Moraes de Oliveira

# Abstract

The ligand (-)-grandisin has shown important pharmacological activities, such as cytotoxicity and antiangiogenic, antibacterial and trypanocal activities. So, it has been considered as a potential drug candidate. In the early drug development process, drug metabolism is one of the main parameters that should be evaluated; therefore, the biotransformation of this lignan by rat liver microsomes was investigated for the first time. In order to perform the biotransformation study and to determine the kinetic parameters, a simple, sensitive and selective HPLC method was developed and fully validated. After method validation, the biotransformation study was accomplished and the kinetic parameters were determined. The biotransformation study obeyed the Michaelis-Menten kinetics. The _V_max and _K_m were \(1.46 \pm 0.034\,\mu\text{mol}/\text{mg}\) protein/h and \(8.99 \pm 0.488\,\mu\text{M}\), respectively. In addition, the formation of dihydro-grandisin, characterized by GC-MS, by mammalian systems indicated the involvement of a CYP450 enzyme type.

## Introduction

(-)-Grandisin (Fig. 1) is a known tetrahydrofuran lignan isolated from Piperaceae, Lauraceae, Myristicaceae and Schisandracaee species [1-3]. This compound has displayed different biological properties, such as larvicidal activity against the mosquito _Aedes aegypti_[4], trypanocal activity against the trypanatigote form of _Trypanosoma cruzi_[5-7], and antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities [8]. In the last years, many studies on cytotoxicity and antitumoural activity showed that (-)-grandisin is a potential candidate as an anticancer agent [9-11].

The oxidative metabolism has been extensively investigated in the last two decades by means of biological simulating models, using perfused organs, isolated cells or cell fragments (microsomes) [12]. Its importance lies on the fact that the drug candidates, before the final developmental steps as drugs, must be evaluated as safe and effective, including the evaluation of the pharmacokinetic process involved. In addition, the knowledge on interactions of new drug candidates towards oxidative enzymes, their affinity and speed of metabolism is of fundamental importance, particularly when investigations of drug interactions is concerned.

The _in vivo_ study of hepatic metabolism can be estimated from the "turnover" or intrinsic clearance, derived from _in vitro_ tissue preparations. Species-specific metabolism allows for the extrapolation from animals to humans with an additional level of assurance. Since human studies are generally impractical, unethical, or too costly, _in vitro_ systems are the most relevant way to compare metabolic rates between species. To best utilize this approach, the mechanism needs to be conserved across species. For metabolism studies, the enzymatic processes need to be qualitatively the same [13]. Many laboratories have used liver microsomes to perform such metabolism studies. Hepatic microsomes are a flexible system, are a straightforward preparation and they can be stored, with long-term availability [12]. They probably represent one of the most widely used _in vitro_ system for investigating the metabolic profile of a new drug candidate [14,15]. The recent appreciation of the metabolism study became apparent that understanding the fundamental properties of the enzyme kinetics of cytochrome

## Page 2

P450, and thus the rate of biotransformation of a new drug candidate, becomes a parameter of crucial importance in shaping the therapeutic profile [16]. The advantages arising from these studies are mainly to provide information on the biochemical characteristics of a new drug candidate substance increasing the relevance for future clinical studies [17].

Due to the potential of (-)-grandisin as a new lead compound mainly against cancer, the aim of this paper was to characterize its metabolism employing rat liver microsomal fraction (a mammalian species) by evaluating the Michaelis-Menten kinetics parameters (_V_max, _K_m), the intrinsic clearance (Clint) and the formation of metabolites.

## Experimental

### Chemical and reagents

The tetrahydrofuran lignan (-)-grandisin used in the present work was extracted and purified from _Piper solmsianum_ (Piperaceae) according to previous procedures [18]. Standard stock solution of the lignan (-)-grandisin was prepared at the concentration of 1.15 mmol L-1 in methanol. Calibration curve solutions of the lignan (-)-grandisin in the range of 0.00115-1.15 mmol L-1 were obtained by dilutions in the same solvent mixture. These solutions were stored at -20 degC and protected from light. HPLC grade methanol, acetonitrile, hexane, were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) and from J.T. Baker (Philipsburg, NJ, USA). Sodium chloride and sodium dihydrogen phosphate were obtained from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Sodium hydroxide and potassium chloride were obtained from Nuclear (Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil). Glycerol and Tris (hydroxymethyl)aminomethane were obtained from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy) and hydrochloric acid was obtained from Chemco (Campinas, SP, Brazil), NADP+, glucose-6-phosphate and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).

### HPLC conditions

Chromatographic analyzes were conducted using a Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) liquid chromatography equipped with an LC10-AD VP solvent pump unit, an SCL-10A VP system controller, a CT0-10AS VP column oven and an SPD-M10A VP diode array detector operating in the range of 200-400 nm. Injections were performed manually through a 50 mL loop with a Rheodyne model 7725i injector (Rheodyne, Cotait, CA, USA). Data were collected using the Class VP software (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The resolution of the lignan (-)-grandisin was performed at 25 degC on a Kromasil(r) C18 column, 5 mm particle size (250 mm x 4.6 mm, Eka Chemicals, Bohus, Sweden). A C18 column (4.6 mm x 12.5 mm, 5 mm particle size, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was used as guard column. The mobile phase was a mixture of acetonitrile:water (60:40, v/v) and the flow rate was 1 mL min-1.

### Extraction procedure and method validation

To extract the lignan from the rat liver microsomes it was employed a liquid-liquid extraction as sample preparation. The extraction was performed employing 4 mL hexane. The samples were shaked for 10 min in a Vibrax VXR (IKA, Staufen, Germany) and then centrifuged for 5 min at 2860 x g. The supernatant was collected (3 mL) and let to evaporate to dryness under a gently stream of compressed air. After that, the residue was reconstituted in 100 mL of the mobile phase and 50 mL was injected in the chromatography system.

The linearity of the method was performed in triplicate and the results were weighted by 1/_k_2. The results of the linearity were weighted because the residual analysis of the analytical curve showed a heteroscedasticity behavior [19]. Calibration curves (_n_ = 3) were obtained by spiking aliquots of 1.0 mL drug-free rat microsomes samples with standard solutions of the (-)-grandisin. The final concentration range in the rat microsomes was 0.028, 0.57, 1.44, 2.31, 5.78 and 28.93 mM. In addition, the linearity of the calibration curve was assessed by ANOVA Lack of fit test using _a p_ value of 0.05. MINITAB Release, version 14.1 (State College, PA, USA) was used to perform the statistical analysis.

The limit of quantification was defined as the lowest concentration that could be determined with accuracy and precision below 20% [20] over five analytical run and it was obtained using rat microsomes samples (1.0 mL) spiked with 0.028 mM of the lignan. Precision was expressed as relative standard deviation (RSD%) and accuracy as percent of deviation between the true and the measured value. To assess within-day precision and accuracy, replicate analyzes (_n_ = 5) of 1.0 mL of rat microsomes spiked at concentrations of 0.57, 5.78 and 23.14 mM of the (-)-grandisin were performed. For between-day assays, quintuplicate rat microsome samples of each concentration were analyzed for three consecutive days (_n_ = 3) [20]. The absolute recovery of the lignan (-)-grandisin extracted from the microscope samples spiked with the concentrations of 0.057, 2.89 and 17.3 mM (_n_ = 3, for each concentration), was determined using calibration curves obtained from the data of the analytes not submitted to extraction. The recovery was expressed as percentage of the amount extracted and the relative standard deviation was evaluated. The selectivity of the method was assured by analyzing standard solutions of some reagents that are employed in the _in vitro_ metabolism experiment. These reagents were tested employing a concentration of 0.1 mg mL-1. Drug-free rat microsome samples were also analyzed to assess the capacity of sample pretreatment to eliminate matrix interference. Short-term stability test at 37 degC and at room temperature was determined (_n_ = 6). Aliquots of rat liver microsomes spiked with low (0.57 mM) and high concentration (23.14 mM) of (-)-grandisin were prepared and kept at 37 degC under water bath during 120 min. The samples were prepared and kept in the laboratory during 6 h to perform the room temperature stability. The lignan (-)-grandisin peak area obtained from stability tests was compared with the peak area obtained with freshly prepared samples. One-way ANOVA was applied, with the level of significance set at \(p\) <= 0.05.

### Animals and microsomal preparation

Male Wistar rats weighting 180-220 g were obtained from Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirao Preto - University of Sao Paulo (Ethical Approval no. 10.1.848.53.2). Animals were fed in a normal condition and acclimatized at 12 h light/dark cycle. The animals were sacrificed by decapitation and the livers were removed and placed in ice-cold 0.05 mol L-1 Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4), containing 0.15 mol L-1 KCl. The livers were minced with scissors and washed three times with Tris-HCl buffer. After that, the slices were homogenized with MA 181 potter equipment

Fig. 1: Chemical structure of the lignan (−)-grandisin.



## Page 3

(Marconi, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil). The homogenate was centrifuged in a HIMAC CF 15D2 centrifuge (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 4 degC and the resulting supernatant was ultracentrifuged employing a XL-70 Beckman ultracentrifuge (Beckman, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 100,000 x g for 60 min at 4 degC in order to obtain the microsomal pellet. The obtained pellet was resuspended in 0.05 mol L-1 HEPES-HCl buffer (pH 7.4), containing 20% glycerol and 0.001 mol L-1 EDTA and stored at -70 degC until use. The protein concentration was determinated by the biuret method using a BCA kit (Labtest, MG, Brazil).

### Microsomal incubation conditions

The optimal conditions for microsomal incubation were determined in the linear range for the disappearance of (-)-grandisin from the medium. Incubations were performed in quintuplicate (_n_ = 5) with the reconstituted rat liver microsomes in 10 mL amber tubes, using a shaking water bath at 37 degC. The incubation mixture consisted of a cofactor solution, microsomal preparation (rat liver microsomes), phosphate buffer 0.250 mol L-1 pH 7.4 and substrate (25 mL, 0.028-28.93 mL) in a total volume of 1.0 mL. The cofactor solution consisted of NADP+ (0.25 mM), glucose-6-phosphate (5 mM) and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (0.5 units) in Tris-HCl buffer (Tris-HCl 0.05 mol L-1 - KCl 0.15 mol L-1, pH 7.4). After 5 min prewarmed at 37 degC, the metabolic reaction was initiated by the addition of the rat microsomal preparation. The microsomal protein concentration was evaluated from 0.0 to 5.0 mg protein (0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5 and 5.0 mg protein) (n = 5) and it was incubated by 0-320 min (0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 240, 280 and 320 min). After this period, the reaction was terminated by the addition of hexane (4.0 mL). This mixture was agitated for 10 min in a Vibrax VXR agitator and then centrifuged for 5 min at 4000 rpm. Finally, 3.0 mL of the supernatant was collected and let to evaporate until complete dryness under compressed air. After that, the residue was reconstituted in 100 mL of the mobile phase and 50 mL was injected into the chromatographic system. Control incubations were performed in the absence of cofactor solution and in the absence of microsomal preparation. The difference between 'with' and 'without' NADPH was considered as CYP450-mediated metabolism.

### Metabolism data analysis

The Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetic constants (_V_max and _K_m) for the lignan (-)-grandisin _in vitro_ metabolism were calculated by nonlinear regression using Prism Software (5.0). Furthermore, the intrinsic clearance (Clint) of (-)-grandisin in rat liver microsomes was calculated based on the ratio of _V_max to _K_m.

### Structural determination of the metabolite by GC/MS

Each sample analyzed for the reaction, total of three samples, was pooled from a 10 single reactions due to the low concentration of the substrate and consequently of the possible products. The same procedure of making a pool was performed for the control, however only one sample was analyzed. After dried under a stream of compressed air, the samples were diluted in ethyl acetate to 1.0 mL and 1.0 mL was injected in GC-MS. The sample was diluted to avoid any overload of the sample into the GC capillary column. The GC-MS used was a Shimadzu(r) model QP2010 with the auto sampler and auto injector model AOC5000. The column used was ZB-5 MS (30 m x 0.25 mm x 0.25 mL, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). The oven temperature was programmed as to start the temperature of 210 degC for 4 min. Then, the temperature was increased at the rate 8 degC min-1 until 300 degC and maintained constant for more 12 min. Other GC parameters were: injector temperature at 250 degC, column flow 1.0 mL min-1, and linear velocity 37.5 cm s-1. The injection proceeded in a splitless mode with 1.0 min of sampling time. In the MS, the ionization by electrons was done using energy of 70 eV, ion source at 250 degC and acquisition by scan from _m_/_z_ 40 to 500. The interface temperature used was 280 degC and the solvent delay time was 4 min.

## Results and discussion

### Chromatographic determination and method validation

The method used to determine the (-)-grandisin metabolism was validated according to FDA guidelines for the analysis of drugs in biological fluids [20]. Since there is not any official guide for analytical method validation in metabolism studies, it was decided to follow the FDA guideline (at least partially) due to the characteristic of the matrix employed in this study (microsomes) and due to the high degree of acceptability of this guideline. Method validation is an important step in the development of any study dedicated to quantification. At this stage, it is possible to find out if the developed method is suitable for the desired application and to come across analyte characteristics, such as its stability under different conditions that can affect the analytical results. The chromatographic quantification was carried out on a Kromasil(r) C18 column using a mixture of acetonitrile:water (60:40, v/v) as mobile phase. The retention time of the (-)-grandisin was 15.1 min under this condition. The proposed method showed to be linear over the concentration range of 0.028-28.93 mM, with correlation coefficient (_r_) >= 0.9955 and \(y\) = 1178993x+ 5094. The lack-of-fit test showed that the analytical curve obeys a linear model with \(F\) = 1.58 and \(p\) = 0.211. The precision and accuracy of the method were assessed for both within-day (five spiked microsome samples for each concentration on the same day) and between-day (five spiked microsome samples for each concentration for three consecutive days) determinations. Table 1 shows the results for within-day and between-day precision. The obtained values are in agreement with literature recommendations [20]. The lowest concentration quantified by the validated method was 0.028 uM with a relative standard deviation value below 10% and relative error of -3.86%. The absolute recovery of the lignan (-)-grandisin extracted from the rat microsome samples spiked with the concentrations of 0.057, 2.89 and 17.3 uM was 77.7%, 88.3% and 88.1%, respectively, with RSD below 15%. The selectivity test showed no interferences from the biological matrix in the retention time of the substrate or the produced metabolite (Fig. 2C). The short-term stability test at 37 degC and at room temperature showed no degradation of the substrate in the evaluated conditions with \(p\) value >=0.1429 (Table 2).

### In vitro metabolism study

The studied substrate (-)-grandisin has shown several pharmacological effects, such as cytotoxicity and antiangiogenic effects [8], antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities [7], protective effect against cyclophosphamide-induced mutagenicity in mice [9] and trypanocidal activities [5,6]. Due to these several activities and no report regarding the metabolism of this lignan by mammalian, it was proposed to evaluate the behavior of this substrate towards the cytochrome rat hepatic enzymes, since mammalian metabolism studies should be established in the early drug development. The metabolism rate should be performed in linear conditions in relation to incubation time and microsomal protein concentration to determine the Michaelis-Menten parameters. Initially, the microsomal protein concentration was varied from 0.0 to 5.0 mg protein (0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5 and 

## Page 4

5.0 mg protein) (_n_ = 5). The linearity was obtained only in the range of 0.0-2.0 mg protein (_r_ = 0.977). Thus, 2.0 mg mL-1 was chosen as the microsomal protein concentration to be further applied in the biotransformation study. Once known the protein concentration, the next step was the optimization of the incubation time. The incubation time was varied from 0 to 320 min (0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 240, 280 and 320 min). The linearity was achieved in the range of 90-180 min (_r_ = 0.978) and 180 min was chosen as the incubation time to be further applied in the determination of the kinetic parameters. After the optimization of the microsomal protein content and incubation time, the Michaelis-Menten kinetic parameters were determined by varying the substrate concentration. The substrate concentration was varied in the range of 0.028-28.93 mM. Fig. 3 shows the Michaelis-Menten plot for lignan (-)-grandisin after metabolism by rat liver microsomes. The initial velocity of (-)-grandisin disappearance was dependent upon substrate concentration of 11.57 mM, approaching substrate saturation at 23.14 mM. The Michaelis-Menten rate parameters for the microsomal CYP450 metabolism of (-)-grandisin were calculated using nonlinear regression. It was observed a \(V_{\max } = 1.46 \pm 0.034\) mM/mg protein/h and \(K_{\text{m}} = 8.99 \pm 0.488\) mM with CLint = 0.16 mL/min/mg protein. Fig. 2A shows the chromatogram of the (-)-grandisin metabolism after 100 min. The major CYP450 isoforms present in rats are CYP3A2, CYP2C11, CYP1A1/1A2, CYP2E1, CYP2D1 and CYP2B1/2. Between them, CYP3A2 (corresponding to human CYP3A4), CYP2C11 (corresponding to human CYP2G9) and CYP1A1/1A2 (corresponding to human CYP1A2) represent more than 60% of the total rat CYP amount [21,22]. Therefore, these isoforms might be involved in the ligand biotransformation. However, a more detailed study should be conducted employing isolated CYP isoforms (cDNA-expresses system-supersomes(r)) or specific anti-CYP antibodies to find out, exactly, which isoform(s) is(are) involved in the (-)-grandisin metabolism.

The metabolism study showed the formation of a dihydro derivative metabolite. There are studies reporting the metabolism of the (-)-grandisin employing species of fungi [23] and Coleoptera and Lepidoptera species [24]. These studies show mainly the production of demethylated phenolic derivatives or the cleavage of the molecule losing an aromatic ring. At the present paper, it was observed the formation of a dihydro metabolite probably by an initial oxidation on the furan ring followed by a water molecule elimination. The proposal was based in the major fragment ions. The molecular ion was observed at _m_/_z_ 430 showing less than two mass units in comparison with grandisin. For grandisin, an important pathway starts with the loss of half compound by the opening of tetrahydrofuran ring. These fragments occur at _m_/_z_ 208 and 224, while for the metabolite, these fragments were missed and no other correlated mass were observed, showing an alteration in the central ring. A recent study applying biorganic catalysis led the isolation of dehydro-grandisin. Its structure and the physic-chemical constants were determined by El MS, ESI MS, 1H NMR, specific rotation, and circular dichroism [25]. Both substances have the identical El MS spectrum and retention time during the analysis by GC-MS which confirm the structure of the metabolite produced by hepatic microsome assay.

As the chemical model induces oxidation, reason that this reaction is considered a biomimetic model of CYP, this result indicated

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} \hline Nominal conc. (μM) & Obtained conc. (μM) & Accuracya (\%) & & RSD (\%) \\ \cline{2-6}  & Stability test at room temperature & & & \\ \hline
0.579 & 0.554 & 0.572 & −4.2 & −1.2 & 8.5 & 2.6 \\
5.787 & 5.601 & 5.600 & −3.2 & −3.2 & 12.0 & 1.1 \\
23:148 & 23.718 & 23.936 & 2.4 & 3.4 & 11.0 & 1.3 \\ \hline \end{tabular}

* Expressed as deviation from theoretical values.

\end{table}
Table 1: Within-day (1) and between day (2) precision and accuracy of the developed method.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline Nominal conc. (μM) & Obtained conc. (μM) & Accuracya (\%) & & RSD (\%) \\ \cline{2-4}  & **1** & **2** & **1** & **2** & **1** & **2** \\ \hline
0.579 & 0.554 & 0.572 & −4.2 & −1.2 & 8.5 & 2.6 \\
5.787 & 5.601 & 5.600 & −3.2 & −3.2 & 12.0 & 1.1 \\
23:148 & 23.718 & 23.936 & 2.4 & 3.4 & 11.0 & 1.3 \\ \hline \end{tabular}

* Expressed as deviation from theoretical values.

\end{table}
Table 2: Stability test (_n_ = 6) of the developed method.

Figure 3: Michaelis–Menten kinetics plot. Metabolism conditions described in Section 2.5.

Figure 2: Representative HPLC chromatograms for the metabolism study. Metabolism chromatogram (A), control rat microsome chromatogram without NADPH (B) and blank rat microsome chromatogram (C) (1) (1) Dihydro derivative metabolite, (2) (−)-grandisin. Microsomal protein concentration 2 mg: incubation time 100 min; substrate concentration 28.93 μM. Chromatographic conditions described in Section 2.2.



## Page 5

an oxidation following by a dehydration, despite some reduction reactions have been related to some compounds in metabolism reactions [26,27]. However, for the precise pathway for the production of this metabolite, some experiments using specifics CYP and labeled hydrogen atoms in tetrahydrofuran ring should be performed. Otherwise, considering that grandisin is a molecule with few positions for oxidation or reduction, these studies could support and provide important information about the grandisin _in vivo_ metabolism.

## 4 Conclusion

This paper describes, for the first time, the CYP450-mediated biotransformation of a promising natural product hit, the ligand (-)-grandisin, using rat microsomal preparation. The kinetic parameters indicated that the biotransformation of this natural product obeys the Michaelis-Menten kinetics and the metabolism indicated the formation of 2,5-dihydro-3.4-dimethyl-2,5-bis(3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl)-furan as metabolite. It is the first report about the metabolism of this lignan using mammalian models.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico) and CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior) for financial support and for granting research fellowships. The authors also would like to thanks Prof. P.S. Bonato for her technical support.

## References

* (1) N.P. Lopes, M.J. Kato, M. Yoshida, Antifungal constituents from roots of _Virola_ surinamensis, Phytochemistry 51 (1999) 23-33.
* (2) S.K.R. Morais, A.F. Teixeira, Z.E.S. Torres, S.M. Nunomura, E.H.Y. Kanashiro, J.AL Lindoso, M. Yoshida, Biological activities of lignoids from Amazon Myristicaceae species: Virola indinelli, V. molissima, V. pyonis and Hyantanenj urinensis, J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 20 (2009) 1110-1118.
* (3) J.P. Xu, P.A. Gao, C. Lei, W.L. Xiao, R.W. Lang, L.B. Yang, Y. Zhao, L.M. Li, S.X. Huang, Y.T. Zheng, H.D. Sun. Three new compounds from _Koduru longipedum_, Cultam. Pharm. Bull. 56 (2008) 1143-1146.
* (4) M.M.O. Cabral, A.J. Alecan, A.E. Guimaraes, M.J. Kato, L.artificial activity of grandisin against _Aedes aegypti_, J. Am. Mos. Control. Assoc. 25 (2009) 103-105.
* (5) L.S.C. Bernardes, M.J. Kato, S. Albuquerque, I. Carvalho, Synthesis and trypanopacid activity of 1.4-bis(3,4-5-trimethoxyphenyl)-1,4-butanediol and 1.4-bis(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)-1,4-butanediol, Bioorg. Med. Chem. 14 (2006) 7075-7082.
* (6) R.C. Martins, J.H.G. Lago, S. Albuquerque, M.J. Kato, Trypanocidal tetrahydrofuran lignans from inflorescences of _Poper solnsimanum_, Phytochemistry 64 (2003) 667-670.
* (7) R.B. de Oliveira, A.B.M. Vaz, R.O. Alves, D.B. Liarte, C.L. Dennici, A.J. Romanha, C.L. Zani, Arylfurans as potential _Tryposmax ctra_ triparathionne reductase inhibitors, Mem. Inst. Oswaldo Cruz 101 (2006) 169-173.
* (8) A.A.V. Carvalho, P.M. Galdino, M.V.M. Nascimento, M.J. Kato, M.C. Valadares, L.C. Cunha, E.A. Costa, Attomicoceptive and anti-inflammatory activities of grandisin extracted from Virola surinames, Phytother. Res. 24 (2010) 113-118.
* (9) M.C. Valadares, I.C.P. de Carvalho, L.D. Junior, M.S. Vieira, P.L. Benfica, F.S. de Carvalho, L.V.S. Andrade, E.M. Lima, M.J. Kato, Cytotoxicity and angiogenic activity of grandisin, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 60 (2009) 1709-1714.
* (10) M.C. Valadares, L.M.O. Junior, F.S. de Carvalho, L.V.S. Andrade, A.P. dos Santos, V. de Oliveira, E.S. Gil, M.J. Kato, Chemoprotective effect of the tetrahydrofuran ligand ganglia in the vivo redoned micronucleus assay, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 63 (2011) 447-451.
* (11) M.S. Vieira, V. de Oliveira, E.M. Lima, M.J. Kato, M.C. Valadares, in vitro basal cytotoxicity assay applied to estimate cure oral systemic toxicity of grandisin and its major metabolite, Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 63 (2011) 505-510.
* (12) R. Riley, K. Crime, Metabolic screening in vitro: metabolic stability CYP inhibition and induction, Drug Discov. Today Technol. 1 (2004) 365-372.
* (13) J.C. Lipson, T.S. Poet, In vitro measurements of metabolism for application in pharmacokinetic modeling, Pharmacol. Therapect. 118 (2008) 82-103.
* (14) E.F.A. Brandon, C.D. Raap, I. Meijerman, J.H. Beijmen, J.H.M. Schellens, An update on in vitro test methods in human hepatic drug bitotransformation research: pros and consci. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 189 (2003) 233-246.
* a review, Curr. Drug Metabol. 13 (2010) 215-224.
* (16) W.M. Atkins, Implications of the allosteric kinetics of cytochrome P4505, Drug Discov. Today 9 (2004) 478-484.
* (17) N. Plant, Strategies for using in vitro screens in drug metabolism, Drug Discov. Today 9 (2004) 328-336.
* (18) R.C. Martins, L.R. Latorre, P. Sartorelli, M.J. Kato, Phenylpropagands and tetrahydrofuran lignans from _Poper solnsimanum_, Phytochemistry 55 (2000) 843-846.
* (19) A.M. Almeida, M.M. Castel-Branco, A.C. Falcao, Linear regression for calibration lines revisited: weighting schemes for bioanalytical methods, J. Chromatogr. B774 (2002) 215-222.
* (20) Guidance for Industry: Bioanalytical Method Validation, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, United States Food and Drug Administration. [http://www.fag.gov/eric/guidance/index.htm](http://www.fag.gov/eric/guidance/index.htm), (accessed 15.02.12).
* (21) K. Kobayashi, K. Urashima, N. Shimada, K. Chiba, Substrate specificity rat cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms: screening with cDNA-expressed systems on the rat, Biochem. Pharmacol. 63 (2002) 889-896.
* (22) C.M. Brown, B. Reisfeld, A. Mayeno, Cytochromes P450: a structure-based summary of biotransformations using representative substrates, Drug Metabol. Rev. 40 (2008) 1-100.
* (23) M. Verzas, N.S. Arkakwa, N.P. Lopes, M.J. Kato, M.T. Pupo, S. Said, I. Carvalho, Biotransformation of a tetrahydrofuran lignan by endophytic fungus _Phomosis_ sp. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 20 (2009) 195-200.
* (24) C.S. Ramos, S.A. Vanini, M.J. Kato, Metabolism of (-)-grandisin from _Poper solnsimanum_ in _Coleoptera and Leppidoptera species_, Phytochemistry 69 (2008) 2157-2161.
* (25) L.S. Ferreira, D.R. Callejon, A. Engemann, B. Cramer, H.U. Humpf, V.P. Barros, M.D. Assis, S. Albuquerque, L.T. Okano, M.J. Kato, N.P. Lopes, Evaluation of Grandisin in vitro metabolism, a lignan with anti-chigaseic activity. Planta Med, in press.
* (26) I. Pearson, U.P. Baal, D. Rock, C. Peng, J.O. Schenk, C. Joswig-Jones, I.P. Jones, The kinetic mechanism for cytochrome P450 metabolism of Type II binding compounds: Evidence supporting direct reduction, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 511 (2011) 69-79.
* (27) T.C. Macedo, A.L. Faria, V.P. Barros, M.E.C. Queiroz, M.D. Assis, Primidone oxidation catalyzed by metalloporphyrins and Jacobsen catalyst, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 296 (2008) 54-60.



