# 10.1515@znc-2008-5-611.pdf

## Page 1



**Enzymatic Inhibitory Activity and Trypanocidal Effects of Extracts and Compounds from _Siphoneugena densiflora_ O. Berg and _Vitex polygama_ Cham.

Margareth B. C. Gallo, Anna Sylvia F. Marques, Paulo C. Vieira, Maria Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, Marcio Silva, Rafael V. Guido, Glaucius Oliva, Otavio H. Thiemann, Sergio Albuquerque, and Alan H. Fairlamb

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905, Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil. Fax: +55-16-33518350. E-mail: margareth.gallo@gmail.com Instituto de Fisica de Sao Carlos, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 369, 13560-970, Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil Faculdade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Avenida do Cafe s/n, 14040-903, Ribeirao Preto-SP, Brazil Division of Molecular Parasitology & Biological Chemistry, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, UKAuthor for correspondence and reprint requestsZ. Naturforsch. **63c**, 371-382 (2008); received June 18/December 7, 2007Hexanic, methanolic, and hydroalcoholic extracts, and 34 isolated compounds from _Vitex polygama_ Cham. (Lamiaceae, formerly Verbenaceae) and _Siphoneugena densiflora_ O. Berg (Myrtaceae) were screened for their trypanocidal effects on bloodstream forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ and _T. brucei_, as well as for their enzymatic inhibitory activities on glycosomal glycerolaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) and trypanothione reductase (TR) enzymes from _T. cruzi_ and adeninephosphoribosyl transferase (APRT) enzyme from _Leishmania tarentolae_. In general, polar extracts displayed strong effects and some of the tested compounds have shown good results in comparison to positive controls of the bioassays.

Myrtaceae, _Trypanosoma_, _Leishmania_

## Introduction

_Siphoneugena densiflora_ O. Berg commonly known as Uvatinga belongs to the family Myrtaceae and occurs in grasslands ("campos rupestres"), deciduous forests ("cerradoes") and gallery forests in Goias, Distrito Federal, Minas Gerais and Sao Paulo States of Brazil. This plant takes part in a genus comprising only nine species; two of them are vulnerable to extinction in Sao Paulo State (Programa Biota FAPESP, 2007) and one species, _S. delicata_, has been recently described (Sobral and Proenca, 2006). _S. densiflora_ has been biologically and chemically researched by our group (Gallo _et al._, 2006a, b, c) since neither data about it could be found in the literature nor popular use has been registered.

_Vitex polygamma_ Cham. (Lamiaceae, formerly Verbenaceae) is a widespread and well-known Brazilian species which occurs mainly in the states of Minas Gerais, Espirito Santo, Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, and is commonly called "Taruma". Its leaf tea is used in folk medicine to treat kidney infections (Rodrigues, 2001; Gallo _et al._, 2008). Several of its compounds had already been characterized and bioassayed (Leitao _et al._, 1997; Leitao and Delle Monache, 1998; Santos _et al._, 2001; Mensor _et al._, 2001), but none was regarded as neither potential trypanocidal nor enzyme inhibitor.

Trypanosomiasis and leishmaniasis are major diseases in developing countries which continue to infect millions of people and are responsible for a mortality rate of over one million per year. At present, only ineffective, impractical or severely toxic chemotherapeutic agents, requiring a complicated regimen, are available for the treatment of these infections (WHO, 2007); hence there is a pressing need to find novel antiprotozoan agents.

Trypanosomatids have no functional tricarboxylic acid cycle, and their bloodstream forms are highly dependent on glycolysis to the stage of pyruvate as sole energy supply. Trypanosome glycoly

## Page 2

sis occurs in a specific microbody called glycosome. Accordingly, the inhibition of enzymes of this physiologically important metabolic pathway should deprive the parasite of the energy necessary for survival (Opperdoes and Michels, 2001). The glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) enzyme of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ catalyzes the reversible oxidative phosphorylation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to 1,3-bis-phosphoglycerate in the presence of NAD\({}^{+}\) and inorganic phosphate. The _in silico_ modeling of this pathway has indicated this catalyzed reaction as one of the preferred steps for inhibition (Bakker _et al._, 2000). In addition, Trypanosomatidae have dithiol trypanothione [bis(glutathionyl)spectridine]-conjugated enzymes, specially trypanothione reductase (TR) (Fairlamb _et al._, 1995), that helps to protect the parasites from oxidative stress by maintaining an intracellular reducing milieu through reduction of the \(N^{1}\),\(N^{8}\)-(bisglutathionyl)-spermidine conjugate trypanothione (T[S]2) to dihydrotrypanothione (T[SH]2). TR participates in the inactivation of potentially damaging radicals and reactive oxygen species, and is re-oxidized to (T[S]2) in the process. The essential role of TR in the parasite thiol metabolism and its absence from the mammalian host render the enzyme a highly attractive target for drug development against trypanosomatids (Hamilton _et al._, 2003).

The genus _Leishmanita_ owns three enzymes involved in the recycling of purine nucleotides by the salvage pathway. One of them, adeninephosphoribosyl transferase (APRT), is responsible for catalyzing the conversion of adenine and _a_-D-5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) into adenosine-5-monophosphate (AMP) and pyrophosphate (PPi) by anomeric inversion of the ribofuranose ring (Musick, 1981). APRT and gGAPDH enzymes reveal differences in the amino acid sequence when compared to corresponding mammalian enzymes, which should allow the development of selective inhibitor compounds.

In our investigation for enzymatic inhibitors and trypanocidal agents to be used against parasitic protozoa, we have screened hexanic, methanolic, and hydroalcoholic extracts, as well as 34 isolated compounds from the aforementioned plants for their trypanocidal effects on bloodstream forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_ and _T. brucei_. In addition, the inhibitory activities, either on gGAPDH and TR enzymes from _T. cruzi_ or APRT enzyme from _Leishmanita tarentolae_, were assessed.

## Materials and Methods

### Plant material

_Vitex polygamma_ Cham. (Lamiaceae) and _Siphoneugena densiflora_ O. Berg (Mytraceae) were collected in July 2000 in the city of Pocos de Caldas, Minas Gerais, Brazil. The plants were authenticated by Dr. Fatima Regina Salimena-Pires, a taxonomic botanist from Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora (UFJF), and Dr. Marcos Sobral from Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), respectively. Voucher specimens are deposited at the herbarium of Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciencias e Letras of Universidade de Sao Paulo, campus Ribeirao Preto (SPFR), Brazil, under the acquisition number 9968, and at the Herbarium of Botany Department, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### Extraction procedures

Extracts as well as compounds **1** to **3**, **6**, **7**, **9**, **11** to **13**, **20** to **22**, **28** to **34** were obtained in conformity with formerly described procedures (Gallo _et al._, 2006a, b, c, 2008).

Isolation of compound **4** from the methanolic extract of stem of _Siphoeneugena densiflora_ (SD-MS)

A quantity of 60.7 g of SD-MS was submitted to liquid-liquid partition using solvents of increasing polarity (dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and _n_-butanol). The corresponding dichloromethane layer (SD-DMS, 1.62 g) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (60.0 x 2.0 cm) using a gradient elution from dichloromethane/hexane (1:1 by volume) to methanol (100%), resulting in 35 fractions of 20 mL each, which were pooled into 10 fractions (D1 to D10) according to their composition, determined by thin layer chromatography and visualized under UV light and spraying with colour reagent. Fraction D8 (600.0 mg) was rechromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (23.0 x 3.0 cm) employing a step gradient from dichloromethane (100%), dichloromethane/acetone (80:20 by volume) and methanol (100%). A total of 52 fractions of 20 mL each was collected and combined in agreement with the fractions similarities, affording 16 fractions (D8a to D8p). Fraction D8i was identified as compound **4** (12.0 mg).

Isolation of compounds **5**, **14**, **15**, **16**, **17**, **19**, **24**, **25**, **26** and **27** from a dichloromethane layer of the methanolic extract of leaves of _Vitex polygamma_ (VP-DML)

A quantity of 38.1 g of VP-ML was submitted to liquid-liquid partition using solvents of increasing 

## Page 3

polarity (dichloromethane and ethyl acetate). The corresponding dichloromethane layer (VP-DML, 15.1 g) was chromatographed on a silica gel 60 column (20.0 x 5.5 cm) and eluted in a step gradient from dichloromethane/methanol (95:5 by volume) to methanol (100%) (step A, Fig. 1). A total of 14 fractions of 125 mL each was collected and pooled into 8 fractions (L1 to L8). Fraction L4 (4.4 g) was submitted to column chromatography (CC) (16.5 x 5.5 cm) with silica gel 60 and gradient elution from hexane/ethyl acetate (70:30 by volume) to methanol (100%) (step B, Fig.1), resulting in 15 fractions of 100 mL each, which were combined into four fractions (L4a to L4d). Fraction L4d (3.09 g) was rechromatographed on silica gel 60 (20.0 x 5.0 cm) using a step gradient from dichloromethane (100%) to methanol (100%) (step C, Fig. 1), yielding 20 fractions of 100 mL each, which were pooled into 8 fractions (L4da to L4dh). Fraction L4df (350.4 mg) was chromatographed using step C conditions with a column of 15.0 x 4.0 cm (step G, Fig. 1) to afford 15 fractions of 150 mL each, that were combined into 8 fractions (L4df1 to L4df8). Fraction L4df4 (130.8 mg) was submitted to CC (15.0 x 4.0 cm) with silica gel 60 and gradient elution from dichloromethane/ethyl acetate (90:10 by volume) to methanol (100%) (step H, Fig. 1) to afford 11 fractions of 150 mL each, that were combined into 8 fractions (L4df1 to L4df8). Fraction L4df42 (10.2 mg) was purified on silica gel (10.0 x 3.0 cm) using isocratic elution with dichloromethane/ethyl acetate (95:5 by volume; step N, Fig. 1) to afford 14 fractions of 100 mL each, that were combined into 5 fractions (L4df421 to L4df425). Fraction L4df423 was identified as compound **25**. Fraction L4df44 (89.3 mg) was submitted to step H conditions in a column of 25.0 x 4.5 cm (step I, Fig. 1) to yield 16 fractions of 100 mL each, that were combined into 6 fractions (L4df441 to L4df446). Fraction L4df446 (75.5 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (52.0 x 2.0 cm) using methanol as eluent (step J, Fig. 1) to yield 31 fractions of 15 mL each, that were combined into 4 fractions (L4df446R to

Fig. 1: Fluxogram of isolation of compounds **5**, **14** to **17**, **19**, **24** to **27** from _Vitex polygamma._

## Page 4

L4df446U). Fraction L4df446T (11.7 mg) was purified over a silica gel column (24.0 x 1.0 cm) using dichloromethane/ethyl acetate (90:10 by volume) as eluent (step K, Fig. 1) to yield 31 fractions of 15 mL each, that were combined into 3 fractions. Fraction 3 (L4df446Ta, 4.0 mg) was identified as compound **16**. Fraction L4df443 (26.5 mg) was submitted, consecutively, to the conditions of steps K and J (step L, Fig. 1) to afford compound **24**. Fraction L4dg (436.4 mg) was submitted repeatedly to the conditions of steps A, K and J (steps D, E and F, Fig. 1) to afford compound **19**. Fraction L4c (940.2 mg) was fractionated on silica (24.0 x 4.0 cm) using gradient elution with hexane/ethyl acetate (70:30 by volume) to yield 17 fractions of 100 mL each, that were combined into 7 fractions (L4c1 to L4c7; step M, Fig. 1). Fraction L4c5 (241.5 mg) was submitted to the conditions of step J to afford 27 fractions of 15 mL each, that were combined into 7 fractions (L4c5F to L4c5L; step P, Fig. 1). Fraction L4c5J (11.3 mg) was purified by a HPLC RP-ODS C18 system (step Q, Fig. 1) employing methanol isocratic elution (254 nm; flow rate of 2 mL/min; injection volume of 1 mL) to afford compound **17**. Fraction L4c5I (11.0 mg) was submitted to preparative TLC (20.0 x 20.0 cm, step O, Fig. 1) using dichloromethane/methanol (90:10 by volume) as eluent to yield compounds **5** and **27**. Fraction L4df5 (43.5 mg) was chromatographed on silica gel 60 (18.0 x 5.0 cm, step T, Fig. 1) under the elution conditions of step H. A total of 18 fractions of 50 mL was collected and pooled into 7 fractions (L4df51 to L4df57). Fraction L4df54 (20.3 mg) was chromatographed on silica gel 60 (15.0 x 2.5 cm, step U, Fig. 1) employing dichloromethane/ethyl acetate (70:30 by volume). A total of 10 fractions of 100 mL each was collected and pooled into 6 fractions (L4df54a to L4df54f). The constituent of fraction L4df54c was identified as compound **26** (11.7 mg). Fraction L5 (1.9 g) was subjected to CC using silica gel 60 (20.0 x 4.0 cm) and gradient elution from ethyl acetate (100%) to methanol (100%) (step R, Fig. 1), yielding 13 fractions of 50 mL each which were pooled into 6 fractions (L5a to L5f). Fraction L5b (608.8 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (60.0 x 2.0 cm) using methanol as eluent for three repeated times (step S, Fig. 1) to yield fraction 4 (L5btg4, 1.0 mg) that was identified as compound **15** and fraction 5 (L5btg5, 4.0 mg) characterized as compound **14**.

### Isolation of compounds **18** and **23** from a

methanolic layer of the hexanic extract of _Vitex polygamma_ (VP-MHL)

The corresponding methanolic layer (VP-MHL, 171.0 mg) was chromatographed on a silica gel 60 column (18.0 x 4.5 cm) and eluted in a step gradient from dichloromethane/hexane (50:50 by volume) to methanol (100%). A total of 20 fractions of 150 mL each was collected and pooled into 7 fractions (MHL1 to MHL7). Fraction 5 (MHL5, 26.6 mg) was chromatographed over Sephadex LH-20 (52.0 x 3.0 cm) employing methanol as eluent to afford all fractions of 15 mL each, which were pooled into 7 fractions (MHL5a to MHL5g). Fraction 6 (MHL5f, 1.2 mg) was identified as compound **18** and fraction 5 (MHL5e, 4.2 mg) as compound **23**.

### Isolation of compounds **8** and **10** from a

dichloromethane layer of the methanolic extract of stem of _Siphoneugena densiflora_ (SD-DMS)

A quantity of 1.62 g of SD-DMS was chromatographed over Sephadex-LH20 (28.0 x 3.0 cm) using gradient elution from dichloromethane/hexane (50:50 by volume), dichloromethane (100%), methanol/dichloromethane (50:50 by volume) to methanol (100%). A total of 34 fractions of 20 mL each was collected and pooled into 10 fractions (DMS1 to DMS10). Fraction 5 (DMS5, 75.4 mg) was rechromatographed over Sephadex-LH20 (45.0 x 2.0 cm) using methanol as eluent to afford 15 fractions of 20 mL each, which were combined into 5 fractions (DMS5m to DMS5q). Fraction 5 (DMS5q, 25.9 mg) was purified by PTLC (20.0 x 20.0 cm) using dichloromethane/acetone (90:10 by volume) as eluent twice to afford compound **8** (3.4 mg). Fraction 6 (DMS6, 115.7 mg) was submitted to CC using silica gel 230-400 mesh (23.0 x 3.0 cm) employing a gradient elution from dichloromethane (100%), dichloromethane/ethyl acetate to methanol (100%). A total of 56 fractions of 20 mL each was collected and pooled into 11 fractions (DMS61 to DMS611). Fraction 9 (DMS69, 10.4 mg) was purified by PTLC (20.0 x 20.0 cm) using dichloromethane/acetone (90:10 by volume) as eluent to afford compound **10** (5.0 mg).

### _cruzi gGAPDH inhibitory activity_

The enzymatic activity of _T. cruzi_ gGAPDH and the inhibitory activities of extracts and compounds against this enzyme have been determined accord 

## Page 5

ing to an earlier reported procedure (Vieira _et al._, 2001). The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50), _i. e._, the concentration necessary to inhibit 50% of enzyme activity, was estimated from graphically plotted dose-response curves by making rate measurements for at least five inhibitor concentrations, using the nonlinear curve-fitting program SigmaPlot 2001 7.0. Statistical error limits on the IC50 values have been calculated in amount to 10% or less. The coumarin chalepin was used as positive control (IC50 = 55.5 _m_M).

### _L. tarentolae APRT inhibitory activity_

APRT cloning, expression, and purification have been determined according to earlier described procedures (Thiemann _et al._, 1998). The APRT activity has been determined by spectrophotometric measurements of the formation of AMP at 259 nm after 60 s. The reaction mixture contained, in a final volume of 1.0 mL, 0.01 mm adenine, 0.5 mm PRPP, 5 mm MgCl2, 100 mm Tris-HCl [2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol-hydrochloride], pH 7.4, and 3.8 _m_L APRT solution. The reaction started by the addition of enzyme. The specific activity of the enzyme and the inhibitory activity of compounds and extracts have been calculated in agreement with the literature (Vieira _et al._, 2001).

### _T. cruzi TR inhibitory activity_

Enzyme activity and assay were performed according to prior descriptions (Hamilton _et al._, 2003). Clomipramine (Novartis) was used as positive control [IC50 = 2.72 _m_m (personal communication, Alan Fairlamb)]. The IC50 value was determined by microplate assays in serial two-fold dilutions of the test compound. The data were processed using the GraFit version 4.5 Program (written by R. J. Laetherbarrow, Univ. London Imperial Coll. Sci. Technol. & Med., Dept. Chem., Biol. & Biophys. Chem. Sect., London SW7 2AZ, England) in order to obtain the IC50 values, and the results were fitted into the equation

\[\text{Y} = \left\{ {\text{Range}/\left[ {1 + (\text{X}/\text{IC}_{50})^{\text{s}}} \right]} \right\} + \text{Background},\]

where Y is the absorbance, X the concentration of the test compound (in _m_m), Range the Y axis scale, Background the zero control and s the slope factor (s = 1).

### _T. brucei cell culture and cytotoxicity assay_

Bloodstream forms of _T. brucei_, strain 427 wild type, were grown in HMI-9 medium with 10% serum following the published protocol (Hirumi and Hirumi, 1989). The effect of compounds on the viability of bloodstream forms of _T. brucei_ was evaluated using the Alamar Blue(r) assay (Raz _et al._, 1997). Petamidine was used as positive control (IC50 = 14 nm). In general, compounds were tested at a concentration of 100 _m_m.

### _T. cruzi cytotoxicity assay_

The assay was carried out using blood infected with trypanastigotes of _T. cruzi_ "Y" strain collected by cardiac puncture in experimentally infected male Swiss albino mice on the parasitemic peak (seventh day) and diluted with normal murine blood to 2 * 106 trypanastigotes/mL. The assay was performed in triplicate on titration microplates (96 wells) containing 387.5 mL of diluted infected blood and solutions of extracts or compounds in DMSO to acquire final concentrations of 4 mg/mL, 500 _m_g/mL, 250 _m_g/mL and 100 _m_g/mL. The plates were incubated at 4 degC, and the number of parasites counted after 24 h. Negative and positive controls containing infected blood with either 2.5% DMSO or gentian violet (IC50 = 31 _m_g/mL or 76 _m_M) were run in parallel. The results were expressed as percentage of lysis of trypanastigote forms compared to the DMSO control. DMSO at 2.5% did not interfere with the parasite survival.

## Results and Discussion

### _Identification of compounds_

Fig. 2 shows the structures of isolated and tested compounds from _S. densiflora_: quercetin **(1)**; quercetin **(2)**; gallic acid **(3)**; aryanbolic acid **(4)**; vanillic acid **(5)**; sitosterol **(6)**; syringic acid **(7)**; 2,4,6-trimethoxybenzoic acid **(8)**; ellagic acid **(9)**; 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furancarboxaldehyde **(10)**; casuarin **(11)**; castalagin **(12)**; ellagic acid 4-_O_-a_-L-rhamnopyranoside **(13)**; and from _V. polygamma_: lucolin **(14)**; 3-O-methylquercetin **(15)**; chrysorioenol **(16)**; 3,3'-_O_-dimethylquercetin **(17)**; 3,7,4'-_O_-trimethylkaempferol **(18)**; acacetin **(19)**; isoorientin **(20)**; schaftoside **(21)**; carlinoside **(22)**; penduletin 4'-_O_-methyl ether **(23)**; 2\(a\),3_a_-dihydroxyolean-12-en-28-oic acid **(24)**; oleanolic acid **(25)**; 2\(a\),3\(a\),19_a_-trihydroxyurs-12-en-28-oic acid **(26, euscaphic acid); _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid **(27)**; 20-hydroxyec

## Page 6

dysone (**28**, polypodine A); polypodine B (**29**); stachysterone (**30**); shidsterone (**31**); metacrylic acid (**32**); caffeoyl 6-_O_-b_-d-glucopyranoside (**33**); sitosterol 3-_O_-b_-d-glucopyranoside (**34**, daucosterol). The structures of the compounds were elucidated by comparison of their spectral data (1H NMR, 13C NMR, DEPT, HMBC, HSQC, 1H-1H COSY, IE-MS or ESI-MS) with earlier published data (see references in Tables I and II).

### Trypanocidal activity

Among the 21 extracts and 13 partition fractions tested against trypomastigote forms of _T. cruzi_, 15 revealed significant activities (> 60%, Table III) and were considered as promising sources of active substances.

Partition of VP-HL produced fractions with poorer activities (Table III). 1H NMR analysis of

Fig. 2: Structures of compounds isolated from _V. polygamma_ and _S. densiflora._

## Page 7

Fig. 2 (continued).



## Page 8

VP-HHL (53%) showed characteristic signals of hydrocarbons and fatty acids. VP-DHL (38%), when submitted to column chromatography, yielded a fraction containing a mixture of steroids which was responsible for 93% of Tc lysis at 500 _m_g/mL (this information is not displayed in the table). VP-EHL (36%) yielded compound **18** (31%), and VP-MHL (52%) afforded compounds **18** and **23** (16%).

VP-DML, after fractionation, afforded compounds **16**, **17**, and a mixture of flavonoids containing quercetin 3-_O_-b-d-glucopyranoside and quercetin 4'-_O_-b-d-glucopyranoside, which caused 97% Tc lysis at 500 _m_g/L. The same mixture inhibited the gGAPDH activity by 92% at 100 _m_g/mL (this information is not displayed in the table), which may explain the mechanism of action of the mixture on the trypanastigote forms of the parasite. **16** performed a better activity against _T. cruzi_ (33%, Table II) in comparison with compound **14** (27%), indicating that _O_-methylation of the 3'-hydroxy group was important to improve the activity.

VP-BHAL showed a good trypanocidal activity against _T. cruzi_ (60%, Table III), however, the compounds isolated from this fraction did not. Compound **33** (11%, 1.5 mm, Table II) was much less active than its aglycone tested previously (IC50

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c} Compound & Extract origin & \% lysis Tc [mm] & \% inhibition gGAPDH (200 _μ_M) & \% inhibition APRT (100 _μ_M) & \% inhibition TR (100 _μ_M) & Reference inhibition TR (100 _μ_M) \\
**1** & SD-EML & 34 (1.7) & 91a  & 97 & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\
**2** & SD-EML & 30 (1.1) & 19 & 89 & 4 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\
**3** & SD-EML & 19 (2.9) & I & I & 5 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2006b \\  & SD-MR & & & & & & & \\  & SD-MS & & & & & & \\
**4** & SD-MS & 90 (1.0) & I & 13 & NT & NT & Mahato and \\  & & 61 (0.5) & & & & & & Kundu, 1994 \\
**5** & SD-MS & NT & I & I & NT & NT & Sakushima _et al._, 1995 \\
**6** & SD-MR & NT & I & I & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._, 2006b \\
**7** & SD-EML & 16 (2.5) & I & I & 14 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\
**8** & SD-MS & NT & I & 24 & NT & NT & Russel _et al._, 1990 \\
**9** & SD-MR & 41 (1.7) & 90b  & 80 & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\
**10** & SD-MS & NT & I & I & 46 & I & Kulkarni _et al._, 1989 \\
**11** & SD-MS & 28 (0.5) & c & d & 878 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\  & SD-EML & & & & & & \\
**12** & SD-MS & 11 (0.5) & e & f & 878 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\
**13** & SD-MS & 12 (1.1) & 86 (239 _μ_M) & NT* & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._, 2006a \\  & SD-MR & & 33 (119 _μ_M) & & & & & \\  & SD-HAS & & & & & & \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: _In vitro_ antiprotozoal and enzymatic inhibitory activities of compounds from _Siphoeneugena densiflora_.



## Page 9

2.1 mm, Grael _et al._, 2005), showing that the glycosose moiety, making the molecule more polar, had a bad influence on the biological action.

The polar extracts from _S. densiflora_ (SD-HAS, SD-MT, SD-HAT, SD-MR, and SD-HAR, Table III) exhibited a strong effect on _T. cruzi_; on the other hand, compounds isolated from them did not (**3**, **6**, **7**, **9**, **11**, **12** and **13**; Table I). Maybe the compound(s) responsible for the original extract activity had not been identified yet.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c} Compound & Extract origin & \% lysis Tc [mM] & \% inhibition gGAPDH (200 \(\mu\)m) & \% inhibition & \% inhibition (100 \(\mu\)m) & \% growth (100 \(\mu\)m) & Reference \\
**14** & VP-DML & 27 (1.7)a & 56 & 40 & 46 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2008 \\
**15** & VP-DML & NTb & 73c & 84 & NT & NT & Roitman and James, 1985 \\
**16** & VP-DML & 33 (1.7) & 75 & 80 & 18 & I & Brieskorn and Riedel, 1977 \\
**17** & VP-DML & NT & 37 & 25 & NT & NT & Chiappini _et al._, 1982 \\
**18** & VP-MHL & 31 (1.5) & 41 (305 \(\mu\)M) & NT & NT & NT & Sutunaut _et al._, 2007 \\
**19** & VP-DML & NT & 22 & 16 & NT & NT & Pettit _et al._, 1987 \\
**20** & VP-BHAL & 13 (1.1) & 63 & 63 & 17 & I & Gallo _et al._, 2008 \\
**21** & VP-BHAL & NT & 10 & 47 & 5 & I & Besson _et al._, 1985 \\
**22** & VP-BHAL & NT & 7 & 14 & NT & NT & Besson _et al._, 1985 \\
**23** & VP-MHL & 16 (1.4) & 20 & 12 & NT & NT & Southwick _et al._, 1972 \\
**24** & VP-DML & 76 (1.1) & 44 & 71 & NT & NT & Mahato and Kundu, 1994 \\
**25** & VP-DML & 5 (0.5) & 38 (1.1) & 40 & 68 & NT & NT & Mahato and Kundu, 1994 \\
**26** & VP-DML & 90 (1.0) & I & 10 & 29 & I & Mahato and Kundu, 1994 \\ VP-DMT & 87 (0.5) & 16 (0.2) & & & & & & \\
**27** & VP-DML & NT & I & I & NT & NY & Dayrit _et al._, 1987 \\
**28** & VP-EMT & 71 (1.0) & 6 & 41 & NT & NT & Suksamrarn & \\  & 70 (0.5) & & & & & & & and Sommer- chaik, 1993 \\
**29** & VP-EMT & NT & 27 & 84 & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._ 2006a \\
**30** & VP-EMT & NT & 10 & 12 & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._ 2006c \\
**31** & VP-EMT & NT & 14 & 58 & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._ 2006c \\
**32** & VP-AHAL & 8 (5.8) & I & I & NT & NT & Davidson _et al._, 1989 \\
**33** & VP-BHAL & 11 (1.5) & I & I & 11 & I & Gallo _et al._ 2006a \\
**34** & VP-DML & 14 (0.9) & I & 40 & NT & NT & Gallo _et al._ 2006b \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table II: _In vitro_ antiprototozoal and enzymatic inhibitory activities of compounds from _V. polygamma_.



## Page 10

The outcomes from triterpenes **4** (Table 1), **24**, **25** and **26** (Table 2) point out a clear correlation between increasing number of hydroxy groups and higher activity, which justifies a meticulous investigation on structure-activity relationships in this case.

All the substances tested against _T. brucei_ were inactive, perhaps because of the low concentration (100 \(\mu\)m) tested in contrast to the concentration tested on _T. cruzi_ (500 \(\mu\)g/mL, see Tables 1 and 2).

_gGAPDH inhibition_

On the whole, 26 extracts and subfractions were tested. Eleven of them, the most polar (SD-methanolic and hydroalcoholic extracts), showed outcomes above 70% (Table 3), and the majority belonged to _S. densiflora_ (SD). The ascription of such activities to the hydrolysate tannins **11**, **12**, **13**, and ellagic acid (**9**) may be considered due to the low IC50 values accomplished by these compounds (Table 1).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c} Extract (obtained amount, g)a  & \% livis (4 mg/mL) & \% inhibition gGAPDH (100 \(\mu\)g/mL) & \% inhibition APRT (50 \(\mu\)g/mL) \\ SD-HL (8.2) & 82 & 28 & NT \\ SD-ML (164.8) & 34 & 74 & 97 \\ SD-DML (9.5) & NT & NT & 30 \\ SD-EML (14.6) & NT & 90 & 73 \\ SD-BML (12.0) & NT & NT & 68 \\ SD-AML (12.5) & NT & NT & 75 \\ SD-HAL (22.1) & 49 & 82 & NT* \\ SD-HS (0.9) & 65 & I & 14 \\ SD-MS (177.6) & 47 & 91 & NT* \\ SD-HAS (5.5) & 100 & 93 & NT* \\ SD-HT (1.0) & 33 & I & 30 \\ SD-MT (131.1) & 83 & 94 & 28 \\ SD-HAT (5.7) & 100 & 92 & 73 \\ SD-HR (0.3) & 64 & 26 & 4 \\ SD-MR (73.2) & 88 & 92 & NT* \\ SD-HAR (2.4) & 61 & 94 & NT* \\ VP-HL (5.1) & 94 & NT & NT \\ VP-HHL (1.08) & 53 & I & NT \\ VP-DHL (1.84) & 38 & I & NT \\ VP-EHL (1.94) & 36 & 22 & NT \\ VP-MHL (0.19) & 52 & I & NT \\ VP-ML (40.4) & 58 & 3 & NT \\ VP-DML (15.1) & NT & NT & 74 \\ VP-EML (8.0) & NT & NT & 62 \\ VP-HAL (31.0) & 41 & 81 & NT \\ VP-EHAL (2.2) & 62 & I & 56 \\ VP-BHAL (12.8) & 60 & I & 67 \\ VP-AHAL (22.6) & 40 & 76 & NT \\ VP-HT (0.85) & 75 & I & NT \\ VP-MT (19.3) & 28 & I & NT \\ VP-EMT (3.9) & NT & NT & 51 \\ VP-DMT (2.6) & NT & NT & 52 \\ VP-HAT (2.3) & 81 & 39 & NT \\ VP-HF (1.1) & 80 & I & NT \\ VP-MF (2.0) & 80 & NT & 26 \\ VP-HAF (0.9) & 39 & NT & NT \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: _In vitro_ antiprotozoan and enzymatic inhibitory activities of _Siphoneugena densiflora_ (SD) and _Vitex polygamma_ (VP) extracts and fractions.



## Page 11

Among the flavonoids, the simple and highly oxidized flavonol quercetin (**1**) was the most active. The flavone luteolin (**14**), without a hydroxy group at C-3, had a reduced performance. Though, its activity seemed to be improved by the introduction of the methoxy group at position C-3 (**15**) or C-3' (**16**), the presence of two or more methoxy groups at the flavone skeleton did significantly lower the inhibitory activity of the three tested enzymes (for comparison, see activities of compounds **17**, **18** and **23** in Table II). The _O_-glycosylated flavonoid quercetin (**2**) had a minor outcome in contrast to its aglycone **1**. Lio _et al._ (1985) observed the same behaviour with these compounds on xanthine oxidase, concluding that glycosylated derivatives are more hydrophilic and bulky, what reduces their contact with the active site of the enzyme. This observation fits with the small activities also performed by compounds **21** and **22** (Table II). The triterpenes were no efficient inhibitors of the gGAPDH enzyme neither a mixture of them (see Tables I and II). An unseparated mixture of lupool, _a_-amyrin and _b_-amyrin, isolated from the dichloromethane layer of the methanolic extract of leaves from _S. densiflora_ (SD-DML), tested at 200 _m_m, was inactive (this information is not shown in the table). At a similar concentration, a mixture of compound **24** and its isomer _2a_,3_b_-dihydroxy-12-en-28-oic acid, isolated from VP-DML, was also inactive, while compound **24** inhibited 44% of the enzyme activity (Table II).

### APRT inhibition

From 17 extracts and subfractions tested, eight presented results greater than 60%. Several could not be screened because they absorbed at the same wavelength used in the bioassay. The activity of the methanolic extract from leaves of _S. densiflora_ was increased after fractionation (from 74 to 90%, Table I). Furthermore, quercetin (**1**) as well as quercetin (**2**), from the ethyl acetate layer (SD-EML), showed inhibitory activities similar to their original extracts (97 and 89%, respectively, Table I). Altogether, flavonoids and triterpenes had activities similar to those performed on gGAPDH (Tables I and II). When analyzing the results displayed by ecdysteroids, we can notice that their activities were strictly linked to the number of hydroxy groups. Accordingly, compound **29**, bearing an extra hydroxy group in relation to **28** and two in relation to **30**, was twice more active than **28** and seven times more than **30** (Table II).

### TR inhibition

All tested substances were practically inactive toward the TR enzyme except for casuarinin (**11**) and castalagin (**12**) which performed an IC50 value of 179.3 _m_m on enzyme inhibition, although this result is not promising in comparison with clomipramine, the positive control.

### Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Dr. Marcos Sobral (UFMG) and Fatima Regina Salimena-Pires (UFJF) for botanical identifications, to ALCOA Aluminio S/A for facilitating the plant collections, to Ahilan Saravanamuthu for supplying TR enzyme, and to Dr. John Lee Richardson for valuable discussions. This research has been supported by Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), and Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP).

Davidson B. S., Eisner T., Witz B., and Meinwald J. (1989), Defense mechanisms of arthropods No. 87. Defensive secretion of the exadibedete _Pasimachus subsulatus_. J. Chem. Ecol. **15**, 1689-1697.

Dayrit F. M., Lapid M. R. G., Cagampang J. V., and Lagurin L. G. (1987), Phytochemical studies on the leaves of _Vitex negundo_ L. ("Lagundi"). I. Investigation of the bronchial relaxing constituents. Philipp. J. Sci. **116**, 403-410.

Fairlamb A. H., Blackburn P., Ulrich P., Chait B. T., and Cerami A. (1995), Trypanothione: a novel bis(glutation)ly-spermidine cofactor for glutathione reductase in trypanosomatids. Ann. Rev. Microbiol. **46**, 695-729.



## Page 12

Gallo M. B. C., Rocha W. C., Cunha U. S., Diogo F. A., Silva F. C., Vieira P. C., Vendramim J. D., Fernandes J. B., Silva M. F. G. F., and Batista-Pereira L. G. (2006a), Bioactivity of extracts and isolated compounds from _Vitex polygamma_ (Verbenaceae) and _Spidonneugena densiflora_ (Myrtaceae) against _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (Lepidoptera: Nocutidae). Pest. Manag. Sci. **62**, 1072-1081.
* Gallo _and others_ (2006b) Gallo M. B. C., Silva F. C., Fipara P. C., Fernandes J. B., and Silva M. F. G. F. (2006b), New natural products from _Siphoenugena densiflora_ Berg (Myrtaceae) and their chemotaxonomic significance. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. **17**, 279-288.
* Gallo _and others_ (2006c) Gallo M. B. C., Beltrame F. L., Vieira P. C., Cass O. B., Fernandes J. B., and Silva M. F. G. F. (2006c), Quantitative determination of 20-hydroxyedysone in methanolic extract of twigs from _Vitex polygamma_ Cham. J. Chromatogr. B. **832**, 36-40.
* Gallo _and others_ (2008) Gallo M. B. C., Vieira P. C., Fernandes J. B., Silva M. F. G. F., and Salimena-Pires F. R. (2008), Compounds from _Vitex polygamma_ active against kidney diseases. J. Ethnopharmacol. **115**, 320-322.
* Grael _and others_ (2005) Grael C. F., Albuquerque S., and Lopes J. L. C. (2005), Chemical constituents of _Lychophora polili_ and trypanocal activity of crude extracts and of isolated compounds. Floteragruia **76**, 73-82.
* Hamilton _and others_ (2003) Hamilton C. J., Saravanamuthu A., Eggleston I. M., and Fairlamb A. H. (2003), Ellman's-reagent-mediated regeneration of trypanothione _in situ_: substrate-ecological microplate and time-dependent inhibition assays for trypanothione reductase. Biochem. J. **369**, 529-537.
* Hirumi and Hirumi (1989) Hirumi H. and Hirumi K. (1989), Continuous cultivation of _ Trypanosoma brucei_ bloodstream forms in a medium containing a low concentration of serum protein without feeder cell layers. J. Parasitol. **75**, 985-989.
* Kulkarni _and others_ (1989) Kulkarni A. D., Modak H. M., Jadhav S. J., and Khan R. (1989), Preparation and commercial significance of 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furancarboxaldehyde: a review. J. Sci. Ind. Res. **47**, 335-339.
* Leitao and Delle Monache (1998) Leitao S. G. and Delle Monache F. (1998), 2''\(O\)-Caffeoyloritnin from _Vitex polygamma_. Phytochemistry **49**, 2167-2169.
* Leitao _and others_ (1994) Leitao S. G., Melo F. P. G., Delle Monache F., Goncalves J. L. S., and Wigg M. D. (1997), Inhibitory activity of _Vitex polygamma_ extracts against _Herpes simplex_ type1. Bull. Chim. Farmac. **136**, 121.
* Lio _and others_ (1985) Lio M., Moriyama A., Matsumoto Y., Takaki N., and Fukumoto M. (1985), Inhibition of xanthine oxidase by flavonoids by folate compounds and by amethopterin. J. Biol. Chem. **259**, 12-15.
* a compilation and some salient features. Phytochemistry **37**, 1517-1575.
* Mensor _and others_ (2001) Mensor L. L., Menezes F. S., Leitao G. G., Reis A. S., Santos T. C., Coube C. S., and Leitao S. G. (2001), Screening of Brazilian plant extracts for antioxidant activity by the use of DPPH free radical method. Phytother. Res. **15**, 127-130.
* Musick (1981) Musick W. D. (1981), Structural features of the phosphoribosyltransferases and their relationship to the human deficiency disorders of purine and pyrimidine metabolism. CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. **11**, 1-34.
* Opperdoes _and others_ (2001) Opperdoes F. R. and Michels P. A. M. (2001), Enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism as potential drug targets. Int. J. Parasitol. **31**, 482-490.
* Pettit _and others_ (1987) Pettit G. R., Cragg G. M., and Singh S. B. (1987), Constituents of _Combrenum calfrum_. J. Nat. Prod. **50**, 386-391.
* Programa Biota FAPESP (2007), List of species in extinction in Sao Paulo State, Brazil, [http://www.biota](http://www.biota). org.br/info/us/lista1aps.html
* Raz _and others_ (1997) Raz B., Iten M., Grenf-Buller Y., Kaminsky R., and Brun R. (1997), The Alamar Blue(r) assay to determine drug sensitivity of African trypanosomes (_T. brucei rhodesires_ and _T. brucei gambiae) in vitro_. Acta Tropica **68**, 139-147.
* Rodrigues _and others_ (2001) Rodrigues L. A. (2001), Estudo Floristico e Estrutural da Comunidade Arbustiva e Arborea de uma Floresta em Luminarias, MG, e Informacoes Etnobotaniacs da Popularacola Local. Master's Dissertation, Universidade Federal de Lavras, MG, Brazil, p. 190.
* Roitman and James (1985) Roitman J. N. and James L. F. (1985), Chemistry of toxic range plants. Highly oxygenated flavonol methyl ethers from _Guaterzeta microcephala_. Phytochemistry **24**, 835-848.
* Russel _and others_ (1990) Russel K. M., Molan P. C., Wilkins A. L., and Holland P. T. (1990), Identification of some antibacterial constituents of New Zealand Manuka honey. J. Agric. Food Chem. **38**, 10-13.
* Sakushima _and others_ (1995) Sakushima M., Coskun M., and Maoka T. (1995), Hydroxybenzoic acids from _Boreava orientalis_. Phytochemistry **40**, 257-261.
* Santos _and others_ (2001) Santos T. C., Delle Monache F., and Leitao S. G. (2001), Ecdysteroids from two Brazilian _Vitex_ species. Fitoterapia **72**, 215-220.
* Sobral and Proenca (2006) Sobral M. and Proenca C. E. B. (2006), _Siphoenugena delicata_ (Myrtaceae), a new species from the montane Atlantic forest of southeastern Brazil. Novon **16**, 530-532.
* Southwick _and others_ (1972) Southwick L., Mabry T. J., Averrett J., and Powell A. M. (1972), Penduletit \(A^{\prime}\)-\(O\)-methyl ether from _Peritye vaseyl_. Phytochemistry **11**, 2351.
* Suksamrram and Sommechai (1993) Suksamrram A. and Sommechai C. (1993), Ecdysteroids from _Vitex pimata_. Phytochemistry **32**, 303-306.
* Suttanut _and others_ (2007) Suttanut K., Sripanikduchai B., Yenjai C., and Jay M. (2007), Simultaneous identification and quantitation of 11 flavonoid constituents in _Kaempferia parriflora_ by gas chromatography. J. Chromatogr. A **1143**, 227-233.
* Takeara _and others_ (2003) Takeara R., Albuquerque S., Lopes N. P., and Lopes J. L. C. (2003), Trypanocidal activity of _Lychophora stauvioides_ Mart. (Veronioae, Asteraceae). Phytomedicine **10**, 490-493.
* Thiemann _and others_ (1998) Thiemann O. H., Alfonzo J. D., and Simpson L. (1998), Cloning and characterization of _Leishmania tarentolae_ adenine phosphoribosyltransferase. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. **95**, 141-146.
* Vieira _and others_ (2001) Vieira P. C., Mafezoli J., Pupo M. T., Fernandes J. B., Silva M. F. G. F., Albuquerque S., Oliva G., and Pavao F. (2001), Strategies for the isolation and identification of trypanocidal compounds from the Rutales. Pure Appl. Chem. **73**, 617-622.
* WHO (2007) WHO (World Health Organization) (2007), [http://www.who.int/dtr](http://www.who.int/dtr)

