# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)82898-8.pdf

## Page 1



# Alkaloid Studies--Lviii.

The Alkaloids of Six _Aspidosperma_ Species

R. R. Arndt, S. H. Brown, N. C. Ling, P. Roller and Carl Dierassi

J. M. Ferreira, F., B. Gilbert, Edson C. Miranda and S. E. Flores

Centro de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, Faculdade de Farmacia e Bioqumica, Rio de Janeiro ZC-82

Aparicio P. Duarte

Jardim Botanico, Rio de Janeiro

E. P. Carrazzoni

Instituto de Qumica, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco

17 June 1967

###### Abstract

The alkaloids of a number of _Aspidosperma_ species were isolated and identified. In one species the lignanes (\(-\))-lirioresinol-C and (\(+\))-O,O-dimethylirioresinol-B were also encountered.

17 June 1967

In continuation of previous work [1] directed towards a complete chemo-taxonomic survey [2] of the genus _Aspidosperma_ a further series of species has been studied. In general the alkaloids isolated belong to well-defined groups, already found in the genus and normally characteristic of the botanical sub-groups [2]. Thus, for example, the sub-group Nitida (_A. rigidam_, _nitidam_, and _marcgravianum_) is characterized by indolic alkaloids of the heteroyohimbine and corynantheol types, while the Pyricolla (_A. pyrrolo1hum_ and _nigricans_) and Tomentosa subgroups contain as principal constituents uleine and related alkaloids. The appearance of (\(+\))-stemmadene (\(\Pi\)) previously found in the genera _Stemmadenia_[3] and _Melodimus_[4] is noteworthy for although it is a natural precursor of the aspidospermatidine group of alkaloids based on structure (\(\Pi\)), it had not been previously encountered in _Aspidosperma_.

Piczaline (III), [5]\({}^{,}\)[6] isolated for the first time from this genus, is closely related to alkaloids found earlier, for example, aspidodasycarpine (IV) [7]. A list of the alkaloids is given in the Table.

* Present address: Facultad de Ciencias, Escuela de Qumica, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
* For leading references see B. Gilbert, A. P. Duarte, Y. Nakagawa, J. A. Joule, S. E. Flores, J. Aguayo Brissolese, J. Campello, E. P. Carrazzoni, R. J. Owellen, E. C. Blossey, K. S. Brown, Jr., and C. Dierassi, _Tetrahedron_**21,** 1141 (1965).
* B. Gilbert, _Anis Acad. Bras. Cien._**38** suppl., 315 (1966).
* F. Walls, O. Collera and A. Sandoval, _Tetrahedron_**2,** 173 (1958).
* H. H. A. Lind, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**48,** 1822 (1965).
* A. Z. Britten, G. F. Smith and G. Spiteller, _Chem Ind._ (_London_) 1492 (1963).
* L. Oliver, J. Levy, J. Le Men, M.-M. Janot, H. Budzikewicz and C. Dierassi, _Bull. Soc. Chim. France_ 868 (1965).
* J. A. Joule, M. Ohashi, B. Gilbert and C. Dierassi, _Tetrahedron_**21,** 1717 (1965).



## Page 2



## Page 3



## Page 4

* _A. rigidum_ was collected beside the BR29 highway near Rio Jaru in the Rondonia Territory and registered under Rio de Janeiro Botanical Garden No. 116846.
* _A. nitidium_ grows in mud beside the Igarape da Cachoeira Baixa do Taruma, Manaus, Amazonas, and has distinctive yellow wood. (Rio de Janeiro Herbarium No. 119069; I.N.P.A. Herbarium, Manaus reg. No. 1240.)
* _A. marcerravianum_ was collected in inundated ground near Igarape do Passarinho, Manaus, Amazonas, I.N.P.A. Herbarium no. 6150; Rio de Janeiro Botanical Garden No. 119072.
* _A. pyrroloIUM_ is normally a maritime species. The present specimen from an atypical inland habitat showed slight morphological differences. It was collected at km 18 of the Porto Seguro-BR5 road, Bahia.!_A. pyrroloIUM_ Mull.-Arg. fruits were collected from trees on the sandy coastal strip, Rio de Janeiro. This variety is that previously studied.17,20
* _A. nigricans_ collected in Porto Seguro, Bahia, has been studied previously.1 The present specimen collected in Garanhuns, Pernambuco (Instituto de Pesquisas Agronomicas, Recife Herbarium No. 1371), appears to be the same species and yields olivacene, olivacene-_N_-oxide and guatambuine as principal constituents. Uleine and dihydroulene now encountered, were not found in the Porto Seguro specimen, and in view of the difference the firm identification of the present species as _nigricans_ must await further botanical examination.

**_A. tomentosum_ was collected on the Fazenda da Mae D'agua, Varzea da Palma, Munas Gerais, and is distinguished from co-occurrent species by possessing bark free of cork. We thank Dr. Jose Vicente Goncalves Pinto and the Belgo-Mineira Iron Company for assistance in their collection.

++ This alkaloid has been isolated simultaneously in two other laboratories, from species of _Aspidosperma_ collected by us: _A. linae_ Woodson,23 and _A. subincanum_ Mart.24
* _For more complete bibliography see R. H. Manske, _The.4Ikaloids_, Vol. VIII. Academic Press, New York (1965).
* _I. Olivier, J. Levy, J. Le Men and M. M. Janot, _Ann. Pharm. Franc._**20**, 361 (1962).
* _B. Gilbert, J. Aguayo Brisolese, N. Finch, W. I. Taylor. H. Budzikfwickz, J. M. Wilson and C. Dierassi, _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**85**, 1523 (1963).
* _N. Dastoor and H. Schmid, Experientia_**19**, 297 (1963);
* _N. J. Dastoor, A. A. Gorman and H. Schmid, Helv. Chim. Acta_**50**, 213 (1967). We are indebted to Professor H. Schmid for i.r. and TLC comparison, and mixture m.p. of our 10-methoxydihydrocorynantheol with his alkaloid AD-IV from _A. discolor_. The two are identical.
* _B. Gilbert, L. D. Antonaccio and C. Dierassi, J. Org. Chem._**27**, 4702 (1962).
* _J. M. Ferreira, B. Gilbert, R. J. Dowellen and C. Dierassi, Experientia_**19,** 585 (1963).
* _A. Walser and C. Dierassi, Helv. Chim. Acta_**48**, 391 (1965).
* _S. McLean, K. Palmer and L. Marion, Can. J. Chem._**38**, 1547 (1960).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} \hline \hline  & Alkaloid \\ Species & (with principal references)8 \\ - & - \\ - & - \\ _A. rigidum_ Rusby* (bark) & Percaline (III)5.8 \\ (_= A. laxiffo um_ Kuhlm.) & Deacetylpicraline (V)5 6.9 \\ (_–_)-Carapanaubine (VI)10 \\ Resperilne (VII)11 \\ _A. nitidium_ Benth ex Mull.-Arg.† & 10-Methoxydihydrocorynantheol (VIII)11 \\ (bark) & \\ _A. matcerraíanum_ Woodson 12 & Aricine (IX)12 \\ (wood) & Resperilne (VII) \\ (_–_)-Demethoxasapidospermune (X)13 14 \\ (_+_)-Aspidocarpine (XI)15 \\ _A. pyrroloIUM_ Mull.-Arg.8 & Uleine (XII)16.17 \\ (bark) & Apparcine (XIII)13 \\ _Dasycaprolactone_ (XIV)7.19 \\ _A. pyrroloIUM_20 (fruits) & (_+_)-Sternamademene (I)21 \\ _A. nigricans_ Handro® & (_+_)-Uleine (XII) \\ _Dhybroulene_ (XV)22 \\ _A. tomentosum_ Mart.** & (_+_)-Uleine (XII) \\ (_+_)-12-Hydroxy-_N_-acetylasipidospermatidine (XVI)† \\ (limatunne)23 \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1.



## Page 5

_A. macrogravianum_ Woodson was the object of an earlier study12 when aricine and dihydroxymethyl were isolated from the bark. The former again appeared as a major constituent of the wood. In addition to the alkaloids recorded in the table, the lignanes (-)-lirioresinol-C (XVII)25,26 and (+)-O,O-dimethylirioresinol-B (XVIII)25,27,28 were isolated.

12-Hydroxy-_N_-acetylaspidospermatidine (XVI) (see Table note+++) the _N_-acetyl analogue of limatine (XIX)29 was characterized as a 7-hydroxy-_N_-acyldihydropyindole by its i.r. and u.v. absorption.23 NMR and mass spectral data were consistent with structure (XVI), the precisely determined mass of the molecular ion, 324-18367 confirming the molecular formula, C20H24N2O4. Location of the ethylidene side-chain at position 14 was confirmed by the appearance of the C-3 proton as a singlet (4:52 ppm) superimposed on the C-2 proton quartet, as well as by the mass spectral breakdown of the hydrogenation product, 14,19-dihydro-12-hydroxy-_N_-acetylaspidospermatidine (XXX). The diagnostic peaks in dihydro-aspidospermatidine (XXI) have been shown30 to occur at m/e 199 and 227, the latter having twice the intensity of the former. These peaks appear in the spectrum of (XX) at m/e 257-12921 (C15H17N2O2+) and 285:16019 (C17H21N2O2+, fragment \(a\); accompanied by \(b\), m/e 243) with the same relative intensities as found in the case of (XXI).

The absolute configuration of alkaloids of the aspidospermatidine group has been related to their ORD curves.31 The negative sign of the main Cotton effect (below 290 nm) of (+)-12-hydroxy-_N_-acetylaspidospermatidine (XVI) is indicative of C-6 alpha at C-7 as in (+)-limatine (XIX)29,31 (see Ref. 23).

## References

* [16]G. A. Bucci and E. W. Warnhoff, _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**81**, 4433 (1959).
* [17]B. Gilbert, L. D. Antonacdo, A. A. P. G. Archer and C. Djerassi, _Experletia_**16**, 61 (1960).
* [18]J. A. Joule, H. Montero, L. J. Durkah, B. Gilbert and C. Djerassi, _J. Chem. Soc._**4773** (1965).
* [19]M. Ohashi, J. A. Joule, B. Gilbert and C. Djerassi, _Experletia_**20**, 263 (1964).
* [20]R. R. Arndt and C. Djerassi, _Experletia_**21**, 566 (1965).
* [21]A. Sandoval, F. Walls, J. N. Shoolery, J. M. Wilson, H. Budzkiewicz and C. Djerassi, _Tetrahedron Letters_ 409 (1962). We thank Dr. F. Walls of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, and Drs. A. Hofmann and D. Stauffacher of Sandoz A.G. Basel, for samples of stemmadene and its hydrochloride.
* [22]J. Schmutz, F. Hunziicker and R. Hirt, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**40**, 1189 (1957).
* [23]M. Pinar and H. Schmid, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**50**, 89 (1967).
* [24]J. A. Joule and A. J. Gaskell, Private communication.
* [25]E. E. Dickey, _J. Org. Chem._**23**, 179 (1958); I. A. Pearl, D. L. Beyer and E. E. Dickey, _J. Org. Chem._**23**, 705 (1958).
* [26]L. A. Elyakova, A. K. Dzizenko and G. B. Elyakov, _Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR_**165**, 562 (1965).
* [27]We thank Professor P. R. Jefferies (University of Western Australia, Nedlands, W.A.) for an authentic sample of (XVIII); P. R. Jefferies, J. R. Knox and D. E. White, _Australian J. Chem._**14**, 175 (1961).
* [28]E. N. Maslen, C. Nockolfs and M. Paton, _Australian J. Chem._**15**, 161 (1962).
* [29]M. Piana, B. W. Bycroft, J. Speil and H. Schmid, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**48**, 822 (1965).
* [30]K. Bingham, M. Spieller-Friedmann and G. Spieller, _Tetrahedron Letters_ 485 (1961); _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**85**, 631 (1963).
* [31]W. Klyne, R. J. Swan, B. W. Bycroft and H. Schmid, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**49**, 833 (1966).



## Page 6



## EXPERIMENTAL

### Isolation and identification of known alkaloids

Alkaloids were isolated following procedures described previously1 and by preparative TLC on silica gel. Identification was made by i.r., u.v., NMR and mass spectral data. Chromatographic comparison and mixture m.p. with authentic samples was made wherever possible.

_A. nitidium._ 10-Methoxydihydrocoryanntheol (VIII) isolated from the pH 7 methylene chloride extract by gradient elution with CH2Cl2--MeOH on silica gel followed by successive thin-layer chromatography on alumina using acetone-water-hexane (51:4:50) then chloroform-methanol had m.p. 161-1623, [o]26:5 - 10-8 (pyridine), identical11 to alkaloid AD-IV from _A. discolor_ A.DC. The NMR spectrum (CDC13, 60 Mc) showed 0-95 (terminal methyl of ethyl group), 38 53(H, singlet, OCH3), 6-90 (1H, quartet, \(J\) = 9 and 3 c:s, C-11 proton; and 1H, doublet, \(J\) = 3 c/s, C-9 proton), 7-16 (1H, doublet, \(J\) = 9 c/s, C-12 proton) and 8-0 ppm (1H, broad, indole N--H). The high resolution mass spectrum showed principal peaks at m.e: 328:2459 (C20H28N2O2, molecular ion), 313 (M--CH3), 299-17632 (C14H23N2O2, M--C5H5). 283:18055 (C14H23N2O, M--CH2CH2OH), 255:14998 (C14H19N2O), 214-1050 (C13H

