# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000800025.pdf

## Page 1

Leaf-Cutting Ants Toxicity of Limonexic Acid and Degraded Limonoids from _Raulinoa echinata._ X-Ray Structure of Epoxy-fraxinellone

Maique W. Biavatti, Rosangela Westerlon, Paulo C. Vieira, M. Fatima G. F. da Silva, Joao B. Fernandes, M. Fernanda G. V. Penaflor, Odair C. Bueno, Javier Ellena

e-mail: maique@univali.br \({}^{a}\) Universidade do Vale do Itajai, Programa de Pos-Graduacao em Ciencias Farmaceuticas, CP 360, 88303-202 Itajai - SC, Brazil \({}^{b}\)Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil \({}^{c}\)Centro de Estudos de Insetos Sociais, Universidade Estadual de Sao Paulo, Rio Claro - SP, Brazil \({}^{d}\)Instituto de Fisica de Sao Carlos, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Carlos - SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

A investigacao fitoquimica das raizes de _Raulinoa echinata_, planta endemica do Vale do Itajai/SC, levo a isolamento e identificacao dos limonoides degradados: fraxinellona, fraxinellona e epoxi-fraxinellona. O dittimo foi anteriormente isolado dos caules, porren sua configuracao relativa nao foi resolvida por experimentos de RMx. Este trabaho apresenta a analise de difracao de raios-X da epoxi-fraxinelona, descreve o isolamento da fraxinelonona e fraxinelona pela primeira vez em _Raulinoa_, e a atividade toxica da primeira sobre formigas cortadeiras (_Atta sexdens rubropilosa_). Pouca atividade foi observada para o limonode degradado testado; entretanto, o limonoide acido limonexico isolado dos caules, apresentou alta toxicidade contra as formigas cortadeiras, reduzindo consideravelmente a longevidade das mesmas, em comparacao com o controle.

Phytochemical survey of roots extracts of the South Brazilian endemic plant _Raulinoa echinata_ Cowan, Rutaceae led to the isolation of known degraded limonoids: fraxinellone, fraxinellone and epoxy-fraxinellone. The latter was previously isolated also from the stems, but the relative configuration could not be solved by NMR experiments. This paper deals with the X-ray diffraction analysis of epoxy-fraxinellone and its toxicity to leaf-cutting ants, describes the isolation of fraxinellonone and fraxinellone for the first time in _Raulinoa_. Epoxy-fraxinellone showed no toxicity to the leaf-cutting ants (_Atta sexdens rubropilosa_). The limonoid limonexic acid, isolated from stems, presented high toxicity to the leaf-cutting ants, diminishing considerably their longevity.

**Keywords:**_Raulina echinata_, degraded limonoids, limonexic acid, _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_, X-ray structure

## Introduction

_Raulinoa_ is a monospecific genus and the species _Raulinoa echinata_ Cowan (Rutaceae) is endemic in the Itajai Valley, SC, Brazil.1 This endangered perennial woody shrub is characterized by the presence of spines (popularly know as Cutia-de-espinho) and has only been found in a short interval (1000 m) on the frequently inundated banks of Itajai river in an approximate altitude of 100 m, showing a high degree of adaptation to the environment.

Footnote 1: e-mail: maique@univali.br

We have previously reported the isolation and biological activities of some compounds of _R. echinata.2_ In continuation of our search for compounds and natural products to be used in the control of leaf-cutting ants, we have investigated the hexane extracts of roots of _R. echinata_ leading to the isolation of typical rutaceous degraded limonoids: fraxinellone (**1**), fraxinellonone (**2**) and new epoxy-fraxinellone (**3**). The extracts of the stems furnished the known limonin precursor, limonexic acid (**4**).

Footnote 2: e-mail: maique@univali.br

Leaf-cutting ants are one of the most serious agricultural pests in South American countries and the biological control of these insects has been the aim of many studies. Their control can be achieved by means of intoxicating the leaf-cutting ants3 or inhibiting the growth of their symbiotic fungus.

In this paper we describe the isolation, structural determination and evaluation of the activity of degraded 

## Page 2

limonoids and limonoids as toxicants to the leaf-cutting ants _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

NMR spectra: a Bruker DRX-400 spectrometer, operating at 400.13 MHz for 1H and 100.62 MHz for 13C was used.2 All spectra were run in CDCl3 using TMS as internal standard.

### Single crystal X-ray analysis

Low temperature X-ray diffraction data collection was performed at 120(2) K, on an Enraf-Nonius Kappa-CCD diffractometer equipped with an Oxford Cryosystem liquid N2 device, using graphite-monochromated MoK_a_ radiation (0.71073 A). Data were collected up to 52.7deg in 2th, with a redundancy of 4. The final unit cell parameters were based on all reflections. Data collections were made using the _COLLECT_ program;4 integration and scaling of the reflections were performed with the HKL Denzo-Scalepack system of programs.5 No absorption corrections were applied.

The structure was solved by direct methods with _SHELXS-97_.6 The model was refined by full-matrix least squares on F2 with _SHELXL-97_.7 All the hydrogen atoms were set isotropic and freely refined. Data collections and experimental details for the complexes are summarized in Table 1. The programs SHELXL-97,7 and ORTEP-38 were used within WinGX9 to prepare materials for publication. Data collections and experimental details for compound **3** are summarized in Table 1.

### Plant material

Roots of _R. echinata_ were collected in Ressacada, Ibirama, SC, Brazil and identified by A. Reis (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina) and J. R. Pirani (Universidade de Sao Paulo). Voucher specimens [A. Reis & M. Biavatti 2.570 (26/07/98)] were deposited at the Herbario Barbosa Rodrigues (HBR), Itajai, Santa Catarina, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of compounds

The dried and powdered roots (397 g) were extracted with hexane (4 g) and MeOH (20 g). Successively, the hexane extract was fractionated over silica gel 60 (70-230 mesh) into three fractions: hexane, EtOAc and MeOH. The hexane sub-fraction (576 mg) was chromatographed over silica gel (230-400 mesh) using as eluent CH2C12-EtOAc (9:1 and gradient) to furnish the compounds (in eluting order): fraxinellone (**1**) (37.1 mg), epoxy-fraxinellone (**3**) (76 mg), and the fraction named E (30 mg), that waschromatographed over silica gel (230-400 mesh) using as eluent CH2Cl2-EtOAc (99:1 and gradient) to afford fraxinellonone (**2**) (6 mg).

The methanol extract of the stems (80 g) was partitioned with dichloromethane (yielding 9 g) then chromatographed over silica gel (70-230 mesh) using as eluent hexane-acetone (9:1 and gradient), furnishing 17 sub-fractions (A-P). Sub-fractions D-G (4.1 g) were grouped and chromatographed over silica gel and hexane-acetone (9:1 and gradient) as eluent, originating sub-fractions A-T. The sub-fraction T (1.2 g) was purified by preparative TLC using hexane-benzene (1:1), yielding 650 mg of limonexic acid (**4**).

### Identification of the isolated compounds

The isolated degraded limonoids fraxinellone10,11,12 (**1**), fraxinellonone10,11,12 (**2**), epoxy-fraxinellone13 (**3**) and limonexic acid13 (**4**) presented spectral data in agreement with the literature.

_epoxy-fraxinellone_ (**3**). 5-Furan-3-yl-1a,4a-dimethyl-hexahydro-1,6-dioxa-cyclodextrin[d]inden-7-one, [a]D -22.5deg (_c_ 0.02, CH2Cl2). Colorless needles, mp 80-82 degC. Crystallographic data: publication no. CCDC 265853

## Page 3



#### Atta sexdens bioassay

The toxicity of the compounds to _Atta sexdens_\(rubropilosa\) was determined by ingestion bioassay, according to established protocol described in Bueno _et al._ (1997).14

Each treatment consisted of 50 ants distributed in 5 Petri dishes. The leaf-cutting ants were isolated from their nest and fed with an artificial diet. The ants from the treatment received a diet added with epoxy-fraxinellone or limonexic acid, at a concentration of 200 _m_g. The ants from the control treatment were fed with a diet without this compound.

During 25 days, the number of dead ants for each Petri dish was counted and a new portion of artificial diet given. It was estimated the survival curve of leaf-cutting ants of each treatment and calculated the median longevity. The test used for the statistic analyze of data was the Log rank-test (_a_=0.05).

## Results and Discussion

The isolated degraded limonoids **1-3** were respectively identified as fraxinellone (**1**), fraxinellonone (**2**), epoxy-fraxinellone (**3**) and limonexic acid (**4**) by comparison with the spectral data described in the literature.10-13

Epoxy-fraxinellone has a quaternary epoxy group attached to C8-C14, instead of the double bond as in fraxinellone. The spectroscopic data published13 could not furnish clear evidence of the spatial configuration of this moiety. In an attempt to confirm the epoxy group position, nOe difference experiments were performed, but the defining signals were superimposed (in _d_-chloroform and benzene-_d__b_), frustrating clear conclusions. In order to solve these indistinguishable findings, an X-ray analysis (Figure 1) was performed to confirm the epoxy group position.

Single crystal of epoxy-fraxinellone was produced by recrystallization followed by a crystal-growing process. The recrystallization involved dissolution of the material in proper amount of ethyl acetate-acetone followed by drops of water. Suitable crystals were selected and analysed by single crystal X-ray diffraction which established undoubtedly the structure of the compound **3**. Figure 1 shows an _Ortep_8 type view of **3** showing the thermal ellipsoids and atoms labels. This study shows that the molecular conformation of **3** is fixed by the presence of three main intramolecular interactions (Table 2). The analyses of the crystal packing showed the presence of others three intermolecular interactions in **3** (Table 3). These interactions give rise to the formation of infinite chains along the \(c\) axis (Figure 2). All geometrical details of the intermolecular contacts were interpreted as

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} Empirical formula & C\({}_{\text{u}}\)H\({}_{\text{a}}\)O\({}_{\text{t}}\) \\ Formula weight & 248.27 \\ Temperature & 120(2) K \\ Wavelength & 0.71073 Å \\ Crystal system & Tetragonal \\ Space group & 94 \\ Unit cell dimensions & \\ \(a\) = 8.2669(2) Å \\ c = 18.6746(4) Å \\ Volume & 1276.25(5) Å3 \\ Z & 4 \\ Density (calculated) & 1.292 Mg m−3 \\ Absorption coefficient & 0.094 mm−1 \\ F(000) & 528 \\ Crystal size & 0.24 x 0.18 x 0.17 mm−3 \\ Theta range for data collection & 3.49 to 26.35° \\ Index ranges & -10 ≤ \(h\) ≤ 10, -10 ≤ \(k\) ≤ \(k\) ≤ 10, -20 ≤ \(l\) ≤ _23 \\ Reflections collected & 9664 \\ Independent reflections & 2535 [R(int) = 0.0448] \\ Completeness to theta = 26.35° & 99.4\% \\ Absorption correction & None \\ Refinement method & Full-matrix least-squares on F1 \\ Computing \({}^{\ast}\) & COLLECT1, HKL Denzo and Scalepack2 \\ SHELXS-97°, SHELXL-974 \\ 2535 / 1 / 227 \\ I.078 \\ Final R indices [D ≥2 ≥(1)] & R1 = 0.0328, wR2 = 0.0789 \\ R indices (all data) & R1 = 0.0375, wR2 = 0.0818 \\ Absolute structure parameter & 0.0(7) \\ Largest diff. peak and hole & 0.144 and -0.147 e.Å−3 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Crystal data and structure refinement of compound **3**

## Page 4

intermolecular interactions on geometrical grounds,[15] and the Table 2 show their selected geometrical parameters.

The structures of compounds **1** and **2** were elucidated on the basis of \({}^{1}\)H NMR and EIMS spectra, and were in agreement with published data.[10, 12] The EI-mass spectra of both compounds shown to be formed mainly from the molecular ion by the consecutive exclusion of furan-3-aldehyde, CH3, HCHO and CO fragments.

As previously reported, crude extracts of leaves and stems as well as fractions of _R. echinata_ showed good inhibitory activity on _L. gongylophorus_ growth, the fungus cultured by the leaf-cutting ant _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.[16]

Epoxy-fraxinellone showed not be toxic to the leaf-cutting ants, although limonexic acid displayed a significant reduction on lifetime (11 days) of leaf cutting ants, when compared with the control group (22 days) (Figure 3).

Limonexic acid was also isolated from _Dictannus angustifolius_[17] a traditional plant used in China and from _Tetradium trichotomum_[18] root barks, and together with isolimonexic acid are the main constituents of the fruit of _Citrus nippokoreana_.[19] Despite being known since 1948,[20] no significant reference of its bioactivity was found.

Just a dozen degraded limonoids have been published, mainly from Rutaceae and Meliaceae plants. As the parent limonoids, some of them have been tested for biological activities including antifeeding and growth regulating activities against insects, and some relationship between the structures and biological activity has been studied.[11]

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} D-H....A & D-H & D.....A & H.....A & D-H.......A \\ \hline Intramolecular interactions & & & & \\ C8-H8A...O2 & 1.03(2) & 2.909(2) & 2.66(2) & 93(1) \\ C14-H14B...O2 & 0.99(2) & 2.980(2) & 2.74(2) & 94(1) \\ C11-H11B...O3 & 0.98(2) & 3.246(2) & 2.50(2) & 131(1) \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Intramolecular and intermolecular interactions geometry (Å,\({}^{\circ}\)) of compound **3**

Figure 1: _ORTP_**-3** view of the asymmetric unit of 3, showing the atoms labelling and the 50% probability ellipsoids.

Figure 3: Survival curve of leaf-cutting ants for treatment and control, calculated the median longevity. Statistic analyze of data: log rank-test (a=0.05).

Figure 2: Intermolecular interactions in **3** that form an infinite chain along the \(c\) axis.



## Page 5

In roots they were also found in _Melia azedarach_21 and _Dictamnus dasycarpus_.12

Ichthyotoxic and insect antifeedant activities have been described for fraxinellone and fraxinellonone against _Oryzias latipes_ and _Spodoptera littoralis_ respectively.10 Antifertility, antiplatelet aggregation and vasorelaxant activities are also described for fraxinellone, that also reduced the growth rate and food consumption of both adults and larvae of _Tribolium castaneum_ at concentration of 10 ppm and above in a concentration dependent manner, but was less active than commercial feeding deterrents.12

## Supplementary Information

Supplementary Crystallographic data have been deposited with the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre as supplementary publication no. CCDC 265853. Copies of available material can be obtained, free of charge on application to the Director, CCDC, 12 Union Road, Cambridge CH2 1EZ, UK (fax: +44-1223-336-033 or e-mail: deposit@ccdc.cam.ac.uk or [http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk](http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk)).

## Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Prof. A. Reis for collecting and identifying, Prof. J. R. Pirani for identifying the plant material and CNPq for financial support.

## References

* [1] Kaastra, R.C.; _Flora Neotropica_, monograph n. 33, 1982.
* [2] Biavatti, M.W.; Vieira, P. C.; Silva, M. F. G. F. da; Fernandes, J. B.; Albuquerque, S.; Magalhaes, C. M. I.; Pagnocca, F. C.; _Phytomedicine_**2001**, \(8\), 121.
* [3] Silva, A.; Bacci Jr., M.; Siqueira, C. G.; Bueno, O. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; _J. Insect Physiol._**2003**, _49_, 307.
* [4] Enraf-Nonius _COLLECT_.; Nonius BV, Delft, The Netherlands, 1997-2000.
* [5] Otwinowski, Z.; Minor, W. In _Methods in Enzymology_; Carter Jr., C.W.; Sweet, R.M., eds.; Academic Press: New York, 1997, vol. 276, pp. 307-326.
* [6] Sheldrick, G.M.; _SHELXS-97, Program for Crystal Structure Resolution_; Univ. of Gottingen: Gottingen, Germany, 1997.
* [7] Sheldrick, G.M.; _SHELXL-97, Program for Crystal Structures Analysis_; Univ. of Gottingen: Gottingen, Germany, 1997.
* [8] Farrugia, L. J.; _ORTP-3 for Windows; J. Appl. Crystallogr._**1997**, _30_, 565.
* [9] Farrugia, L. J.; _Win, G. X.; J. Appl. Crystallogr._**1999**, _32_, 837.
* [10] Nakatani, M.; Huang, R.C.; Okamura, H.; Iwagawa, T.; Tadera, K.; _Phytochemistry_**1998**, _49_, 1773.
* [11] Okamura, H.; Yamauchi, K.; Miyawaki, K.; Iwagawa, T.; Nakatani, M.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1997**, _38_, 263.
* [12] Liu, Z.L.; Xu, Y.J.; Wu, J.; Goh, S.H.; Ho, S.H.; _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2002**, _50_, 1447.
* [13] Biavatti, M.W.; Vieira, P. C.; Silva, M. F. G. F. da; Fernandes, J. B.; Albuquerque, S.; _Z. Naturforsch., C: J. Biosci._**2001**, _56_, 570.
* [14] Bueno, O. C.; Morini, M. S. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Silva, O. A.; _An. Soc. Entomol. Brasil_**1997**, _26_, 107.
* [15] Ellena, J.; Goeta, A. E.; Howard, J. A. K.; Punte, G.; _J. Phys. Chem._**2001**, _A105_, 8696.
* [16] Biavatti, M.W.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J.B.; Victor, S. R.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Albuquerque, S.; Caracelli, I.; Zukerman-Schpector, J.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2002**, _13_, 66.
* [17] Wu, T-S.; Li, C-Y.; Leu, Y-L.; Hu, C-Q.; _Phytochemistry_**1999**, _50_, 509.
* [18] Quader, A.; But, P.P.; Gray, A.I.; Hartley, T.G.; Hu, Y.; Waterman, P.G.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1990**, _18_ 251.
* [19] Connolly, J.D.; Hill, R.A.; _Nat. Prod. Rep._**2001**, \(5\), 560.
* [20] Kondo, Y.; Suzuki, H.; Nozoe, S.; _Yakugaku Zasshi_**1985**, _105_, 742.
* [21] D'Ambrosio, M.; Guerriero, A.; _Phytochemistry_**2002**, _60_, 419.



