# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)85161-4.pdf

## Page 1



# Xanthones from _Kielmeyera Excelsa_1
Footnote 1: Part XIX in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Gutiférae”’; for part XVIII see D. de Barros Correña, L. G. Fonseca § Silva, O. R. Gottlieb and S. Janot Goncalves, _Phytochem._**9,** 447 (1970).

O, R. Gottlieb and G. M. Stefani

Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil

5 July 1969

###### Abstract

2-Hydroxyxanthone, 1,7-dihydroxyxanthone, 1-hydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone, 2-hydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone, 1,2-methylenedioxyxanthone and 2,8-dihydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone were isolated from the wood of _Kielmeyera excelsa_ Camb.

The wood of _Kielmeyera excelsa_ Camb. was found to contain 2-hydroxyxanthone, 1,7-dihydroxyxanthone (euxanthone), 1-hydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone, 2-hydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone and 2,8-dihydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone. All these compounds had already been isolated previously from other species of the same genus [2] and were identified by direct comparison with authentic samples. Only one constituent proved to be a new natural compound. The molecular weight, determined by mass spectrometry, fitted a methylene-dioxxanthone structure. Besides the molecular ion peak, this spectrum contained only one more intense peak at M-1 mass units. The ease with which the molecule loses a hydrogen atom was also indicative of a methylenedioxy-benzene system which aromatizes upon electron impact. Of the three possible methylenedioxyxanthones, only the 1,2-derivative was given consideration, in view of its probable biosynthetic relationship to 2-hydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone. Indeed, treatment of the natural isolate with PCI5 and hydrolysis of the reaction product [3] yielded 1,2-dihydroxyxanthone.

1,2-Methylenedioxyxanthone, which has been synthesized,[4] is the fourth natural methylenedioxyxanthone to be reported. Other representatives of this relatively small group include 4-hydroxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone, 4-methoxy-2,3-methylenedioxyxanthone [5] and 1,2,4-trimethoxy-6,7-methylenedioxyxanthone.[6]

1,2-Oxygenation of a xanthone ring is not common among _Kielmeyera_ constituents. Up to now, the only principal metabolites to be characterized by this structural feature were found to occur in _K. petiolaris_ (Spr.) Mart.[7] Within the Guttiferae family, _K. excelsa_ and _K. petiolaris_ form a pair of vicarious species,[8] stemming from a common ancestor, but thriving presently in contiguous, but different ecological environment. _K. excelsa_ is found

## Page 2

in the humid tropical forest of the Atlantic coast, while _K. petiolaris_ grows in the dry savannah-like region of central Brazil. The similarity in oxygenation pattern of the xanthonic constituents of these species is, consequently, paralleled by their morphological and phylogenetic affinity.

## EXPERIMENTAL

For experimental techniques see the preceding paper of this series.1 The identification of all substances was confirmed by direct comparison (co-chromatography, mixture m.p., u.v. and i.r. spectra) with authentic samples.

_Benzene extraction of the sapwood of Kielmeyera excelsa. Isolation of euxanthone, 2-hydroxyxanthone, 1-hydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone, 1,2-methylenedioxyxanthone, b-sitosterol, 2,8-dihydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone and 2-hydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone._ The powdered wood (12 kg) was continuously extracted with hot benzene. Removal of the benzene gave a residue (47:5 g) which was taken up with a small volume of benzene. An insoluble crystalline mass (2:1 g) which appeared was separated by filtration from the benzene solution and chromatographed on silica (50 g) giving various fractions with the indicated solvents: benzene (A1), benzene-CHCl3, 2:1 (A2), benzene-CHCl3, 1:2 (A3). The benzene solution was evaporated to dryness and the residue (45:0 g) was chromatographed on silica (900 g) giving various fraction with the indicated solvents: benzene (B1), CHCl3 and CHCl3-MeOH, 99:1 (B2), CHCl3-MeOH, 99:2 (B3, B4, B5 in this order).

A1 was recrystallized from benzene-EtOH yielding an aliphatic aldehyde (25 mg), m.p. 83-87deg, _n_max 2912, 2830, 1738, 1600, 1460, 1175, 730, 720 cm-1, which was not further examined. A2 was recrystallized from EtOH yielding-euxanthone (20 mg). A3 (0:2 g) was rechromatographed on silica to separate an additional small quantity of euxanthone from a fraction which, upon crystallization from ethanol, yielded 2-hydroxyxanthone (43 mg). B1 (1:3 g) was crystallized from light petroleum-benzene yielding 1-hydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone (100 mg). B2 (0:5 g) was subjected to fractional crystallizations from ethyl acetate. Initial crops: 1,2-methylenedioxyxanthone (16 mg). Last crops: aliphatic alcohol (5 mg), m.p. 82-84deg, _n_max 3400, 2930, 2860, 1475, 1050, 725 cm-1, which was not further examined. B1 (2 g) was submitted to fractional crystallization from acetone. Initial crops: b-sitosterol (171 mg). Last crops: 1,2-methylenedioxyxanthone (190 mg). B4 (15 g) was washed with light petroleum. From the insoluble part nothing useful could be isolated. The soluble part (0:2 g) was separated by thick layer chromatography (silica, CHCl3-acetone, 95:5) into 2,8-dihydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone (94 mg, after recrystallization from CHCl3), 1-methoxy-2-hydroxyxanthone (19 mg, after recrystallization from light petroleum-benzene), euxanthone and 2-hydroxyxanthone (small quantities), quoted in order of decreasing \(R_{r}\). B8 (2:9 g) was freed from resin by filtration through silica and recrystallized from ethyl acetate yielding an aliphatic compound, m.p. 87-88deg, _n_max 2930, 2860, 1713, 1460 cm-1, which was not further examined.

_Euxanthone._ Found: m.p. 236-237deg. Required: m.p. 236-237deg. Required: m.p. 236-237deg. 2-_Hydroxyxanthone._ Found: m.p. 238-239deg. M 212. Required: m.p. 240-242deg,10 M 212. 1-_Hydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone._ Found: m.p. 130-131deg. Required: m.p. 129-131deg. _B-Slitosterol._ Found: m.p. 139-141deg. Required: m.p. 136-138deg. 2,8-_Difhydroxyxanthone._ Found: m.p. 199-201deg. Required: 197-199deg. 2-_Hydroxyx-1-methoxyxanthone._ Found: 171-173deg. Required: 169-171deg.4

1,2-_Methylenedioxyxanthone._ Colourless (7:17-218deg (lit.4 212deg). _n_max 246, 270 sh., 308, 353 nm (e resp. 45,500, 10,600, 18,000, 14,000): no alteration in presence of NaOH. NaOAc, AlCl., _n_max 1650, 1476, 1456, 1313, 1253, 1225, 1191, 1150, 1141, 1116, 1019, 928, 922, 853, 834, 772, 744, 694, 691, 631 cm-1. Mass spectrum: _m_le (_%_) 241 (16), 240 (100), 239 (42).

_Hydrolysis of 1,2-methylenedioxyxanthone._ 1,2-Methylenedioxyxanthone (150 mg) and PCl3 (1:5 g) in xylene (10 ml) were heated under reflux (3 hr). The xylene was removed by entrainment with water vapour. The residual mixture was cooled to room temperature and extracted with CHCl3. The extract was washed to neutrality, dried and evaporated. The brown residue was chromatographed on a dry column (silica deactivated with water, developing mixture benzene-ethyl acetate-ethanol, 72:25:3) yielding a crystalline fraction. Recrystallization from EtOH led to a small quantity of 1,2-dihydroxyxanthone, m.p. 165-167deg (lit.4 165-167deg), identified by direct comparison with an authentic sample.

_Acknowledgements--_The authors are indebted to the Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Brazil, for financial aid, and to Dr. G. G. de Oliveira, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil, for a sample of synthetic 1,2-dihydroxyxanthone. Professor W. D. Ollis's kindness in making available the mass spectra through the courtesy of Dr. C. P. Falshaw, The University, Sheffield, England, is also highly appreciated.

## References

- [1] F. Ullmann and L. Panchaud, _Ann._**350**, 108 (1906).

- [2] R. A. Finnegan and P. L. Bachman, _J. Pharm. Sci._**54**, 633 (1965).

- [3] K. S. Pankajamani and T. R. Seshadri, _J. Sci. Ind. Res._ (_India_) 13B, 396 (1954).



