# 10.1590@S0103-50532009000200025.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

Grosso State, Brazil. A voucher specimen (No. 24.080) was deposited at Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso Central Herbarium.

### Extraction and isolation

Dried roots (3.0 kg) were powdered and extracted with hexane and methanol by maceration at room temperature. The macerates were concentrated under reduced pressure to yield the extracts A (21.5 g) and B (200.5 g) from hexane and methanol, respectively. The extract A was partitioned with hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and methanol. Solvents were removed under reduced pressure and the dichloromethane residue (8.2 g) was submitted to column chromatography, carried out in a gradient system from hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate, acetone and methanol as mobile phase. The 174 collected fractions were reunited in 30 fractions. Fraction 10 (1.0 g) afforded the triterpene lupeol (170.0 mg, mp 162.5-164.2 degC). Fraction 25 (200.0 mg) was submitted to preparative TLC with dichloromethane-methanol (2:8), affording the alkaloid 6-acetonyldihydrocheleylthrine (**2**, 30.0 mg, mp 171.6-173.0 degC).

The extract B was partitioned successively with hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and methanol. The dichloromethane residue (530.0 mg) was submitted to column chromatography performed in a gradient system with hexane, dichloromethane, acetone and methanol as mobile phase. The 243 collected fractions were reunited in 33 fractions after TLC comparison. Fraction 4 (190.0 mg) was submitted to preparative TLC eluting with dichloromethane-methanol (1:9), affording the alkaloids 6-acetonyl-_N_-methyl-dihydrodecarine (**1**, 60.0 mg, mp 186-188 degC) and 6-acetonyldihydrocavicine (**3**, 57.0 mg, mp 184-185 degC).

### 6-Acetonyl-N-methyl-dihydrodecarine, (I)

Brown amorphous solid. [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\text{D}}^{21.5}\)- 5.625 (CHCl3; conc. 0.014 g mL-1). IR (NaCl film) vmax/cm-1:3396, 1708, 1615, 1610, 1516, 1425, 1296, 1239. \({}^{\text{H}}\)NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz) (Table 1). ESIMS/MS: _m/z_ (rel. int.) 391 [M+H]*.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline \hline \multirow{2}{*}{C} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{**1**} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{**3**} \\ \cline{2-5}  & \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) & \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) (_m_, \(J\) in 

## Page 3



## Results and Discussion

The well known natural compounds lupeol,16 6-acetonyldihydrochelerytr (**2**)17 and 6-acetonyl-dihydroavicine (**3**)18 were identified mainly by 1H and 13C NMR spectral analyses, comparing with previous literature data.16-18

Compound **1** presented a positive test with Dragendorff's reagent, indicating it to be an alkaloid. The IR spectrum presented bands at 3396 (\(\text{v}_{\text{OH}}\)), 1708 (\(\text{v}_{\text{C-O}}\)), 1615, 1516 cm-1 attributed to aromatic rings. The positive ESI-mass spectrum of **1** showed a _quasi_-molecular ion at _m/z_ 391 [M+H]' pointing out to a molecular formula \(\text{C}_{\text{23}}\text{H}_{\text{23}}\text{NO}_{\text{3}}\). The 1H NMR spectrum of **1**, exhibited signals corresponding to six aromatic hydrogen, characteristic of a benzophenanthridine system.18 Accordingly, the aromatic region from compound (**1**) 1H NMR spectrum exhibited signals of two pairs of one-hydrogen doublets (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 7.01 (H-9) and 7.54 (H-10); 7.72 (H-11) and 7.51 (H-12)) and two one-hydrogen singlets (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 7.10 (H-1) and 7.51 (H-4)) indicating the presence of four aromatic hydrogens in _ortho_ position and two isolated hydrogens. The 1H NMR spectrum also displayed signals of methylenedioxide group at \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 6.05 (2H, AB system), hydroxyl group at \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 5.30 (s, 1H), a methoxyl group at \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 3.95 (s, 3H) and the _N_-methyl group at \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.65 (s, 3H). In addition to the benzophenanthridine signals, the presence of an acetonyl group at C-6 was indicated by a methyl singlet at \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.02 and the AMX system with \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.25 (\(J\) 3.5 and 15.2 Hz) and 2.66 (\(J\) 10.9 and 15.2 Hz), respectively, and \(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 5.0 (\(J\) 3.5 and 10.9 Hz), corresponding to the coupling constants between H-6 and the acetonyl methylene hydrogens in the 1H NMR and 1H, 1H-COSY spectra. The 13C NMR spectrum also confirmed the acetonyl moiety with signals at 207.6 (C=O), 31.5 (COCH3), 46.5 (-CH3CO). Through the chemical shifts observed in the 13C, 1H-gHSQC spectrum, it was possible the attribution of each carbon and its respective hydrogen (Table 1). The cross peaks observed in the HMBC spectrum showed long-range couplings from H-6 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 5.0) and H-3' (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.02) with C-2' (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 207.6), confirming the connection of the acetonyl moiety with C-6. Further correlations were observed between OCH3 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 3.95) with C-7 (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 151.3), as well as H-9 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 7.01) and H-10 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 7.54) with C-8 (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 144.9) and C-10 (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 119.7), indicating that position 8 is substituted; finally, _N_-CH3 (\(\delta_{\text{H}}\) 2.65) with C-6 (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 54.8). The absence of the methoxyl group in C-7 moves away the effect of the oxygen atom in C-6, justifying its largest chemical shift (\(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 60.2) in compound **3**, when compared with the correspondent \(\delta_{\text{C}}\) 54.8, attributed to C-6 in compound **1;** thus revealing \(\Delta_{\text{C}}\) = 54.9-60.2 = -5.3 ppm as \(\gamma\) effect. Therefore, the structure of **1** was established as 6-acetonyl-_N_-methyl-dihydrodecarine, a decarine derivative.18 Previous publications,17,18 however, reported the isolation of the unstable parent alkaloids avicine and nitidine. Although acetone derivatives of avicine and nitidine have been reported in the literature,19-21 as well as acetone adducts of two other benzophenanthridine alkaloids,22,23 it is controversial, however, whether those acetone derivatives are really present on the plant extract or were isolated as artifacts, due to the greater stability of the acetone aducts as compared to the parent alkaloids avicine and nitidine.

Footnote 1: The 1H NMR spectrum

## Page 4

* (12) Navarrete, A.; Hong, E.; _Planta Med._**1996**, _62_, 250.
* (13) Cheng, M. J.; Lee, K. H.; Tsai, I. L.; Chen, I. S.; _Bioorg. Med. Chem._**2005**, _13_, 5915.
* (14) Guy, I.; Charles, B.; Guinaudeau, H.; Ferreira, M. E.; Arias, A. R.; Fournet, A.; _Pharm. Biol._**2001**, _39_, 152.
* (15) Guarim Neto, G.; _Plantas Utilizadas na Medicina Popular do Estado de Mato Grosso_, Associaacao Brasileira de Educacao Agricola Superior: Brasilia, 1996.
* (16) Mahato, S. B.; Kundu, A. P.; _Pytochemistry_**1994**, _37_, 1517.
* (17) Julian, A.; Delgado, G.; _Rev. Soc. Quim. Mex._**2001**, _45_, 189.
* (18) Nissanka, A. P. K.; Karunaratne, V.; Bandara, B. M. R.; Kumar, V.; Nakanishi, T.; Nishi, M.; Inada, A.; Tillekeratne, L. M. V.; Wijesundara, D. S. A.; Gunatilaka, A. A. L.; _Pytochemistry_**2001**, _56_, 857.
* (19) Arthur, H. R., Hui, W. H.; Ng, Y. L.; _J. Chem. Soc._**1959**, 4007.
* (20) Gopinath, K. W.; Kohli, J. M.; Kahn, M. S. Y.; Kidwai, A. R.; _Indian J. Chem._**1963**, \(1\), 99.
* (21) Fotie, J.; Bohle, D. S.; Olivier, M.; Gomez, M. A.; Nximiro, S.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2007**, _70_, 1650.
* (22) Desai, P. D.; Govidachari, T. R.; Nagarajan, K.; Visvanathan, N.; _Indian J. Chem._**1967**, \(5\), 41.
* (23) Ng, K. M.; Gray, A. I.; Waterman, P. G.; _Pytochemistry_**1987**, _26_, 3251.



## Page 5



# 6-Acetonyl-N-methyl-dihydrodecarine, a New Alkaloid from Zanthoxylum riedelianum

Carmorberth C. Fernandes

Paulo C. Vieira

Virginia C. da Silva

Evandro L. Dall'Oglio

Luiz E. da Silva

Paulo T. de Sousa Jr.

Departamento de Ciencias da Natureza, Universidade Federal do Acre, 66915-900 Rio Branco-AC, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Centro de Ciencias Exatas e de Tecnologia, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, 13565-905 Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Instituto de Ciencias Exatas e da Terra, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, 78060-900 Guiaba- MT, Brazil

###### Abstract

The Zanthoxylum riedelianum ried

## Page 6

Figure S2: \({}^{\rm H}\) NMR spectrum (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) of 1 (6-acetyl-N-methyl-dihydrodecarine).



## Page 7

Figure S4: \({}^{1}\)H,\({}^{1}\)H, COSY spectrum (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) of 1 (6-acetonyl-N-methyl-dihydrodecarine).



## Page 8

Figure S6. gHSQC spectrum (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) of 1 (6-acetyl-N-methyl-dihydrodecarine).



## Page 9

Figure S8. ElIMS (+) of 1 (6-acetonyl-N-methyl-dihydrodocrine).



## Page 10

Figure S10. \({}^{\rm H}\) NMR spectrum (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) of 3 (6-acetyldihydroaxidine).



## Page 11

Figure S12: "C NMR spectrum (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) of 3 (6-acetonyldihydroaxicine).



