# 10.1021@np200556p.pdf

## Page 1

Correction to Azaphilones from the Endophyte _Chaotomium globosum_ [_Journal of Natural Products_**2011**, 74, 1182-1187 DOI: 10.1021/np200110f]. Warley S. Borges, Gabriela Mancilla, Denise O. Guimaraes, Rosa Duran-Patron, Isidro G. Collado, and Monica T. Pupo

Pages 1182 and 1183: Structures for **2** and **4** should be corrected as shown:

Page 1183: In the structure elucidation description for **2** and **4**, "On the other hand, the relative configuration of the C8 and C2' positions of the chaotyridins B (**2**) and D (**4**) was suggested to be _cis_ by Takahashi et al. 8 on the basis of the magnitude of the coupling constants (10.2 Hz in **2** and 9.7 Hz in **4**). A qualitative analysis of the NOE experiments confirmed this disposition. In particular, NOE interactions were detected between H-7CH3, H-8 and H-2', supporting the _S_-configuration for C8 and C2'." should be corrected to "The relative configuration of the C8 and C2' positions of the chaotyridins B (**2**) and D (**4**) was suggested to be _cis_ by Takahashi et al. 8 on the basis of the magnitude of the coupling constants (10.2 Hz in 2 and 9.7 Hz in **4**). More recently, structures of chaotyridins B and D have been revised by Kingsland and Barrow 23 that proposed an additional lactone ring in the structures. All the \({}^{H}\) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data for both proposals are coincident. Our HRESIIMS data for compounds **2** and **4** confirmed the cyclization of the hydroxyl group at C5 with the carboxylic acid at C1'. in the first structures proposed by Takahashi et al. 8 Therefore, structures of compounds **2** and **4** are in agreement with those proposed by Kingsland and Barrow.23,

Page 1183: The sentence "The absolute configuration of _C5'_ could not be determined by this method as it was not possible to derivatize the secondary alcohol linked to this carbon." should be removed.

Page 1187: Include reference:

(23) Kingsland, S. R.; Barrow, R. A. _Aust. J. Chem._**2009**, _62_, 269-274.

There are two related compounds named as chaetoviridin E,9,23 and our data for 5 are in agreement with the first published structure.9

The authors apologize for any inconvenience caused by these errors.



