# 10.1016@0031-9422(92)83738-K.pdf

## Page 1



# Quinolone Alkaloids from _Zanthoxylum Acutifolium+
Footnote †: Based in part on the Doctorate thesis presented by M.S.P.A. to Universidade Federal de São Carlos (1990).

Mara S. P. Arruda, Joao B. Fernandes, M. Fatima Das G. F. da Silva, Paulo C. Vieira and Jose R. Pirani

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, 13560 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil; +Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Para, 66059 Belem, PA, Brazil; +Departamento de Botanica, Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05508 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

The leaves of _Zanthoxylum acutifolium_ afforded five new quinolone alkaloids which were identified on the basis of spectroscopic analysis as acutifolia, acutifolia, _O_-methylacutifolia, acutifolia palmitate and neocutifolia. In addition, the known compounds (_E_, _E_)-_N_-(2-methylpropyl)-2,4-tetradecadienamide, (_E_)-3,4-dimethoxyscinnamic acid and _b_-sitosterol were also isolated and characterized.

## INTRODUCTION

_Zanthoxylum acutifolium_ Engl. (syn. _Fagara acutifolium_) is a small tree of the tropical forests of Minas Gerais State (Lagoa Santa) and Sao Paulo State [1]. As part of a continuing study of the chemistry of _Zanthoxylum_[2], we have examined the leaves of this previously uninvestigated species.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The dichloromethane and methanol extracts of the leaves of _Z. acutifolium_, on chromatography over silica gel and preparative TLC, afforded five new quinolone alkaloids, acutifolia (**1**), acutifolia (**2**), _O_-methylacutifolia (**3**), acutifolia palmitate (**4**), and neocutifolia (**5**), in addition to the known compounds (_E_, _E_)-_N_-(2-methylpropyl)-2,4-tetradecadienamide, (_E_)-3,4-dimethoxyscinnamic acid and _b_-sitosterol. The known compounds were identified by comparison with published data [3-6].

Acutifolin (**1**) exhibited similar spectral data to lunaceridine (**6**), which has previously been isolated from _Lunasia amara_ and _L. costulata_ (Rutaceae) [7, 8]. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1), instead of signals for an isopropyl moiety, showed two broad 1H singlets for an acomethylene (_δ_5.06, 4.83) and a broad singlet for a vinylic methyl (_δ_1.86). These signals and the mass spectral fragment at _m_/_z_ 232 [M-C4H7O]+ required the presence of acomethylene at C-3' of the sidechain of lunaceridine. This was supported by the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) which agreed closely with published data for 1-demethyl-8-demethyloxacillin (7) available by synthesis [8]. The above data are in agreement with structure **1**, _N_-methyl-3-(2'-hydroxy-3'-methylbut-3'-enyl-4,8-dimethoxys-2-quinolone, for acutifolia.

_Acutifolia_ (**2**), showed spectral characteristics close to those of **1**. The principal change observed in the 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of **2** was the replacement of the resonances for an N-Me group by a broad 1H singlet (_δ_9.65, D2O each) for N - H. These data together with the mass and 13C NMR (Table 2) spectral data are consistent with **2** being an _N_-demethylacutifolia derivative.

The alkaloid **3** also showed the spectral characteristics of an acutifolia derivative, except for the presence of an aliphatic methoxy group (_δ_3.16, 56.2, Tables 1 and 2). The mass spectrum gave a base peak at _m_/_z_ 85 (C3H9O) which indicated a methoxyl at C-2' of the sidechain. The new alkaloid is, therefore, _O_-methylacutifolia.

Compound **4**, was also found to be an acutifolia derivative, with the 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1

## Page 2

and 2) indicating that C-2' has been acylated with a fatty acid. The mass spectrum gave significant fragments for _m_/_z_ 286 [M - OCO(CH2)14Me]+ and 256 [Me(CH2)14CO2H]+ supporting the structure as that of the novel alkaloid acutiofilm palmitate (4).

Neocaucitofilm (5), was very closely related to bafluoro-dine (8), previously isolated from _Bafloroendron reidelianum_ and _Ptelea trifoliata_ (Rutaceae) [7]. The 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2), in addition to signals typical of a dihydrofuquinolin-4-one, revealed the presence of an isopropenyl system. The mass spectrum showed peak for loss of C3H5 from the [M]+ ion (_m_/_z_ 230) which pointed to an isopropenyl group attached to the dihydrofuran ring on C-2', confirming that neo-acutofilin has structure 5.

The range of alkaloids found in _Z. acutiofilum_ is typical of the Rutaceae [7]. Murray [9] has pointed out that coumarin production is generally highest around the time of flowering. The leaves of _Z. acutofilum_ were collected in December, before the flowering and fruiting season. This appears to explain the absence of coumarins in this species.

## EXPERIMENTAL

NMR: CDCl3, with TMS as in. standard; MS: 70 eV, direct probe insert and elevated temp.

_Plant material_: Aerial parts of _Zanthoxylum acutofilum_ were collected from the Jatai Reserve, Sao Paulo, Brazil (Dec. 1987) and a voucher is deposited at the Herbarium of the Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP.

_Extraction and isolation of compounds_ 1-5. The leaves (190 g) of _Z. acutofilum_ were dried and extracted with CH2Cl2 and MeOH. The CH2Cl2 extract (5.3 g) was subjected to TLC over silica gel 

## Page 3

MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.); 289 [M]- (5), 219 (100), 218 (54), 204 (89), 203 (10), 188 (18).

_O-Methylacetofolin_ (3). Viscous oil, [a]b - 6.4 (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.00156), UV \(\chi_{\max}^{\text{adsom}}\) nm (log _ek_ 324 (3.35), 293 (3.70), 284 (3.74), 258 (4.21), 239 (4.19); IR \(\chi_{\min}^{\text{min}}\) cm\({}^{-1}\); 1630, 1620, 1595, 1460, 1240, 1075; 1H NMR: Table 1; 3C NMR: Table 2; MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.); 317 [M]- (7), 286 (8), 232 (62), 217 (9), 202 (24), 148 (27), 85 (100), 55 (52).

_Acavitofilm palmitate_ (4). Viscous oil, [a]b + 15 (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.00066), UV \(\chi_{\max}^{\text{adsom}}\) nm (log _ek_ 335 (3.60), 293 (3.95), 284 (3.98), 258 (4.45), 239 (4.44), IR \(\chi_{\max}^{\text{min}}\) cm\({}^

