# 10.1590@S0103-50531999000300013.pdf

## Page 1

_J. Braz. Chem. Soc._, Vol. 10, No. 3, 237-240, 1999.

Printed in Brazil.

Note

**Complete Assignments of \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR Spectra of the 3,4-\(seco\)-Triterpene Canaric Acid isolated from _Rudgea jasminoides Marcia N. Lopes\({}^{\text{a}}\), Fabiano C. Mazza\({}^{\text{a}}\), Maria Claudia M. Young\({}^{\text{b}}\), and Vanderlan da S. Bolzani\({}^{\text{a}}\)\({}^{\text{a}}\)\({}^{\text{n}}\)Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, C.P. 355, 14800-900 Aranquara - SP, Brazil \({}^{\text{b}}\)Secao de Fisiologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, C.P. 4005, 01061-970 Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil

O acido canarico **1** foi isolado das folhas de _Rudgea jasminoides_. A substancia isolada e um derivado triterpeneo do tipo \(seco\)-lupano e teve sua estrutura elucidada com base nos dados espectrais, principalmente em experimentos de RMN a 1D e 2D. O istosterol, o estigmasterol e os acidos ursolico e oleanolico tambem foram isolados.

The canaric acid 1 was isolated from the leaves of _Rudgea jasminoides_. Compound **1** is a \(seco\)-lupane derivative and its structure was established on the basis of spectral data, mainly by 1D and 2D NMR experiments. Sitosterol, stigmasterol and ursolic and oleanolic acids were also isolated.

**Keywords:** Rudgea jasminoides, _Rubiaceae, \(seco\)-\(A\)-ring hupane triterpene_

## Introduction

The genus _Rudgea_ is widely distributed along the Brazilian East Coast, where some species are used as a remedy to treat rheumatism, syphilis and swelling of the members relief\({}^{\text{f}}\). _Rudgea jasminoides_ is a small tree, especially impressive due to the pleasant jasmine smell of its wonderful white flowers, during the blooming. Several triterpenes and saponins have been isolated from other species, _R. viburnioides\({}^{2}\)_. However, \(seco\)-lupane triterpene derivatives have never been isolated from the Rubiaceae family.

As a part of our study on the constituents of plants from Rubiaceae\({}^{\text{a},\text{c}}\), we report the isolation of the canaric acid **1** from the leaves of a specimen of _R. jasminoides_. The canaric acid is a rare \(seco\)-ring-A-triterpene derivative, previously isolated from _Dacryooides edulis, Canarium zvelanicum and C. muelleri_ from the Burseraceae family\({}^{\text{c},\text{f},\text{7}}\). However, no detailed studies of \({}^{13}\)C-NMR, and high-resolution \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectra of the compound **1** have been carried out. Herein we report application of these NMR spectral data in the structural elucidation of this triterpene. In addition, sitosterol, stigmasterol and two known triterpenesusolic and oleanolic acid were isolated.

## Experimental

IR spectra were obtained on a Perkin-Elmer Model 1600 spectrometer; \({}^{1}\)H-NMR (200, 300 and 500 MHz) and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (75 and 125 MHz) spectra were registered on a Bruker AC 200, DPX 300 and ARX 500, at 25\({}^{\text{o}}\), in CDCl\({}_{3}\); HRFABMS: Central Analitica, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP, Brasil.

### Plant material

Leaves of _Rudgea jasminoides_ were collected from preserved areas of Atlantic forest in the biological reserve of the "Ilha do Cardoso", Cananeia, SP, Brazil. A voucher specimen SP 161 348 was deposited in the Herbarium Maria Eneida de Fidalgo, Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo.

### Extraction and isolation of the constituents

Dried and powdered leaves (1.0 kg) of _R. jasminoides_ were successively extracted with acetone and EtOH at room temp. to yield the acetonic (11.0 g) and EtOH (3.0 g) extracts respectively. Half of the acetone extract (5,5 g) was submitted to flash column chromatography eluting with a mixture of hexane and EtOAc. Twenty fractions (25 mL) were collected and analyzed by TLC on silica gel in hex 

## Page 2

ane-EtOAc (7:3) and CHCl3-MeOH (9:1 and 9.5:0.5). Fractions 2-3 were submitted to prep. TLC (hexane-EtOAc, 7:3) yielding sitosterol (21 mg) and stigmasterol (5 mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 (200 mg) containing the crude triterpene **1** as a mixture with oleanane and unsane acid were further purified by a sequence prep. TLC with hexane-mg). Fractions 12-16 and 1H-13C-HMPC-13C

## Page 3

EtOAc (7:3) and CHCl3-MeOH (9:1) to give compound **1** (43 mg) and oleanolic and unsolic acids (102 mg) in a mixture (2:1). The EtOH extract was diluted with H2O and extracted with CHCl3 at room temp. The CHCl3 soluble portion was chromatographed on a silica gel column with a mixture of CHCl3-MeOH. From the CHCl3-MeOH (98:2) eluate was obtained a mixture of triterpenes and steroids. This mixture furnished the compounds sitosterol in a mixture with stigmasterol (12 mg) and unsolic acid (9 mg) by repeated column chromatography and prep. TLC.

### Canaric acid (1)

Colorless crystalline powder, mp. 215-217deg [lit.(8) mp. 215-217deg, [ ]2025 +43deg (0.5, CHCl3) [lit.(8) [ ]225 +57]; IR max cm-1: 1690, 1646, 895, 880; FABMS _m/z_: 463 [M+Na]deg; 1H-NMR (CDCl3): Table 1. 13C-NMR (CDCl3): Table 1.

### Methylation of canaric acid (1)

Compound **1** was methylated with CH2N2, affording a methyl canarate **(1a)**. Gum, [ ]2025 +038 (0.6, CHCl3); IR max cm-1: 1715, 1640, 1100, 880; FABMS m/z: 477 [M+Na]deg; 1H-NMR (CDCl3): 4.76 (1H, s, Ha-24), 4. 60 (1H, s, Ha-29), 4.55 (1H, s, Hb-24), 4.50 (1H, s, Hb-29), 3.53 (3H, s, OCH3), 2.53 (1H, br s, H-18), 0.75 (3H, s, H-26), 0.78 (3H, s, H-27), 0.98 (3H, s, H-28), 1.10 (3H, s, H-25), 1.65 (3H, s, H-H-30), 1.63 (3H, s, H-23); 13C-NMR (CDCl3): 178.0 s (C-3), 150.9 s (C-20), 148.1 s (C-4), 113.5 t (C-24), 109.0 t (C-29), 51.3 q (OCH3), 50.7 d (C-9), 48.6 d (C-18), 48.0 d (C-19), 42.9 s (C-17), 42.5 s (C-14), 40.9 d (C

## Page 4

tra of the triterpene **1** resembled very closely those of lupoed9 and lupene10. Prominent differences in the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C values between lupeol and **1** were only observed in the A-ring region; the value of 78.8 attributed to C-3 in lupoed9,11 was inexistent in the molecule of **1**. However, the signal at 179.91 could be attributable to C-3, if we consider that the modification in the A-ring of the compound in discussion is related to the breaking of the C-3/C-4 bond (_seco_-lupane-A ring). These results allowed us to deduce that compound **1** possesses the same structure as canaric acid, previously described in the literature6,7.

Interpretation of \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H COSY, HMQC, HMBC, NOE and NOESY data for **1** led to the unambiguous elucidation of the structure. The relative stereochemistry of **1** was assigned on the basis of coupling constants (Table 1) and NOESY data (Fig. 1). The -axial orientation of H-5 was confirmed by a strong NOE between H-5 and the hydrogens assigned as H-1, H-6, H-9, H-7 and 3H-23, and the lack of an NOE between it and the olefinic hydrogens assigned as H-24. Also consistent with the axial orientation of H-5 was a strong correlation observed with the axial methyl hydrogens 3H-25 and olefinic hydrogens H-24. Strong NOE correlations between 3H-25 and H-11, between 3H-26 and H-7 and H-13, between 3H-27 and H-12, H-16 and H-18, between 3H-28 and H-19 were consistent with _trans_ B/C/D ring junctions with _seco_-ring A in a diequatorial conformation and ring D in a half boat conformation. Other correlations observed in the NOESY and NOE difference spectra are depicted in Table 2 and with the aid of COSY spectra and coupling constant values the relative stereochemistry of the _seco_-lupane triterpene **1** was established and shown to be identical to dihydrocanaric acid isolated from _Hoya naumanii_12.

## References

- Pio Correa, M. _Dicionario de Plantas Uteis do Brasil e das Plantas Exoticas Cultivadas_1st Ed., Ministerio da Agricultura, Brasil, 1931, p. 363.
- Young, M.C.M.; Lopes, M.N.; Araujo, A.R.; Adauto, C.; Bolzani, V. da S. _J. Nat. Prod._**1998**, _61_, 936.
- Brochini, C.; Martins, D.; Roque, N.F.; Bolzani, V. da S. _Pytochemistry_**1994**, _36_, 1293.
- Bolzani, V. da S.; Trevisan, L.M.V.; Izumisawa, C.M.; Young, M.C.M. _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**1996**, \(7\), 157.
- Bolzani, V. da S.; Trevisan, L.M.V.; Izumisawa, C.M.; Young, M.C.M.; Kingston, D.G.I.; Gunatilaka, A.A.L. _Pytochemistry_**1997**, _46_, 308.
- Ekong, D.E.U.; Okogun, J.I. _Pytochemistry_**1969**, \(8\), 669.
- Bandaranayake, W.M. _Pytochemistry_**1980**, _19_, 255.
- Carman, R.M.; Cowley, D. _Aust. J. Chem._ 1965, _18_, 213.
- Reynolds, W.F.; McLean, S.; Poplawski, J.; Enriquez, R.G.; Escobar, L.I.; Leon, I. _Tetrahedron_**1986**, _42_, 3419.
- Wenkert, E.; Baddeley, G.V.; Burfit, I.R.; Moreno, L.N. _Org. Magn. Reson._**1978**, _11_, 337.
- Siddiqui, S.; Hafeez, F.; Begum, S.; Siddiqui, B.S. _J. Nat. Prod._**1988**, _51_, 229.
- Baas, W.J.; van Berkel, E.M. _Pytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 1625. -

Figure 1: Selected NOESY correlations for 1.



