# 10.1078@0944-7113-00016.pdf

## Page 1



# Chemistry and bioactivity of Raulinoa echinata Cowan, an endemic Brazilian Rutaceae species

M. W. Biavatti, P. C. Vieira, M. F. G. F. da Silva, J. B. Fernandes, S. Albuquerque, C. M. I. Magalhaes, F. C. Pagnocca

# Abstract

## Summary

The hexane extract of the stems of _Raulinoa echinata_ afforded the sesquiterpenes germacrene D (6), 1,6 -dihydroxy-4-(15)-eudesmene (4) and oplopanone (5); the triterpenes squalene, isomulti-florenol (7), isobaerenol (8) and friedelin (9); the protolimonoids melianone (2) and melanodiol (3); and the pyranocournacin 3-(1'-1'-dimethylallyl)-lomatin (1), which has not been reported previously as a natural product; together with -sitosterol. The hexane extract and some of these compounds were assayed _in vitro_ against trypanastigote forms of _Trypanosoma cruzi_. Brine shrimp lethality and antimicrobial activities of the crude extract and pure compounds were also evaluated.

## Introduction

The subtribe Pilocarpinae (Rutoideae) is distributed throughout the American continent and includes the genus _Raulinoa,_ first described by R. S. Cowan in 1960 (Cowan and Smith, 1973). This genus is monospecific and endemic to one region in Itajai Valley, Santa Catarina, Brazil. _Raulinoa echinata_ is a perennial woody shrub showing a high degree of adaptation to the rocky margins of the Itajai river. As part of our interest in bioactive natural products, in this paper we describe the isolation, identification, antitrypanosomal activity, brine shrimp lethality, and antimicrobial activity of crude extracts and nine compounds from _Raulinoa echinata_. This is the first time that this species has been investigated.

## Material and methods

### Plant material

Stems and leaves of _R. echinata_ were collected in Ibirama, SC, Brazil and identified by A. Reis (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina) and J. R. Pirani (Universidade de Sao Paulo). Voucher specimens [A. Reis & M. Biavatti 2.570 (26/07/98)] were deposited at the Herbario Barbosa Rodrigues (HBR), Itajai, Santa Catarina, Brazil.

### General experimental procedures

A Bruker DRX-400 spectrometer, operating at 400.13 MHz for 1H and 100.62 MHz for 13C was used. The EIMS were obtained on a VG-Platform II mass spectrometer (70 eV). Optical rotations were measured using a Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter. HPLC separations were performed using a Shimadzu LC 8A pump [2.5 ml/min flow; Shandon Hypersil (5 \(\upmu\)m) silica gel (35 \(\upmu\)m 1.2 cm i.d.) column; UV-VIS detector at 330 and 220 nm; and hexane-acetone (8:2) as eluent].

### Extraction and isolation

The dried and powdered stems (5 kg) were extracted with hexane and methanol. The hexane extract (40 g)

## Page 2



\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l l l} \hline Extract/subfraction and & \% Antitrypano- & BSL & \multicolumn{4}{l}{Antimicrobial activity\({}^{\rm c}\)} \\ pure compounds & \multicolumn{1}{l}{somal activity (\(\mu\)g/ml)\({}^{\rm b}\)} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{LD 50\% (\(\mu\)g/ml)\({}^{\rm b}\)} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{_Bacillus_} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{_Bacillus_} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{_Staphylo-_} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{_Micro-_} \\  & (\(\mu\)g/ml)\({}^{\rm a}\) & & & _subtilis_ & _ceerus_ & _coccus_ & _coccus_ \\ \hline Hexane extract & 76 (4000) & 32.4 (C.I. = 22.0–47.5) & 12 mm & – & – & – \\ Subfraction Hexane & 23 (2000) & 102.4 (C.I. = 87.5–140.2) & – & – & 7 mm & 6 mm \\ Germacrene-D (**6**) & 61 (100) & Inactive & – & – & & \\ Subfraction Dichloromethane & 44 (2000) & 282.3 (C.I. = 168.0–472.0) & – & – & 7 mm & 7 mm \\ Isobaureen(**7**) & Inactive & Inactive & – & – & – & – \\ Isomultiflorend (**8**) & Inactive & Inactive & – & – & – & – \\ Friedelin (**9**) & Inactive & Inactive & – & – & – & – \\ Subfraction Ethyl Acetate & 30 (2000) & 8.3 (C.I. = 4.6–15.0) & 10 mm & – & 15 mm & 14 mm \\
1,6 -Dihydroxy-4-(15)- & 29 (100) & Inactive & – & – & – & – \\ eudesmene (**4**) & & & & & & \\ -(1’-1’Dimethylallyl)- & 72 (100) & Inactive & – & – & 9 mm & – \\ - & - & - & - & -

## Page 3

was fractionated over silica gel 60 (70-230 mesh) into four fractions: hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate, and methanol. These fractions were biomonitored and separated over silica gel (230-400 mesh) using varying ratios of hexane-acetone as eluent. The hexane subfraction furnished germacrene D (**6**) (25 mg) and squalene (20 mg). From the dichloromethane subfraction, isomultiflorenol (**7**) and isobauerenol (**8**) (mixture, 200 mg), friedelin (**9**) (10 mg), and -sitosterol (100 mg) were obtained. The ethyl acetate subfraction yielded interesting fractions (denominated D, E, and F) when fractionated over Florisil (100-200 mesh). Fractions D (40 mg) and E (19 mg) were separated by preparative HPLC. Fraction D afforded 20 mg of 3-(1'-1'-dimethylallyl)-lomatin (**1**), and the E fraction furnished 1,6 -dihydroxy-4-(15)-eudesmene (**4**) (9 mg). From silica gel fractionation of fraction F, melianone (**2**) (26 mg), melianodiol (**3**) (23 mg), and oplopanone (**5**) (18 mg) were isolated.

### Bioactivity screening

_In vitro_ trypomastigote forms of _T. cruzi_ (Y strain) and brine shrimp lethality (BSL) assays were performed according to established protocols (Alves et al. 1999; Alkofahi et al. 1989). Agar diffusion and minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) methods (Bauer et al. 1996; Washington and Sutter, 1980) were used to evaluate the antimicrobial activity of the fractions and compounds against the following microorganisms: _Bacillus subtilis_ (CCT 2471), _B. cereus_ (CCT 1436), _Staphylococcus aureus_ (ATCC 6538), _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ (ATCC 15442), _Escherichia coli_ (CCT 1457), and _Micrococcus roseus_ (CCT 1469).

## Discussion

The bioassay results for the extract, fractions, and isolates are shown in Table 1. The pyranocumarin 3-(1'-1'-dimethylallyl)-lomatin (**1**) is known only as product of synthesis. This is the first report of its isolation as a single enantiomer natural product displaying interesting _in vitro_ activity against _T. cruzi_ (IC50 = 0.14 mg/ml). This compound was characterized by spectral data and literature comparison (Salva et al. 1990). The absolute (_S_)-configuration of **1** [[ ]\({}_{\text{D}}\) = +12.7 (_c_ 0.04; CHCl3]) was determined by the Mosher method for secondary alcohols (Preite, 1994).

Brine shrimp bioassay-guided fractionation led to the isolation of the known cytotoxic prodimonoid melianone, identified through comparison of its spectral data with the literature (Itokawa et al. 1992; Nakanishi et al. 1986) (**2**), which showed an IC50 value of 38 mg/ml corroborating that BSL is a good pre-screen test for cytotoxicity. The results obtained here also reinforce the feasibility of the brine shrimp lethality bioassay as a pre-screen system to detect extracts active against _T. cruzi_, as suggested by Alves et al. (1999). Melianodiol (**3**) (LD50 value = 2.6 mg/ml), also identified through comparison of its spectral data with the literature (Merrien and Polonsky, 1971), was less active than **2** (LD50 value = 41 mg/ml).

All extracts and pure compounds tested for antimicrobial activity were inactive against _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ and _Escherichia coli_. Among the microorganisms and compounds assayed, only _B. subtilis_, _B. cereus_, _S. aureus_ and _M. roseus_ were inhibited significantly by melianodiol (**3**) at 100 mg/ml; this compound showed a good diffusion on agar media, presenting activity against Gram-positive bacteria. These results are presented in Table 1. The MIC of melianodiol (**3**) was 50 mg/ml against _B. subtilis_ and _B. cereus_ and 25 mg/ml against _S. aureus_ and _M. roseus_.

Germancrene D (**6**) is frequently found in Rutaceae species; its prevalent occurrence may be significant in the communication between the plant and its environment, possibly as an insecticide (Marr and Tang, 1992). Germacrene D, identified through comparison of its spectral data with the literature (Kubeczka, 1979), showed a moderate _in vitro_ trypanoidal activity (IC50 value = 0.135 mg/ml), considering the reference chemoprophylatic drug crystal violet (IC50 value of 7.5 mg/ml). Compound 1,6 -dihydroxy-4-(15)-eudesmene (**4**) (Gutierrez and Herz, 1988) and oplopanone (**5**) (Herz and Watanabe, 1983) were characterized by comparison of their spectral data with the literature. This is the first report of these sesquiterpenes from Rutaceae. They did not display any significant activity on the models tested.

The pentacyclic triterpenes isobaurerenol (**7**) and iso-multiflorenol (**8**) were inactive in all bioassays. Isolated as a mixture, these compounds were identified by comparison of 1H and 13C NMR, and EIMS data with literature values (Olea and Roque, 1990; Tanaka and Matsunaga, 1988). Friedelin (**9**) was also inactive and was identified based on comparison of 1H NMR and 13C NMR literature data (Ahmad and Rahman, 1994). Pentacyclic triterpenes are not common in the Rutaceae, but compound **9** has also been reported from the Rutotideae (Dreyer et al. 1972).

It was observed that the crude extract presented increased activities when fractionated for BSL and antimicrobial activity. The fractions obtained were less active for trypanocidal activity than the crude extract.

The results obtained in this study indicated the interesting phytochemical potential of _Raulinaa echinata_. Compounds **1** and **6** showed considerable activity against trypanastigote forms of _T. cruzi_, was compared with crystal violet. Based on these results, it is possible to drive future research toward new bioactive

## Page 4

compounds, selecting active structural classes for synthetic or photochemical survey.

### Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Professor Ademir Reis for collecting and identifying the plant material, CAPES/PIDCT and UNIVALI for PhD sponsorship of MWB, and FAPESP, CNPq/ PRONEX, and MCT/FINEP for financial support.

## References

* Ahmad and Rahman (1994) Ahmad, V.U., Rahman, A.U.: _Handbook of Natural Products Data_, vol 2. Elsevier Amsterdam, 1994.
* Alkofahi et al. (1989) Alkofahi, A., Rupprecht, J.K., Anderson, J.E., McLaughlin, J.L., Mikolajczak, K.L., Scott, B.A.: Search for New Pesticides from Higher Plants. In: _Insecticides of Plant Origin_. Arnason, J.T.; Philogene, B.J.R.; Morand, P. (Eds.) Washington, American Chemical Society, 1989, p. 28-29.
* Alves et al. (1999) Alves, T.M.D., Alves, R.D., Romanha, A.J., dos Santos, M.H., Nagem, T.J., Zani, C.L.: Biological activities of 7-epiclusionane. _J. Nat. Prod., 62_: 369-371, 1999.
* Bauer et al. (1996) Bauer, A.W., Kirby, W.M.M., Sherris, J.C., Turck, M.: Antibiotic susceptibility testing by a standardized single disk method. _Am. J. Clin. Path., 45_: 493-496, 1996.
* Cowan and Smith (1973) Cowan, R.S., Smith, L.B.: Rutaceas. IN: _Flora Ilustrada Catarinense_. Herbario Barbosa Rodrigues (HBR), 1973.
* Dreyer et al. (1972) Dreyer, D.L., Pickering, V., Cohan, P.: Distribution of limonoids in the Rutaceae. _Phytochemistry, 11:_ 705-713, 1972.
* Gutierrez and Herz (1988) Gutierrez, A.B., Herz, W.: Guaianolides and other constituents of _Helianthus microcephalus_. _Phytochemistry, 27:_ 2225-2228, 1988.
* Herz and Watanabe (1983) Herz, W., Watanabe, K.: Sesquiterpene alcohols and triterpenoids from _Liatris microcephala_. _Phytochemistry, 22:_ 1457-1459, 1983.
* Itokawa et al. (1992) Itokawa, H., Kishi, E., Morita, H., Takeya, K.: Cytotoxic quasinoids and rituximab-type triterpenes from the woods of _Eurycoma longifolia_. _Chem. Pharm. Bull., 40:_ 1053-1055, 1992.
* Kubeczka (1979) Kubeczka, K.H.: Essential oils from the Apiaceae. 5. Germacrene D from _Falcaria vulgaris_. _Phytochemistry, 18:_ 1006-1067, 1979.
* Marr et al. (1992) Marr, K.L., Tang, C.S.: Volatile insecticidal compounds and chemical variability of Hawaiian _Zanthoxylum_ (Rutaceae) species. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol., 20:_ 209-217, 1992.
* Merrien and Polonsky (1971) Merrien, A., Polonsky, J.: The natural occurrence of melanodiol and its diacetate in _Samadera madagascariensis_ (Simaroubaceae): Model experiments on melanodiol directed towards simarolide. _Chem. Commun.,_ 261-263, 1971.
* Nakanishi et al. (1986) Nakanishi, T., Inada, A., Lavie, D.: A new trivellane-type triterpenoid derivative, lipomelanol from fruits of _Melia toosomala_ Sieb et Zucc. _Chem. Pharm. Bull., 34:_ 100-104, 1986.
* Olea and Roque (1990) Olea, R.S.G., Roque, N.F.: Analise de misturas de triterpenes por RMN de \({}^{13}\)C. _Quim. Nova, 13:_ 278-281, 1990.
* Preite (1994) Preite, M.D.: Determinacion de excesos enantiomericos y asignacion de configuraciones absolutas por analisis de resonancia magnetica nuclear. _Quim. Nova, 17:_ 137-151, 1994.
* Salva et al. (1990) Salva, J., Luis, F.R., Pando, E., Massanet, G.M., Galan, R.H.: Synthesis of C-8 prenylated and angular 3-(1',1'-dimethylallyl)cumarins. _Heterocycles, 31:_ 255-258, 1990.
* Tanaka and Matsunaga (1988) Tanaka, R., Matsunaga, S.: Triterpene constituents from _Eurphorbia supina. Phytochemistry, 27:_ 3579-3584, 1988.
* Washington and Sutter (1980) Washington, J.A., Sutter, V.L.: Dilution susceptibility test: agar and macro-broth dilution procedures In: Lennette, E.: _Manual of Clinical of Microbiology,_ 3rd Ed. Washington: American Society for Microbiology, 1980, p. 453-458.

## Index

\(\alpha\) (\(\alpha\)) (\(\beta\)) (

