# 10.1039@c3cc46213g.pdf

## Page 1



[

[

[

###### Abstract

This is an _Accepted Manuscript_, which has been through the RSC Publishing peer review process and has been accepted for publication.

## 1 Introduction

The _Accepted Manuscript_ is a collection of papers, which are published online shortly after acceptance, which is prior to technical editing, formatting and proof reading. This free service from RSC Publishing allows authors to make their results available to the community, in a reliable form, before publication of the edited article. This _Accepted Manuscript_ will be replaced by the edited and formatted _Advance Article_ as soon as this is available.

To cite this manuscript please use its permanent Digital Object Identifier (DOI*), which is identical for all formats of publication.

## 2 More information about _Accepted Manuscript_ can be found in the

### Information for Authors

Please note that technical editing may introduce minor changes to the text and/or graphics contained in the manuscript submitted by the author(s) which may alter content, and that the standard **Terms & Conditions** and the **ethical guidelines** that apply to the journal are still applicable. In no event shall the RSC be held responsible for any errors or omissions in these _Accepted Manuscript_ manuscripts or any consequences arising from the use of any information contained in them.



## Page 2

Biosynthetic pathway of sesquiterpene lactones in _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ and their localization in leaf tissues by MALDI imaging

Adriana A. Lopes, Edieidia S. Pina, Denise B. Silva, Ana Maria S. Pereira, Maria Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Fernando B. Da Costa, Norberto P. Lopes, and Monica T. Pupo

# Abstract

The biosynthetic route for epoxygenaselete esters of the sesquiterpene lactones (STL) ucydalin and enhydrin from _in vitro_ cultures of _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ (Asteraceae) was investigated with \({}^{13}\)C- precursors for the first time in the literature. Photomicroscope analyses and studies using MALDI-MS imaging confirmed that glandular trichomes accumulate STL.

## Smallanthus sonchifolius

(Poepp & Endl.) H. Robinson (Asteraceae) is popularly known as _yacon_ and has attracted worldwide attention because of its wide range of medicinal and nutritional properties,1 despite its reported renal toxicity.2 The 15 melampolide-type sesquiterpene lactones (STL) ucydalin (**1**) and enhydrin (**2**) are the major constituents of the _S. sonchifolius_ leaves. Enhydrin (**2**) has been shown to exhibit anti-inflammatory,3 antimicrobial,45 and anti-diabetic activities.6 There is a significant amount of information on the structural 30 aspects of such STL7 and on their biological activities, but few studies about STL biosynthesis. Only two feeding experiments have been reported for the elucidation of the biosynthetic pathways of STL in Asteraceae. In both studies, each plant produced STL via different terpene pathways.8,9 Dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAP) and isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) are the universal precursors in the biosynthesis of terpenoids. The biosynthesis of IPP can proceed via two different pathways in plants: mevalonate (MVA) and 2-C-methyl-D-erythrinol-4-phosphate (MEP) pathways.10 Despite a significant amount of recent research in this area, primarily on the establishment of the MVA and MEP chemical reactions,11 knowledge pertaining to the contribution of both pathways in the biosynthesis of different plant terpenoids remains limited.

We report herein the complete elucidation of STL **1** and **2** biosynthetic pathway from _Smallanthus sonchifolius_ using 1-\({}^{13}\)C-D-glucose, 1,2-\({}^{13}\)C-mercaptoethanolactene, 2-\({}^{13}\)C-sodium acetate and L-[U-\({}^{13}\)C\({}_{6}\)]-isoleucine as precursors. Nodal segments of _S. sonchifolitis_ were sterilized and inoculated on solid and liquid Mursahige & Skoog media12 supplemented with the precursors \({}^{46}\) described above and allowed to grow aseptically until the appropriate establishment of plantlets had formed.

First of all, segments of _S. sonchifolitis_ were sterilized and inoculated on solid Murashige & Skoog medium12 supplemented with 1-\({}^{13}\)C-D-glucose. An acetone extract from fresh shoots of _S. sonchifolitis_ was prepared after eight weeks of culture and fractionated via column chromatography and HPLC to yield **1** and **2**. The patterns of incorporation of labeled substrates were determined by quantitative \({}^{13}\)C NMR by comparing the relative intensities of the labeled and non-labeled STL signals for **1** and **2**.

The \({}^{13}\)C enrichment patterns of **1** and **2**, after 1-\({}^{13}\)C-D-glucose metabolism (Fig. 1), indicated that the three isoprene building blocks were predominantly formed via the MEP pathway in the STL framework. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of \({}^{13}\)C-labeled **1** revealed enhancement of the signals at C-2 and C-14; C-8 and C-8; 13; and C-6 and C-15, thus indicating incorporation of label into the corresponding C-1 and C-5 of IPP derived from the MEP pathway as shown in Fig. 1. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of labeled **2** presented a similar enrichment pattern for the corresponding carbon atoms from the sesquiterpene.



## Page 3

sodium acetate and 1-13C-D-glucose. After nine weeks of culture, an acetone extract from fresh shoots of _S. sonchofilus_ was prepared and fractionated as described above to yield **1** and **2**. The 13C enrichment patterns of **1** and **2**, after feeding with 1,2-13C2-s-mevalonolactone, showed that there was no incorporation of 1,2-13C2-mevalonolactone in the biosynthesis of **1** and **2**. This result confirms the strong evidence that MEP is the single pathway involved in sesquiterpene skeleton synthesis. Administering L-[U-13C4]-elsucenue thus resulted in multiplet signs at positions 1', 2', 3', 4' and 5' of coprosapazelae moieties from **1** and **2**, therefore indicating operation of the amino acid on arrangement of branched-chain ester. The remarkable multiplet signs observed arise from couplings between 13C and 13C directly attached to each other at the acyl side chain.
* Synthesis of L-isoleucine from 1-13C-D-glucose resulted in labeling pattern of positions 1', 3', 4' and 5' of coprosapazelae moieties from **1** and **2**. Isotopic labeling from 2-13C-sodium acetate experiments led to enrichment at positions 1', 3' and 4' of epoxysapazelae moieties from **1** and **2**. Interestingly, the C-5' did not exhibit isotopic enrichment in the branched-chain ester of **1** and **2** from 2-13C-sodium acetate metabolism. Osaloacetate (via the tricarboxylic acid cycle), aspartate, threonine and glutamate are key intermediates of L-isoleucine biosynthesis. Pyruvate would be enriched from 1-13C-D-glucose metabolism, but not enriched from 2-13C-sodium acetate pathway.16

These results obtained from 13C-precursor feeding experiments explained why no isotopic enrichment at position C-5' was observed in the branched-chain ester after 2-13C-sodium acetate was administered to _S. sonchofilus_. Furthermore, 2-13C-sodium acetate has not been incorporated into the sesquiterpene scaffolds, providing additional evidence for exclusive MEP pathway involvement. Moreover, the biosynthetic intermediates involved in sesquiterpene lactone biosynthesis were monitored by LC-HRESIMS in the crude extract of leaves from _S. sonchofilus_. LC-HRESIMS analysis detected intermediates **a** (m/z 433.1854 [M+H]') and **b** (m/z 449.1804 [M+H]'), suggesting that the epoxidation occurs in the final steps of compound **2** biosynthesis.These results are in agreement with literature data, because SIL with branched-chain esters derived from angelic and piglets which pentoxidation have been also isolated from _S. sonchofilus_.17 These results suggest that epoxidation might occur at the final steps of biosynthesis. Finally, the complete biosynthesis involves first sesquiterpene skeleton synthesis, followed by the acylation by the angelic acid moiety (derived from L-isoleucine) at C-8 of STL scaffolds (derived from MEP pathway) and further oxidations.

It has been reported that STL are produced and accumulated in glandular trichomes from leaves and are important chemotaxonomic markers of the Asteraceae in several species.18 A further expansion of the glandular trichomes was observed microscopically; _in vitro_, the plant possesses the same glandular trichomes as a cultivated plant. MALDI (Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization) imaging procedures have the potential to provide new insights of proteins and drugs within animal tissues.19 MALDI imaging has been applied to analyze plant tissues, but this remains an underplexped area.20 Generally, it has been used on intact surfaces, such as leaves and petals,20 however, the laser can penetrate deeply and several layers of cells can be analyzed. Intact (abaxial andaxial surfaces) and \(a\) transversal sections of leaves from _in vitro_. _S. sonchofilus_ were analyzed by MALDI imaging to examine the tissue distributions of STL, mainly compounds **1** and **2**. The images from leaves of _S. sonchofilus_, cultivated _in vitro_, were performed by MALDI in positive mode acquiring MS and MS/MS data. On the intact surfaces of leaves, the reconstructed images of adaxial and abaxial sides for uvedalin and enhydrin (_m/z 471_ [M+Na]' and 487 [M+Na]', respectively) are shown in Fig. 2 (B, C), which represent a part of leaf intact surface. Higher amounts of these compounds were observed in the abaxial surface and its foliar periphery. In the transversal section, the ions of **1** and **2** were observed in glandular trichomes (Fig. 2E-F) by MS mode. The analyses were carried out in the whole surfaces of transversal sections, and some parts were expanded for visualization (Fig. 2D). This trichome type was previously reported from leaves of _S. sonchofilus_ in adaxial and abaxial surfaces.21

Isolated **1** and **2** were analyzed by LIFT and the fragmentation patterns from sodulated ions were studied. The main fragment ions identifying these compounds were established because they were important to yield reliable images from diagnostic fragment ions, and then the proposed tissue distribution of **1** and **2** was confirmed. Fig. 2G-H show the fragment ions of _m/z_ 371 and 355 obtained from _m/z_ 487 [M+Na]' (**1**) and _m/z_ 471 [M+Na]' (**2**) in transversal sections, respectively. They confirm the presence of enhydrin and uredalin glandular trichomes using a more reliable method, MS/MS mode. These images constructed with the fragment ions demonstrate the same distribution for enhydrin and uredalin. Although STL have been reported in glandular trichomes,22 we confirmed the presence of such compounds in glandular trichomes without doubts using MALDI imaging technique.

## Conclusions

In conclusion, our studies on the biosynthesis of **1** and **2** have shown that the sesquiterpene skeleton is derived from the MEP pathway. We have also established the L-isoleucine origin of the ester side chain in the sesquiterpene lactones. These results

Fig. 2: Optical images of intact leaf surface – adaxial side (A) and transversal sections of leaves (D) of _S. sonchofilus_. MALDI-MS images reconstructed with ions _m/z_ 471 [M+Na]′ (**1**) and 487 [M+Na]′ (**2**) from (abaxial (**B**) and adaxial (**C**) sides) and with _m/z_ 487 [M+Na]′ (**C**) and 471 [M+Na]′ (**F**) from transversal sections of leaves. MALDI-MS/MS images (exposim) reconstructed with fragment ions _m/z_ 371 of enhydrin (**G**) and _m/z_ 355 of uredalin (**H**). (**Ab: abaxial side, **Ad: adaxial side, **GT**: as glandular trichome, **Mi: mid rib)

## Page 4

showed the involvement of both the amino acid and MEP pathways in a mixed sesquiterpene biosynthesis. In plants, synthesis of terpenoids is thought to be compartmentalized in such a way that mono- and diterpenes (also carotenoids and s chlorophylls) are produced via the MEP pathway in the plastics, whereas sesquiterpenes and triterpenes are made in the cytosol via the MVA pathway.23 However, others have reported sesquiterpenoids biosynthesized by the MEP pathway.24 Our results, together with previously reported data, seem to suggest that plants do not synthesize sesquiterpenes exclusively in the cytoplasm.25 It is possible that there are two cellular compartments involved into STL biosynthesis: the formation of the sesquiterpene (MEP pathway) and isoleucine (amino acid metabolism) occurs in plastids, and the formation of intermediate oxaloacetate by the TCA occurs in the mitochondria. This is the first report of a biosynthetic study of STL from _S. sonofibrilolus_ and the experiments also allowed us to establish the biosynthetic pathway for oxygenalgae esters with \({}^{13}\)C-precursors for the first time in the literature.

## References

- This work was supported by grants#2008/01220-6 and 2008/09540-0 São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) and Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessosal de 23 Nivel Superior (CAPES). This research was developed as part of the studies performed at the INCT-INBEQMeDI and the CEPID-CIBFar. We also thank Prof. Jon Clardy (Harvard Medical School) for L-[U-\({}^{13}\)C6]-isoleucine supply.

## Notes and references

- 10 \({}^{\circ}\) Facultade de Ciencias Farmaceuticas de Ribeirao Preto/Nielco de Pesquisa en Produtos Naturais e Shaticos, Universidade de São Paulo, Avenida do Cafe s/n, 14040093, Brazil. Fax: +551636024710; E-mail: munova@cfr.usp.br
- 10 Unidade de Biotechnologia, Universidade de Ribeirao Preto, Av.
- 15 Cosmos Reunzo, 22011, 4096900, Brazil
- 1 Centro de Ciencias Exatas e de Tecnologia, Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Via Washington Luis, Km 235, 13565905, Brazil
- 1 Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: 10C 40 NMR data of STL (Table S1 and S2); 10C NMR spectra of STL incorporation of \({}^{13}\)C-precursors (Fig. S1-S9); Isosynthetic pathway of STL from 1-\({}^{13}\)C-glucose, 2-1C-sodium acetate and L[U-\({}^{13}\)C6]-isoleucine (Fig. S10); Chemical structures and accurate mass measurements of the STL intermediates by LC-HRESIMO analysis (Fig. 45 S11); Photomicroscopy of leaves from _S. sonofibrilos_ showing glandular trichomes of _ex vitro_ and _in vitro_ plants (Fig. S12); High resolution mass spectra of STL (Fig. S13); Analysis of the STL intermediates biosynthetic (a and b) by LC-HESIMS (Fig. S14); MS/MS spectrum of STL and leaf extract (Fig. S15-S17). See DOI: 10.1039/0000000/


