# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)00226-0.pdf

## Page 1



# Antifungal amides from _Piper hispidum_ and _Piper tuberculatum_

Hosana Maria D. Navickiene

Alberto Camilo Alecio

Massuo Jorge Kato

Vanderlan da S. Bolzani

Maria Claudia M. Young

Alberto Jose Cavalheiro

Maysa Furlan

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14800-900, Aeraqpara-SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 26077, 05599-970, Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil Sergao de Fisologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, CP 4005, 10051, Sao Paulo-SP, Brazil

Received 7 January 2000; received in revised form 21 April 2000

###### Abstract

_Piper hispidum_ and _Piper tuberculatum_ accumulate amides bearing isobutyl, pyrrolidine, dihydropyridone and piperidine moieties. The isolation and characterization of several representatives including two hitherto unreported amides were performed by chromatographic techniques and by analysis of spectroscopic data. The antifungal activity of each amide was determined by direct bioautography against _Cladosporium sphareospermum_. (c) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Keywords: Piper hispidum_, _Piper tuberculatum_; Piperaceae; Amides; Antifungal activity +
Footnote †: journal: Phytochemistry

## 1 Introduction

Various amides bearing isobutyl, pyrrolidine, dihydropyridone and piperidine moieties have been isolated from Piperaceae species (Parmar, 1997). These amides have generated interest as a result of their potent insecticidal properties (Miyako et al., 1989). In a previous paper, we described the structure of the antifungal amide _N_-[7-(3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(_Z_),4(_Z_)-hep tadienoyl]pyrrolidine isolated from the leaves of _Piper hispidum_ H.B.K. (Alecio et al., 1998).

In this paper, we describe the isolation, structure elucidation and evaluation of the antifungal activity of two new amides, (_3Z_,_5Z_)-_N_-isobutyl-8-(3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-heptacionamide (**1**), (_S_Z_)-N_-(12,13,14-trimetho xycinnamoyl)-D\({}^{3}\)-pyridin-2-one (**2**) and also of eight known antifungal amides _N_-[3-(6'-methoxy-3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(_Z_)-propenoylpyrrolidine (**3**), piperamine (**4**), _N_-(12,13,14-trimethoxydihydrocinnamoyl)-D\({}^{3}\) -pyridin-2-one (**5**), piperatine (**6**), piperine (**7**), D\({}^{\alpha,\beta,}\)-dihydropyiperine (**8**), 5,6-dihydropyiperlonguminine (**9**) and pellitorine (**10**). The amides isolated from stems of _Piper hispidum_ (**1**, **3** and **4**) and from seeds of _Piper tuberculatum_ (**2**, **5-10**) were active against the fungus _Cladosporium sphareospermum_ as evaluated by direct bioauto graphy (Homans and Fuchs, 1970).

## 2 Results and discussion

A CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):MeOH (2:1) extract of the stems of _P. hispidum_ was subjected to silica gel column chromatography, followed by HPLC purification to afford the compounds **1, 3** and **4**.

Compound **1**, has a molecular formula C\({}_{18}\)H\({}_{23}\)NO\({}_{3}\) as determined by analysis of electrospray mass spectrum (ES-MS) and of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data. The IR spectrum exhibited bands at 1640 (conjugated carbonyl group), 1620 (conjugated double bond), and 925 (methylenedioxyphenyl group) cm \({}^{1}\). Its \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1) revealed the presence of a 3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl group by the signal at \(d\) 5.91 (2H, _s_), and four olefine protons which showed signals at \(d\) 5.45 (1H, \(d\), \(J\)3,4 = 12.0 Hz), 6.38 (1H, _dd_, \(J\)4,3 and 4,5 = 12.0 Hz), 7.24 (1H, _dd_, \(J\)5,4 and 5,6 = 12.0 Hz) and 5.94 (1H, _dt_, \(J\)6,5 and 6,7 = 12.0 and 7.0 Hz) indicative of an a,b,g,d-unsaturated carbonyl system. The coupling constant values indicated that both double bonds

## Page 2

possess the Z configuration (Alecio et al., 1998; Shah et al. 1986). The assignments of these olefinic protons were confirmed by analysis of the \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H COSY spectrum and by comparison with the literature data (Shah et al., 1986). The irradiation at the frequencies of the H-3 and H-4 collapsed the signals of H-4 and of H-3 to a doublet and to a singlet, respectively. The assignments of methylene protons H-8 at \(\delta\) 2.62 (2H, \(t\), \(J_{8,7}\) = 7.0 Hz) and H-7 at \(\delta\) 2.46 (2H, m) were confirmed by the DQ-COSY spectrum which showed mutual correlation between such protons. Additional correlation between signal assigned to the proton H-7 and to that of methine proton H-6 (\(\delta\) 5.94, 1H) could be also observed.

The presence of a isobutyl moiety was confirmed by the signals at \(\delta\) 3.13 (2H, \(dd\), \(J_{1^{\prime},2^{\prime}}\) = 7.0 Hz), \(\delta\) 1.80 (1H, \(m\)) and \(\delta\) 0.92 (6H, \(d\), \(J_{3^{\prime},2^{\prime}



## Page 3

exchange with D2O in the 1H NMR experiment. The 13C NMR data (Table 1) of **1** are in accordance with the proposed structure. The low-field region of the spectrum exhibited signals assigned to an amide carbonyl at \(d\) 166.5, ten olefinic and/or aromatic carbons, six saturated carbons [d_C 46.7, 35.1, 34.9, 28.6 and 20.1(2x)], and a methylenedioxyphenyl group at \(d\) 100.7. The assignments of the signals for the aromatic carbons are based on comparison with data described in the literature (Alecio et al., 1998; Araujo-Junior et al. 1997) and indicated that a 3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl moiety is present. The structure of **1** was determined as (3\(Z\),5_Z_)-_N_-isobutyl-8-(3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-heptadienamide.

A CH2Cl2:MeOH (2:1) extract from seeds of _P. tuberculatum_ was fractionated by column chromatography on silica gel followed by preparative TLC to afford compounds **2** and **5-10**.

Compound **2**, was shown to have a molecular formula C17H19NO5 by analysis of electrospray mass spectrum (ES-MS) and of 13C NMR data. Its IR spectrum revealed absorption bands at 1757 (conjugated carbonyl group), at 1615 (conjugated double bond) and at 1216 cm 1 (asymmetric C-O-C stretching). The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of **2** revealed the presence of methoxyphenyl groups by the signals at \(d\) 3.84 (6H, _s_), \(d\) 3.85 (3H, _s_), one aromatic proton signal at \(d\) 6.76 (2H, _s_) which suggested a 12,13,14-trimethoxyphenyl group. Assignments of signals related to four olefinic protons were determined based on analysis of DQCOSY spectrum. The spin systems derived from H-8, H-9 and H-3, H-4 were readily recognized by starting with the 1H doublet at \(d\) 6.48 assigned to H-8 (_J_8,9 = 12.4 Hz) which showed a cross-peak with the 1H doublet at \(d\) 6.71 assigned to H-9 (_J_9,8 = 12.4 Hz). The coupling constant values indicated that this double bond possesses the \(Z\) configuration. The attribution of this configuration was corroborated by the shielded signals of H-8 and H-9 in the \(Z\) isomer when compared with the \(E\) isomer (Duh et al., 1990). The doublet of triplet (1H) at \(d\) 5.98 (_J_3,4 and 3,5 = 9.7 and 1.9 Hz) assigned to H-3 showed correlation with H-4. The doublet of triplet (1H) at \(d\) 6.89 (_J_4,3 and 4,5 = 9.7 and 4.3 Hz) assigned to H-4 showed a cross peak with the signal at \(d\) 5.98 (_J_3,4 and 3,5 = 9.7 and 1.9 Hz) attributed to H-3 and with the multiplet centered at \(d\) 2.40 attributed to H-5. This last proton also showed a correlation with the triplet at \(d\) 3.97 (_J_6,5 = 7.0 Hz) assigned to H-6. The low-field region of the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) of **2** exhibited signals assigned to six aromatic carbons, four olefinic carbons, besides two carbonyl groups at \(d\) 165.7 and 168.1. The assignments

## Page 4

of the carbonyl groups were based on analysis of the HMBC spectrum. The signal at \(d\) 168.1 was assigned to the carbonyl at C-7 based on its correlation with the proton signals at \(d\) 6.48 (H-8) and \(d\) 6.71 (H-9). The signal of a carbonyl group at \(d\) 165.7 was assigned to C-2 based on its cross-peak with the proton signal at \(d\) 5.98 (H-3) and 6.89 (H-4). The high-field region exhibited signals assigned to two saturated carbons [_d_c 24.8 (C-5) and 41.1 (C-6)] and to methoxyphenyl groups at \(d\) 56.1 and 60.7. HETCOR analysis were used to assign the signals for all proton-bearing carbons, and thus the structure of amide **2** was defined as 8(_Z_)-_N_-(12,13,14-trimethoxycinnamoyl)-D3-pyridin-2-one.

_N_- (12, 13, 14- Trimethoxyphenylhydrocinnamoyl)-D3 -pyridin -2- one (**5**), D_a_b_- dihydropyiperine (**8**) and 5,6-dihydropyiperlonguminine (**9**) have the molecular formula C17H21NO5, C17H21NO3 and C16H21NO3, respectively, by analysis of the MS data. Their 1H NMR spectra were identical to that published for the same compounds previously isolated from _Piper rugosum_ (Maxwell and Rampersad, 1991), _Piper guineense_ (Parmar et al., 1997) and _P. tuberculatum_ (Bernard et al., 1995), respectively. Their 13C NMR spectral data (Table 2) are published here for the first time.

_N_-[3-(6'-methoxy-3',4'-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2(Z)-propenyl]pyrrolidine (**3**) was previously isolated from _Piper pequloides_ (Shah et al., 1986) and _P. hispidum_ (Alecio et al., 1998). Piperamine (**4**) was previously obtained from _Piper nigrum_ (Kiuchi et al., 1988) and _P. hispidum_ (Alecio et al., 1998). Piplartine (**6**) was previously described from _Piper aborescens_ (Duh et al., 1990) and _P. tuberculatum_ (Filho et al. 1981). Piperine (**7**) was previously described from _P. aborescens_ and _P. tuberculatum_ (Araujo-Junior et al., 1997) and pellitorine (**10**) had been reported from _Cissampelos glaberrina_ (Rosario et al., 1996).

The antifungal activity of amides **1-10** was evaluated by means of direct bioautography in a TLC bioassay (Homans and Fuchs, 1970). The detection limits of compounds **1-10** are shown in Table 3 and were performed according to Rahalison et al. (1994). The highest sample amount tested was 10 mg; amides producing no inhibition of _C. sphaerospermum_ growth at that level were considered inactive.

The minimum quantity of compounds **1-4**, **6**, **8-10** necessary to inhibit growth of the fungus on the TLC plates was determined as 5.0 mg, while for **7** and **5** the values were 1.0 and 0.1 mg, respectively. The values for **7** and **5** were comparable to those observed for the reference compounds miconazole (0.5 mg) and nystatin (0.5 mg).

_P. hispidum_ and _P. tuberculatum_ have accumulated amides with _cis_ geometry in their side chain, which is a structural feature quite rare in nature (Alecio et al., 1998; Shah et al., 1986).

## Experimental

### Instrumentation and chromatography materials

Silica gel (Merck 230-400 mesh) was used for all column chromatography unless otherwise stated and sol

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline Carbons & **5** & **8** & **9** \\ \hline
2 & 165.4 (s) & 43.0 (t) & 166.0 (s) \\
3 & 125.8 (d) & 25.5 (t) & 120.8 (d) \\
4 & 145.2 (d) & 24.6 (t) & 142.6 (d) \\
5 & 24.6 (t) & 26.7 (t) & 33.8 (t) \\
6 & 41.0 (t) & 46.8 (t) & 34.1 (t) \\

## Page 5

vents were redistilled prior to use. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, using CDCl3 as a solvent and TMS as reference. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer. ES-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. HPLC separations were performed on a Shimadzu LC-10AS using a reverse phase column (Waters Nova Pack, C18; 3.9 x 150 mm) eluted with MeOH:H2O (3:2), flow rate of 0.5 ml/min and detection at 260 nm. Elemental analysis were performed on a Elemental Analyser 2400 CHN Perkin-Elmer.

### Plant material

_Piper hispidum_ H.B.K. stems were collected in Parque Estadual do Morro do Diabo, Teodoro Sampaio, SP and identified by Dr. Waldir Mantovani (Instituto de Biociencias -- USP). _P. tuberculatum_ Jacq. seeds were collected in the Campus do INPA (Manaus) and identified by Dr. Guillermo E. D. Paredes (Universidad Nacional Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Peru). The voucher specimens are deposited at Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias -- USP, Sao Paulo.

### Antifungal assay

The microorganism used in the antifungal assay _C.phaerospermum_ (Penzig) SPC 491 has been maintained at the Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo--SP, Brazil. For the antifungal assay -- 10 ul of solutions corresponding to 100 ug of crude extract and 10.0, 5.0, 1.0, 0.5, 0.1 ug of pure compound were applied to pre-coated TLC plates. TLC plates were developed with hexane:EtOAc (7:3) and dried for complete removal of solvents. The chromatograms were sprayed with a spore suspension of _C. spharoospermum_ in glucose and salt solution (Rahalison et al., 1994) and incubated for 72 h in darkness in a moistened chamber at 25degC. A clear inhibition zone appeared against a dark background indicated the minimal amount of **1-10** required (Table 3). Nystatin (0.5 ug) and miconazole (0.5 ug) were used as positive controls.

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

The dried and powdered stems of _P. hispidum_ (28.0 g) were extracted with CH2Cl2 (3x150 ml), for two days at room temperature. The resulting CH2Cl2 extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford a green gum (1.60 g). Part of this extract (1.49 g) was applied to a silica gel column (300 g), and eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 100%) to give 24 fractions. Fraction 3 (0.203 g) was applied to a silica gel column (2.00 g) eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give **1** (0.012 g). Fraction 28 (0.198 g) was subjected to a silica gel column chromatography, eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give **3** (0.004 g). Frs containing **4** were combined and concentrated in vacuo to give a green gum (0.021 g), which was further purified by reversed-phase HPLC as described above. The dried and powdered seeds of _P. tuberculatum_ (24.3 g) were extracted CH2Cl2:MeOH (2:1) (2 x 600 ml) for two days at room temperature. The resulting extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford a green gummy resin (2.87 g). Part of this extract (2.00 g) was fractionated by chromatographic column chromatography [eluted with Hex:EtOAc (4:1) with gradient] to give 36 fractions (15 ml). Fraction 21 (0.043 g) was submitted to preparative TLC [Hex:EtOAc (3:2), three elutions] to yield **2** (0.024 g) and **6** (0.003 g). Fraction 20 (0.146 g) was submitted to preparative TLC [Hex:EtOAc (3:2), three elutions] to yield **5** (0.005 g). Fraction 19 (0.083 g) was submitted to preparative TLC [Hex:EtOAc (75:25), three elutions] to yield **7** (0.012 g) and **8** (0.007 g). Frs. 8 and 13 yielded **10** (0.079 g) and **9** (0.018 g), respectively.

### (3Z,5Z)-N-isobutyl-8-(3',4'-methylenedioxy-phenyl)-heptadienamide (1)

Found: C, 71.54; H, 7.56; N, 4.45; O, 16.43%. C18H23NO3 requires C, 71.74; H, 7.69; N, 4.65; O, 15.93%. Amorphous solid. UV \(\lambda_{\mathrm{max}}^{\mathrm{M\ddot{o}}\mathrm{M}}\) nm: 260; IR vmax (KBr): 3010, 2923, 2874, 1640, 1620, 1488, 1443, 1035, and 925 cm 1; ES-MS m/z (rel. int.): 324 [M + Na] (100); 1H and 13C NMR spectra (see Table 1).

### 8Z-N-(12,13,14-Trimethoxyscinamoyl)-D3-pyridin-2-one (2)

Found: C, 63.95; H, 6.08; N, 4.28; O, 25.68%. C17H19NO5 requires C, 64.34; H, 6.03; N, 4.41; O, 25.21%. Amorphous solid; UV \(\lambda_{\mathrm{max}}^{\mathrm{CHCl}_{\mathrm{3}}}\) nm: 332; IR vmax (KBr): 3018, 2926, 2853, 1757, 1615, 1459, 1215 cm 1; ES-MS m/z (rel. int.): 318 [M + H] (6), 342 [M + Na + H] (13), 181 (100); 1H and 13C NMR spectra (see Table 1).

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants provided by FAPESP and CNPq/PADCT. M.F., M.J.K., M.C.M.Y. and V.S.B. are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships. H.M.D.N. thanks FAPESP for providing a scholarship.

## References

* (1) Alecio, A.C., Bolzani, V da S., Young, M.C.M., Kato, M.J., Furlan, M., 1998. Antifungal amide from leaves of _Piper hispidum_. Journal of Natural Products 61, 637-639.



## Page 6

* [19] Araujo-Junior, J.X., Da-Cunha, E.V.L., Chaves, M.C. de O., Gray, A.I., 1997. Piperdarine, a piperidine alkaloid from _Piper tubercutatum_. Phytochemistry 44, 559-561.
* [20] Bernard, C.B., Krishnamurty, H.G., Chauret, D., Durst, T., Philogene, B.J.R., Sanchez-Vindas, P., Hasbun, C., Poveda, L., San Roman, L., Arnason, J.T., 1995. Insecticidal defenses of Piperaceae from the neotropics. Journal of Chemical Ecology 21, 801-814.
* [21] Duh, C.-Y., Wu, Y.-C., Wang, S.K., 1990. Cytotoxic pyridone alkaloids from _Piper aborescens_. Phytochemistry 29, 2689-2691.
* [22] Filho, R.B., Souza, M.P., Mattos, M.E.O., 1981. Piplartime-dimer A, a new alkaloid from _Piper tubercutatum_. Phytochemistry 20, 345-346.
* [23] Homans, A.L., Fuchs, A., 1970. Direct bioautography on thin-layer chromatograms as a method for detecting fungitoxic substances. Journal of Chromatography 51, 327-329.
* [24] Kiuchi, F., Nakamura, N., Tsuda, Y., Kondo, K., 1988. Studies on crude drugs effective on visceral larva migrants IV. Isolation and identification of larvicidal principles in Pepper. Chemical Pharmaceutical Bulletin 36, 2452-2465.
* [25] Maxwell, A., Rampersad, D., 1991. A new dihydropyridine and piplartine dimer from _Piper rugosum_. Journal of Natural Products 54, 1150-1152.
* [26] Miyako, M., Nakayama, I., Ohno, N. 1989. In: Annason, J.T., Philogene, B.J.R., Morand, P. (Eds.), Insecticides of Plant Origin. ACS Symposium Series. Am. Chem. Soc. Washington, DC, pp. 387-390.
* [27] Parmar, V.S., Jain, S.C., Bisht, K.S., Jain, R., Taneja, P., Jha, A., Tyagi, O.D., Prasad, A.K., Wengel, J., Olsen, C., Boll, P.M., 1997. Phytochemistry of the genus _Piper_. Phytochemistry 46, 597-673.
* [28] Rahalison, L., Hamburger, M., Monod, M., Frenk, E., Hostettmann, K., 1994. Antifungal tests in phytochemical investigations--comparison of bioautographic methods using phytoatogenic and human pathogenic fungi. Planta Medica 60, 41-44.
* [29] Rosario, S.L., Silva, A.J.R., Parente, J.P., 1996. Alkamides from _Cissampelos glaberrina_. Planta Medica 62, 376-377.
* [30] Shah, S., Kalla, A.K., Dhar, K.L., 1986. A cinnamoyl pyrrolidine amide from _Piper peeuloides_. Phytochemistry 25, 1997-1998.



