# 10.1016@0305-1978(88)90060-9.pdf

## Page 1



# The Chemosystematics of _Dictyoloma_

PAULO C. VIEIRA, ANA R. LAZARO, JOAO B. FERNANDES and M. FATIMA DAS G. F. DA SILVA

Departamento de Quimica da Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal-676, 13560-Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

The fruit and stem of _Dictyoloma vandellianum_ have yielded three limonoids and a mixture of two alkaloids. The limonoids were identified as deacetylspathelin and the corresponding 21- and 23-Y-hydroxybutenolide derivatives. The limonoids were isolated from the fruits and stem, while the alkaloids were found only in the stem. These results provide firm support for including the genus _Dictyoloma_ in the Rutaceae.

## Introduction

_Dictyoloma_ Juss. contains only two species, _D. vandellianum_ Adr. Juss. (syn. _D. incanescens_ DC) which occurs in Brazil and _D. peruvianum_ which occurs in Peru [1-3].

The taxonomy of this genus has been doubtful since its initial description in 1825, when Jussieu [4] classified it in the Rutaceae, assigning it to the tribe Zanthoxyleae. However, at the same time De Candolle [5] classified it as an ill-defined genus in the Terebinthaceae "ordo" [equivalent to the modern description of the Terebinthaceae).

According to the concept of Bentham and Hooker [6], _Dictyoloma_ belongs to the Simaroubaceae "ordo". Engler [1] first included _Dictyoloma_ in the Simaroubaceae, but later removed it to the Rutaceae, classifying _Dictyoloma_ as the single genus in the subfamily Dictyolomatoideae [2].

One simple amine [7] and two chromones [8, 9] have previously been isolated from _Dictyoloma_. In this paper we report a phyto-chemical study on _D. vandellianum_, which grows in Sao Paulo state, Brazil and discuss its chemotaxonomic position in the Rutales in the light of our findings.

## Results and Discussion

_Isolation and identification of compounds_

The chloroform extract of the fruits yielded, on chromatography over silica gel, three limonoids, sitosterol and triglycerides. The corresponding extract from the stems yielded the same limonoids and two alkaloids.

The major limonoid was identified as deacethylspathelin (**1**) and was transformed into spathelin (**1a**) when treated with acetic anhydride and pyridine. The 1H NMR spectra of **1** and **1a** were obtained (Table 1) and revealed the anticipated chemical shifts and coupling constants. Of particular note was the upfield shift of 0.35 ppm for H-15 on acetylation, which suggests that H-15 has a _cis_ relationship with H-7 [10, 11].

Treatment of **1** with a basic solution of NaOH gave the acid **2** which upon reaction with diazomethane, yielded the corresponding methyl ester **2a**. The structure of **2a** was established by 1H NMR (Table 1), the doublet for H-1 in **1** being replaced by a triplet observed at d 3.90. A similar result was obtained by Taylor [12] when spathelin was treated under the same conditions, but the product reported by Taylor was epimeric at C-1.

Treatment of **1** under acidic conditions using TsOH with MeOH as solvent, gave an interesting product characterized as the _ortho_ ester **3**. The comparison of the 1H NMR spectra obtained for **1** and **3** (Table 1) shows a shielding of the pair of doublets observed for H-1 and H-2 indicating the absence of an a,b-unsaturated ester unit. Similarly there is an upfield shift shown for the methoxy protons. In the IR spectrum of **3** there are only two bands in the carbonyl region at 1740 and 1720 cm-1. When **3** was submitted to catalytic hydrogenation, there was reduction of

## Page 2

the double bond, which was confirmed by the disappearance of the doublets at d 5.76 and 5.20.

The 3C NMR, when compared with the data obtained for **1**, proved to be useful in the total characterization of **3**. Resonances at 160.8, 118.8 and 166.0 in **1** are attributed to C-1, C-2 and C-3, respectively, while in **3**, these signals are replaced by resonances at 127.0, 134.8 and 114.7, of which the last represents the _ortho_ ester carbon.

Two further limonoids **4** and **5** were isolated. Their spectral characteristics were close to those of **1** (Table 1). The principal change observed in the 1H NMR of **4** and **5** was the absence of the furan unit, which was substituted by a g-hydroxybutyrolactone. For compound **4** this unit is characterized by the signals in the 1H NMR at d 8.41 referring to H-22 and d 6.10 for H-23. However for **5** there is a signal at d 6.02, instead of d 7.41.

The analysis of the mass spectrum of **4** and **5** reveals an increment of 32 MU in relation to **1**, suggesting the presence of two more oxygen atoms, which confirms their hydroxy-butenolide nature. When **4** and **5** were acetylated, the product obtained exhibited two different signals for the acetyl groups, indicating two hydroxy groups in the starting compounds **4** and **5**. This fact is definitive proof that one hydroxy group is located at C-7 and the other at the butylrolactone moiety.

The transformation of **1** into a mixture of **4** and **5** was carried out by means of a photo-oxidation reaction.

The alkaloids 4,7,8-trimethoxy-1-methyl-2-quinolone (**6**) and casimiroine (**7**), previously isolated from two species of Rutaceae, _Spaethelia sorbitolia_ [13] and _Casimiroa edulis_ [14], respectively, were characterized by the co-identity of spectral and physical data with that published.

## Conclusion

The alkaloids and limonoids that we have isolated from _D. vandellianum_ are typical of the Rutaceae family [15, 16], while the two chromosomes **8** and **9** described recently for the same species are know to occur sporadically in the Rutaceae and allied families [17]. All these compounds are particularly closely related to those isolated from _S. sorbitolia_, and this is evidence of the chemical affinity between the subfamilies Spathelioideae and Dictyolomatoideae.

Spathelioideae is a small subfamily of the Rutaceae [2] and it was also previously placed in the Simaroubaceae [6]. However, the presence of limonoids and anthranilic acid derivatives alkaloids (specifically **6**) was the reason used by Adams [18] to retain Spathelioideae in the Rutaceae.

Based on the above evidence, we are suggesting that _D. vandellianum_ certainly belongs to the Rutaceae, which is in agreement with the most recent proposition of Engler [2].



## Page 3



## Experimental

Melting points were obtained on a Kofler apparatus and were uncorrected. 1H NMR were recorded at 80 MHz in CDCl2 and "C NMR at 20 MHz, using TMS as internal standard. MS were run at 70 eV.

### Plant material

Fruits of _D. vendelinarum_ were collected in the Instituto Agronomico de Campinas, Sao Paulo, from a cultivated specimen. A voucher is deposited at the Herbarium of the Instituto de Biocilancias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP.

### Extraction and isolation of compounds

The fruits (700 g) were dried and extracted with CHCl, and MeOH. The CHCl2 extract (20 g) was chromatographed over Si gel (dry column, 200 g). The column was eluted with CHCl2 and subsequently fractionated into 13 parts. Fractions 6, 7 and 8 gave 800 mg of the limonoid 1 and a mixture of 4 and 5 (150 mg).

The extract obtained from the stems (3 g) after extraction with CHCl2 was chromatographed on dry column over Si gel (50 g) deactivated with 10% of water, and using CHCl2:EtOAc (3:1) for elution. The column was cut into seven parts. The fractions 3, 4 and 5 yielded 1 (200 mg), and a mixture of 4 and

## Page 4



**5** (50 mg). Fraction 7 gave a mixture (35 mg) of alkaloids **6** and **7**.

#### Characterization of isolated compounds

_Deacetylspaathelin_ (1). Amorphous solid IR \(\nu_{\rm max}^{\rm OR_{3}}\) cm ': 3480, 1740, 1720, 1700, 1630. MS _m/z_ (rel. int.): 500 (28) [M'], 359 (6), 240 (14), 208 (18), 181 (34), 123 (62), 43 (100). 'H NMR (see Table 1). 'C NMR (CDCl2, 20 MHz): 208.0 (_s_), 167.3 (_s_), 166.0 (_s_), 160.8 (_d_), 142.9 (_d_), 140.1 (_d_), 120.3 (_s_), 118.8 (_d_), 109.9 (_d_), 81.2 (_d_), 781.8 (_d_), 70.8 (_s_), 51.7 (_d_), 51.4 (_d_), 45.7 (_d_), 45.0 (_s_

