# 10.1590@S0102-695X2010005000017.pdf

## Page 1



# Antimicrobial activity of _Pterogyne nitens_ Tul., Fabaceae, against opportunistic fungi

Luis Octavio Regasini, Marcos Pivatto, Liliana Scorzoni, Tatiane Benaducci, Ana Marisa Fusco-Almeida, Maria Jose Soares Mendes Giannini, Eliezer Jesus Barreiro, Dulce Helena Siqueira Siva, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

# Abstract

As part of our ongoing research on antifungal agents from Brazilian flora, eight extracts and twelve fractions from _Pterogyne nitens_ Tul., Fabaceae, were screened for antimicrobial activity against four opportunistic fungi species (_Candida albicans_, _Candida krusci_, _Candida paralysis_ and _Cryptococcus neoformans_) using a broth microlithion method. The present investigation reveals that _P. nitens_ extracts and fractions were more effective against _C. brucei_ and _C. parapsilosis_ than against _C. neoformans_. The growth of _C. albicans_ was moderately affected by all tested extracts and fractions. The strongest effects were observed for _n_-butanol fractions from branches (MIC = 15.6 mg/mL) and roots (MIC = 31.2 mg/mL) against _C. brucei_. Additionally, the chromatographic fractionation of the _n_-butanol fraction from branches afforded four guanidine alkaloids; _N-1.N.-2.N.3_-trisopentenylguanidine (**1**), described for the first time in the Fabaceae family, and nitensidines **A-C (2-4)**, which showed moderate activity towards _C. brucei_ (MIC = 62.5 mg/mL) and _C. parapsilosis_ (MIC = 31.2 mg/mL).

## INTRODUCTION

The clinical relevance of opportunistic fungal infections have increased at an alarming rate in the second half of the twentyth century, including individuals infected with HIV, transplant recipients and patients with cancer (Clark & Hajeh, 2002; Hage et al., 2002). The most frequent causing agents of such infections are _Candida, Aspergillus_ species, _Cryptococcus neoformans_, _Mucor_ and some unusual genera such as _Fusarium, Trichosporon,

## Page 2

and _Seedosporium_(Guarro et al., 2006; Nucci & Anaissie, 2007). Furthermore, the most common treatment for these infectious diseases involves azoles and polyene macrolides, which are limited in their spectrum, and presenting severe side effects (Helmerhorst et al., 1999). For this reason, there is a need for new antifungal compounds which can serve as lead compounds for further development in antifungal chemotherapy. In this way, plants have been proven to be a rich source of antimicrobial agents (Vieira et al., 2005, Alves et al., 2006; Dias et al., 2006; Sena Filho et al., 2006; Oliveira et al., 2007; Batista-Junior et al., 2008; Cardoso-Lopes et al., 2008; Lopes et al., 2008; Tempone et al., 2008; Bertucci et al., 2009; Costa et al., 2009; Regasini et al., 2009a; Silva-Junior et al., 2009).

_Pterogyne nitens_ Tul., Fabaceae, is popularly named in South America as "tipa", "vyi-raro", "cocal", "amendoinzeiro", "balsamo" and "amendoin-bravo" according to the region where this plant grows. It is a sole beautiful legume tree from _Pterogyne_ genus, which is distributed mainly in Brazil, Bolivia, Paraguay and Argentina, reaching 5-12 m height (Burkart, 1952; Lorenzi, 1998). Cold aqueous preparations using stem barks has been used as folk medicine for treating of ascaridiasis (Crivos, 2007). Previous chemical and biological studies have demonstrated the presence of guanidine alkaloids, which exhibited cytotoxic activity against to human cancer cell lines (Bolzani et al., 1995; Ferreira et al., 2009; Regasini et al., 2007, 2009b,c) and phenolics with myeloperoxidase inhibitory and radical scavenging activities (Fernandes et al., 2008; Regasini et al., 2008a,b,c; Souza et al., 2009; Souza et al., 2010).

Thus, the aim of this investigation was to evaluate the antimicrobial activity of extracts and fractions from branches, green fruits, roots and stem barks and isolated terpene guanidine alkaloids from _P. nitens_ against four opportunistic human yeasts (_Candida albicans, C. Brusei, C. parapsilosis_ and _Cryptococcus neoformans_), by using broth microdilution test.

## MATERIAL AND METHODS

### Plant material

Roots, branches, green fruits and stem barks of _Pterogyne nitens_ Tul., Fabaceae, were collected in the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo (Sao Paulo, Brazil) by Ph.D. Maria C. M. Young in January 2005 and identified by Ph.D. Ines Cordeiro (IBt-SMA). A voucher specimen (SP 204319b) was deposited at the State Herbarium "Maria Enedia Kaufmann" of Institute of Botany (Sao Paulo, Brazil).

### Extraction

The powdered shade-dried plant material was extracted three times (72 h) by macroation with hexane and, subsequently with ethanol. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure by rotary evaporation yielding a thick syrup. The crude ethanol extracts were further reconstituted in methanol-water (7:3) and then partitioned with ethyl acetate and _n_-butanol, successively. Samples from hexane and ethanol extracts, ethyl acetate, _n_-butanol and lyophilized hydroalcoholic fractions, were submitted to antimicrobial tests.

### Isolation of antifungal compounds 1-4

The _n_-butanol fraction (2.5 g) from the ethanol extract of branches was subjected to gel permeation column chromatography using Sephadex LH-20, eluted with methanol to afford nine fractions (B1-B9), which were combined after comparison of their TLC profile [chloroform:methanol (9:1)] revealed with Dragendorff's reagent. The alkaloidal fraction (B2, 587 mg) was subjected to reversed-phase C-18 silica gel CC eluted with acetonitrile:water gradient that afforded eight fractions (ALK1-ALK8). Purification of fraction ALK5 (121 mg) by repeated CC over silica gel (230-400 mesh) eluted with chloroform:methanol in a gradient ranging from 0 to 35% methanol, furnished _N-1,N-2,N-3_-triisopentenyl)guanidine (**1**, 7 mg) and nitensidine B (**3**, 12 mg). Fraction ALK-8 (88 mg) was subject to preparative TLC developed with ch loroform:methanol:triethylamine (87:12.5:0.5), developed three times to yield nitensidine A (**2**, 7 mg) and nitensidine C (**4**, 3 mg).

The molecular structures of these guanidine alkaloids were identified through \({}^{1}\)H NMR, \({}^{13}\)C NMR and MS data. The spectral data were in agreement with those published in the literature (Bolzani et al., 1995; Conegero et al., 2003).



## Page 3



## Microorganisms and growth conditions

The test organisms _C. albicans_ ATCC 90028, _C. krusei_ ATCC 6258, _C. parapsilosis_ ATCC 22019 and _C. neoformans_ ATCC 90012 were originally obtained from the Mycology Laboratory of the Department of Clinical Analysis, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences at Sao Paulo State University (UNESP). The yeasts were grown and maintained on Sabouraud-dextrose agar for 24 to 48 h at room temperature.

### Antimicrobial susceptibility testing

The antifungal activity tests were performed using broth microdilution method as described in the M27-A2 document of Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) with modifications (Rodriguez-Tudela et al., 2003). The medium used was RPMI 1640 with L-glutamine buffered to pH 7.0 with 0.165 M morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS), supplemented with 2% glucose. Samples were diluted in DMSO and each well of a 96-well U-bottomed culture plate were added 100 \(\mu\)L culture together with 100 \(\mu\)L of 2-fold serial diluted test compound. The cell suspension was prepared in 0.85% saline with an optical density equivalent to McFarland 0.5 and diluted 1:100 in RPMI for the final concentration to be 1 x 10\({}^{\circ}\) to 5 x 10\({}^{\circ}\) CFU/mL. This suspension was inoculated on the microdilution plate previously prepared with the extracts, fractions and compounds **1-4** diluted at concentrations ranging from 1000 to 0.48 mg/mL. The plates were incubated with agitation at 37 \({}^{\circ}\)C for 24 h for _Candida_ spp. and 48 h for _C. neoformans_. Amphotericin B and fluconazole were used as positive controls exhibiting a MIC value ranging from 2.00 to 0.06 and 64.00 to 2.00 mg/mL (Table 1).

The MIC values were calculated as the lowest concentration of the test samples which shows complete growth inhibition of the fungi strains. Results were analyzed visually and spectrophotometrically. All assays were performed in triplicate. The extracts and fractions showing a MIC lower than 100, ranging from 100-500, 500-1000 and over 1000 mg/mL were considered potent, moderated, weak and not active, respectively (Holetz et al., 2002).

### Minimum fungicidal concentration (MFC)

All tested samples in antifungal study showing MIC\(<\)1000 mg/mL, were transferred to plates of Sabouraud-dextrose agar. The plates were incubated at 35 \({}^{\circ}\)C for 48 h (yeast). The MFC was defined as the lowest concentration of the extract that did not permit any visible fungal colony growth on the appropriate agar plate after the period of incubation. All assays were performed in triplicate.

## Results

In this work, eight extracts and twelve fractions as well as four guanidine alkaloids (**1-4**) were tested at concentrations ranging from 1000 to 0.48 mg/mL against four human opportunistic yeasts (_C. albicans, C. krusei, C. parapsilosis_ and _C. neoformans_). These results were summarized in Table 1.

All extracts and fractions from _Pterogyne nitens_ Tul., Fabaceae, were weakly active against the yeast _C. albicans_ with MIC values ranging from 1000 to 250 mg/mL, which were considered moderate to weak according to Holetz et al. (2002). The hexane extract from roots was not active to _C. albicans_ and _C. neoformans_ (MIC\(>\)1000 mg/mL). The extracts and fractions from roots and green fruits demonstrated moderate activity against _C. krusei_, except the _n_-butanol fraction from roots, which presented strong activity (MIC 31.2 mg/mL) against this yeast. Additionally, branches and stem barks exhibited potent activity against _C. krusei_ with MIC values ranging from 15.6 to 62.5 mg/mL and the best result was observed for the _n_-butanol fraction from branches (MIC = 15.6 mg/mL). Furthermore the hexane extracts and hydroalcoholic fractions from branches and stem barks showed moderate to weak activity against this yeast. All the samples had weak to moderate activity against _C. parapsilosis_ and _C. neoformans_, except for the ethanol extract, ethyl acetate, and _n_-butanol fractions from stem barks, which exhibited potent inhibition of _C. parapsilosis_ (MIC = 62.5 mg/mL).

Compounds **1-4** isolated from _n_-butanol fraction of branches from _P. nitens_ inhibits the growth of opportunistic fungi with MIC values of 62.5 and 31.2 mg/mL against _C. krusei_ and _C. parapsilosis_, respectively.

Additionally, minimal fungicidal concentration (MFC) of all extracts, fractions and guanidine alkaloids (**1-4**) were also evaluated against the four yeasts and showed MFC values higher than 1000 mg/mL, indicating a fungistatic behavior.

## Discussion

Several Fabaceae species have been evaluated for their antifungal properties (Scorzoni et al., 2007) among them _Pterogyne nitens_ Tul., Fabaceae, a typical leguminous plant from Brazilian flora has been studied for antimicrobial activity. Previous biological studies have demonstrated that extracts from the barks of _P. nitens_ did not show antibacterial activity (Salvat et al., 2001).

The bioactivity presented for compounds **1-4** indicated that antifungal activity observed in the extracts and fractions may be at least partially due to guanidine alkaloids. It was also observed that the strongest antifungal effects of the tested samples were on strains of _C. krusei_ and _C. parapsilosis_ when compared with _C. albicans_ and _C. neoformans_.

### nitens

and isolated compounds displayed

## Page 4

activity against _C. lrusei_, which is very significant because this yeast has natural resistance against commercial drug fluconazole (Rex et al., 1995), suggesting its potential application for treating _C. lrusei_ infections, considering a possible mode of action different from those azole drugs.

The current study suggests that _P. nitens_ have antimicrobial activity against opportunistic yeasts. Therefore, it could be an important source of antifungal compounds which can be useful for developing new lead compounds, including compound **1**, which was described for the first time in the Fabaceae family. Further chemical and pharmacological investigations are thus needed in order to isolate and identify additional constituents and establish the potential mechanisms of action.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants from the "Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo", FAPESP (Brazil), as part of the Biota-FAPESP-The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br) through grants 03/021767-7 and 04/07932-7. LOR, MP, LS, MJSMG, TB, VSB also acknowledge CNPq and FAPESP for researcher and students fellowships.

## References

* (1) Alves PM, Leite PHAS, Pereira JV, Pereira LF, Pereira MSV, Higino JS, Lima EO 2006. Atividade antifungica do extrato de _Psidium guajava_ Linn. (goiabera) sobre leveluras do genero _Candida_ da cavidade oral: uma avaliacao _in vitro_. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 16_: 192-196.
* (2) Batista-Junior JM, Lopes AA, Ambrosio DL, Regasini LO, Kato MJ, Bolzani VS, Cicarelli RMB, Furlan M 2008. Natural chromenes and chromene derivatives as potential anti-trypanosomal agents. _Biol Pharm Bull 31_: 538-540.
* (3)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} Plant part or guanidine alkaloids & Type extract or Fraction tested & Caa & Ckb & Cpa & Cn4 \\ Roots & hexane & \textgreater{}1000 & 500 & 500 & \textgreater{}1000 \\ ethanol & 1000 & 250 & 1000 & 1000 \\ ethyl acetate & 250 & 125 & 250 & 250 \\ _n_-butanol & 250 & 31.2 & 250 & 250 \\ hydroalcoholic & 500 & 500 & 500 & 500 \\ Green fruits & hexane & 500 & 250 & 250 & 500 \\ ethanol & 250 & 250 & 125 & 250 \\ ethyl acetate & 500 & 125 & 250 & 500 \\ _n_-butanol & 1000 & 1000 & 500 & 1000 \\ hydroalcoholic & 500 & 250 & 250 & 500 \\ Branches & hexane & 1000 & 500 & 500 & 1000 \\ ethanol & 250 & 62.5 & 125 & 250 \\ ethyl acetate & 250 & 62.5 & 125 & 250 \\ _n_-butanol & 250 & 15.6 & 125 & 250 \\ hydroalcoholic & 250 & 250 & 250 & 250 \\ Stem barks & hexane & 250 & 125 & 500 & 250 \\ ethanol & 500 & 62.5 & 62.5 & 500 \\ ethyl acetate & 250 & 62.5 & 62.5 & 250 \\ _n_-butanol & 250 & 62.5 & 62.5 & 250 \\ hydroalcoholic & 1000 & 125 & 500 & 1000 \\ _N-1,N-2,N-3_-trisopentenylguanidine (1) & – & 250 & 62.5 & 31.2 & 250 \\ nitensidine A (2) & – & 250 & 62.5 & 31.2 & 250 \\ nitensidine B (3) & – & 250 & 62.5 & 31.2 & 250 \\ nitensidine C (4) & – & 250 & 62.5 & 31.2 & 250 \\ \hline amphotericin B* & 2.00 & 2.00 & 1.00 & 0.06 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: _In vitro_ antifungal activity (MIC in μg/mL) of extracts, fractions and isolated compounds **1-4** from _Pterogyne nitens_.



## Page 5

Bertucci A, Olivaro C, Silva PA, Ramos D, Cerdeiras MP, Vazquez A 2009. Initial antimicrobial activity studies of plants of the riverside forests of the southern Uruguay River. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 19_: 20-25.
* Bolzani VS, Gunatilaka AAL, Kingston DGI 1995. Bioactive guanidine alkaloids from _Pterogyne nitens. J Nat Prod 58_: 1683-1688.
* Burkart A 1952. _Las Leguminosas Argentinas_. Buenos Aires: Aeme Agency.
* Cardoso-Lopes EM, Carreira RC, Agripino DG, Torres LMB, Cordeiro I, Bolzani VS, Dietrich SMC, Young MCM 2008. Screening for antifungal, DNA-damaging and anticholinesterase activities of Brazilian plants from the Atlantic Rainforest-Ilha do Cardoso State Park. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 18_: 655-660.
* Clark TA, Hajieh RA 2002. Recent trends in the epidemiology of invasive mycoses. _Curr Opin Infect Dis 15_: 569-574.
* Conegero LS, Ide RM, Nazari AS, Sarragiotto, MH, Filho BPD, Nakamura CV, Carvalho JE, Foglio MA 2003. Constituintes quimicos de _Alchornea glandulosa_ (Euphorbiaceae). _Quin Nova 26_: 825-827.
* Costa AC, Santos BHC, Santos Filho L, Lima EO 2009. Antibacterial activity of the essential oil of _Origanum vulgare_ L. (Lannaceae) against bacterial multiresistant strains isolated from nosocomial patients. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 19_: 236-241.
* Crivos M, Martinez MR, Pochetino ML, Remorini C, Sy A, Teves L 2007. Pathways as "signatures in landscape": towards an ethnography of mobility among the _Mbya-Guarani_ (Northeastern Argentina). _J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 3_: 2
* Dias JFG, Virtuoso S, Davet A, Cunico MM, Miguel MD, Miguel OG, Auer CG, Grigoletti-Junior A, Oliveira AB, Ferronato ML 2006. Atividade antibacterialeriana e antifringa de extratos tanolicos de _Aster Innoculatus_. Willd., Asteraceae. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 16_: 83-87.
* Fernandes DC, Regasini LO, Vellosa JCR, Pauletti PM, Castro-Gamboa I, Bolzani VS, Oliveira OMM, Silva DHS 2008. Myeloperoxidase inhibitory and radical scavenging activities of flavones from _Pterogyne nitens. Chem Pharm Bull 56_: 723-726.
* Ferreira FG, Regasini LO, Oliveira AM, Campos JADB, Silva DHS, Cavalheiro AJ, Santos RA, Bassi CL, Bolzani VS, Soares CP 2009. Avaliacao da mutagenicidade e antimutagenicidade de diferentes fracoes de _Pterogyne nitens_ (Leguminosae), utilizando o ensaio de micronucleo em _Tradescantia pallida_. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 19_: 61-67.
* Guarro J, Kantarcioglu AS, Horre R, Rodriguez-Tudela JL, Estrella MC, Berenguer J, Hoog GS 2006. _Sedosporium apiospermum_: changing clinical spectrum of a therapy-refractory opportunist. _Med Mycol 44_: 295-327
* Hage CA, Goldman M, Wheat LJ 2002. Mucosal and invasive fungal infections in HIV/AIDS. _Eur J Med Res 7_: 236-241.
* Helmerhorst EJ, Reijnders IM, Hof WV, Simoons-Smit I, Veerman ECI, Amerongen AVN 1999. Ambphotericin B- and fluconazole-resistant _Candida_ spp., _Aspergillus fumigatus,_ and other newly emerging pathogenic fungi are susceptible to basic antifungal peptides. _Antimicrob Agents Ch 43_: 702-704.
* Holetz FB, Pessini GL, Sanches NR, Cortez DAG, Nakamura CV, Dias-Filho BP 2002. Screening of some plants used in the Brazilian folk medicine for the treatment of infectious diseases. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 97_: 1027-1031.
* Lopes AA, Lopez SN, Regasini LO, Batista-Junior JM, Ambrosio DL, Kato MJ, Bolzani VS, Ciacrelli RMB, Furlan M 2008. _In vitro_ activity of isolated compounds from _Pipper crassinevinum_ against _Typanosoma cruzi. Nat Prod Res 22_: 1040-1046.
* Lorenzi H 1998. _Arvores brasileiras: manual de identificacao e cultivo de plantas arboreas do Brasil._ Sao Paulo: Plantarum.
* Nucci M, Anaissie E 2007. _Fusarium_ infections in immunocompromised patients. _Clin Microbiol Rev 20_: 695-704.
* Oliveira RAG, Lima EO, Souza EL, Vieira WL, Freire KRL, Trajano VN, Lima IO, Silva-Filho RN 2007. Interference of _Plecranthus amboinicines_ (Lour). Spreng essential oil on the anti-_Candida_ activity of some clinically used antifungal. _Rev Bras Farmacogn 17_: 186-190.
* Regasini LO, Lopes AA, Silva DHS, Furlan M, Young MCM, MariaDA, Barreiro EJ, Bolzani VS 2007. Antiproliferative effect of _Pterogyne nitens_ on melanoma cells. _Rev Cienc Farm Basica ApJ 28_: 335-340.
* Regasini LO, Fernandes DC, Castro-Gamboa I, Silva DHS, Furlan M, Bolzani VS, Barreiro EJ, Cardoso-Lopes EM, Young MCM, Torres LB, Vellosa JCR, Oliveira OMM 2008a. Constituintes quimicos das flores de _Pterogyne nitens_ (Casesalpinioideae). _Quin Nova 31_: 802-806.
* J Biotechnol 7_: 4609-4613.
* Regasini LO, Vellosa JCR, Silva DHS, Furlan M, Oliveira OMM, Khalil NM, Brunetti IL, Young MCM, Barreiro EJ, Bolzani VS 2008c. Flavonols from _Pterogyne nitens_ and their evaluation as myeloperoxidase inhibitors. _Pytochemistry 69_: 1739-1744.
* Regasini LO, Cotinguiba F, Passerini GD, Bolzani VS, Cicarelli RMB, Kato MJ, Furlan M 2009a. Trypanocoidal activity of _Pipper arboremum_ and _Pipper merchantum_ (Piperaceae). _Rev Bras Farmacogn 19_: 199-203.
* Regasini LO, Castro-Gamboa I, Silva DHS, Furlan M, Barreiro EJ, Ferreira PMP, Pessoa C, Lotufo LVC, Moraes MO, Young MCM, Bolzani VS 2009b. Cytotoxic guanidine alkaloids from _Pterogyne nitens. J Nat Prod 72_: 473-476.
* Regasini LO, Vieira-Junior GM, Fernandes DC, Bolzani VS, Cavalheiro AJ, Silva DHS 2009c. Identification of triterpenes and sterols from _Pterogyne nitens_ (Fabaceae-Casesalpinioideae) using High-Resolution Gas Chromatography. _J Chil Chem Soc 54_: 218-221.



## Page 6

* [19] Rex JH, Rinaldi MG, Pfaller MA 1995. Resistance of _Candida_ species to fluconazole. _Antimicrob Agents Ch 39_: 1-8.
* [20] Rodriguez-Tudela JL, Berenguer J, Martinez-Suarez JV, Sanchez R 1996. Comparison of a spectrophotometric microdilution method with RPMI-2% glucose with the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards reference macrodilution method M27-P for in vitro susceptibility testing of amphotericin B, fluconazole, and fluconazole against _Candida albicans. Antimicrob Agents Ch 40_: 1998-2003.
* [21] Sena-Filho JG, Melo JGS, Saraiva AM, Goncalves AM, Psiento MNC, Xavier HS 2006. Antimicrobial activity and phytochemical profile from the roots of _Lippia alba_ (Mill.) N. E. Brown. _Rev Bras Farmacogen 16_: 506-509.
* [22] Salvat A, Antonacci L, Fortunato RH, Suarez EY, Godoy HM 2001. Screening of some plants from Northern Argentina for their antimicrobial activity. _Lett Appl Microbiol 32_: 293-297.
* [23] Scorzoni L, Benaducci T, Almeida AMF, Silva DHS, Bolzani VS, Gianinni MJ 2007. The use of standard methodology for determination of antifungal activity of natural products against medical yeasts _Candida_ sp. and _Cryptococcus_ sp. _Braz J Microbiol 38_: 391-397.
* [24] Silva-Junior IF, Cechinel Filho V, Zacchino SA, Lima JCS, Martins DTO 2009. Antimicrobial screening of some medicinal plants from Mato Grosso Cerrado. I: 242-248.
* [25] Souza A, Vendramini RC, Brunetti IL, Regasinio LO, Bolzani VS, Silva DHS, Pepato MT 2009. Tratamento cronico com extrato alcoolico de _Pterogyne nitens_ nao mellhora parametricos classicos do diabetes experimental. _Rev Bras Farmacogen 19_: 412-417.
* [26] Souza A, Vendramini RC, Brunetti IL, Regasinio LO, Silva DHS, Bolzani VS, Pepato MT 2010. Alcohol extract of _Pterogyne nitens_ leaves fails to reduce severity of streptozotocin-induced diabetes in rats. _J Med Plants Res 4_: 802-808.
* [27] Tempone AG, Sartorelli P, Teixeira D, Prado F0, Calixto IARL, Lorenzi H, Melhem MSC 2008. Brazilian flora extracts as source of novel antileishmanial and antifungal compounds. _Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 103_: 443-449.
* [28] Vieira OMC, Santos MH, Silva GA, Siqueira AM 2005. Atividade antimicrobiana de _Struthanthus vulgaris_ (erva-de-passarinho). _Rev Bras Farmacogen 15_: 149-154. Inserir citacao

