# 10.1515@znc-2009-11-1212.pdf

## Page 1

Bioactive Metabolites Produced by _Penicillium_ sp.1 and sp.2, Two Endophytes Associated with _Alibertia macrophylla_ (Rubiaceae)

Camila M. Oliveira

NuBBE - Nucleo de Bioensaios, Biossintese e Ecosfiologia de Produtos Naturais, Departamento de Quimica Organica, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rua Professor Francisco Degni, SN, Bairro Quitandinha, 14800-900 Araraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Fax +55-16-33 22 79 32. E-mail: araujoor@iq.unesp.br Universidade Federal de Sergipe, Av. Vereador Olimpio Grande, SN, 49500-000 Itabiana, Sergipe, Brazil

Maria C. M. Young

Sceno de Fisologia e Bioquinica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, Av. Miguel Stefano 3687, 04301-902 Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

###### Abstract

In the course of our continuous search for bioactive metabolites from endophytic fungi living in plants from the Brazilian flora, leaves of _Alibertia macrophylla_ (Rubiaceae) were submitted to isolation of endophytes, and two species of _Penicillium_ were isolated. The acetonitrile fraction obtained in corn from a culture of _Penicillium_ sp.1 afforded orcinol (**1**). On the other hand, _Penicillium_ sp.1 cultivated in potato-dextrose-broth furnished two different compounds, _cyclo_-(L-Pro-L-Val) (**2**) and uracil (**3**). The chromatographic fractionation of the acetonitrile fraction obtained from _Penicillium_ sp.2 led to three dihydroisocoumarins, 4-hydroxymellein (**4**), 8-methoxyamellein (**5**) and 5-hydroxyamellein (**6**). Compounds **5** and **6** were obtained from the _Penicillium_ genus for the first time. Additionally, metabolites **1-6** were evaluated for their antifungal and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitory activities. The most active compounds **1** and **4** exhibited detection limits of 5.00 and 10.0 _m_g against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospremum_, respectively. Compound **2** showed a detection limit of 10.0 _m_g, displaying potent AChE inhibitory activity.

keywords: _Penicillium_, _Alibertia macrophylla_, Endophytic Fungi, Acetylcholinesterase

## Introduction

Terrestrial-derived microfungi have been the sources of several novel and pharmacologically active compounds over decades (Hormazabal _et al._, 2005; Schmeda-Hirschmann _et al._, 2008; Takahashi and Lucas, 2008). In this context, endophytes belonging to the _Penicillium_ genus have been recognized as a rich source of bioactive secondary metabolites (Fill _et al._, 2007). Recent examples include the anticancer berkelic acid from _Penicillium_ sp., polyketides with HIV-integrase inhibitory activity from _P. chrysogenum_ and the insecticidal paraheraquamides H and I from _P. cluniae_ (Singh, 2003; Stierle _et al._, 2006).

As part of our interest for bioactive metabolites from endophytes associated with Brazilian plants (Cafeu _et al._, 2005; Inacio _et al._, 2006; Silva _et al._, 2006; Teles _et al._, 2006), _Alibertia macrophylla_ (Rubiaceae) was selected for our study, due to the fact that this species accumulates a series of bioactive compounds (Bolzani _et al._, 1991; Silva _et al._, 2007).

Thus, the major aim of the current study was to identify potential bioactive compounds from _Penicillium_ sp.1 and _Penicillium_ sp.2, two endophytes associated with _A. macrophylla_ leaves, by using antifungal and acetylcholinesterase inhibitory assays.

## Material and Methods

### General

1H NMR (500 MHz), 13C NMR (126 MHz), _g_HMBC, _g_HMQC and _g_COSY experiments were recorded on a VARIAN DRX-500 spectrometer, using the solvents as internal standard. Mass spectra were measured on a Q-TOF Micromass spectrometer in the ESI mode using MeOH/H2O (1:1) as solvent (cone voltage 25 V). TLC was 

## Page 2

performed using Merck silica gel 60 (230 mesh) and precoated silica gel 60 \(\text{PF}_{25}\) plates. Spots on TLC plates were visualized under UV light and by spraying with anisaldehyde(\(\text{H}_{5}\text{SO}_{4}\) reagent followed by heating at 120 degC. Preparative HPLC was performed on a Varian Prep-Star 400 system using a Phenomenex C-18 preparative column (250 mm x 21.2 mm). Analytical HPLC was performed on a Varian Pro Star 230 instrument using a Phenomenex C-18 column (250 mm x 4.6 mm). Column chromatography (CC) was performed over reversed-phase silica gel 230-400 mesh (Merck).

### Plant material

Authenticated _Alibertia macrophyla_ K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) was collected in Estacao Ecologica Experimental de Mogi-Guava, Fazenda Campinina, Mogi-Guava, Sao Paulo, Brazil, in November 2003. The botanical identification was made by Ph.D. Maria Claudia Marx Young (Institute of Botany, Sao Paulo, Brazil), and a voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden of Sao Paulo, Brazil (voucher no. SP 370915).

### Isolation and identification of the endophytes

For isolation of the endophytic fungi, adult and healthy leaves of _A. macrophyla_ were selected and submitted to surface sterilization. They were first washed with water and soap, and then immersed in an 1% aqueous sodium hypochlorite solution for 5 min and 70% aqueous ethanol for 1 min. A second washing with water and soap was performed and finally the leaves were immersed in sterile water for 10 min. Sterilized leaves were cut into 2 x 2 cm pieces and deposited on a Petri dish containing PDA (potato-dextrose-agar) and anthramicine sulfate (50 mg/mL) with approx. 3 to 4 pieces on each dish (Silva _et al._, 2006).

The endophytic fungi were identified according to the characteristics of morphology of the culture and spores, mechanism of spore production, and molecular taxonomy according to a modification of the rapid preparation of DNA from filamentous fungi (Raeder and Broda, 1985). The fungi were identified by Ph.D. Derlene Attil de Angelis (CPOBA-UNICAMP - Centro Pluridisciplinar de Pesquisas Quimicas, Biologicas e Agricolas, Campinas, Brazil) and deposited in our collection with culture numbers 05070032-C and 05-070032-A for _Penicillium_ sp.1 and _Penicillium_ sp.2, respectively.

### Preparation of the crude extract in corn and potato-dextrose-broth of Penicillium sp.1

The cultivation in corn was accomplished in 9 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL) each containing as medium 90 g of corn and 75 mL of water. The media were autoclaved four times (four consecutive days) at 121 degC for 40 min. After cool, the media were inoculated with the endophyte and incubated at 25 degC in static mode for 21 d. After the incubation period, the solid cultures were ground and extracted with MeOH (6 x 250 mL); after that the solvent was evaporated, providing the crude MeOH extract (10.6 g). The methanol extract was dissolved in water and then subjected to liquid-liquid partition with EtOAc. The EtOAc fraction was suspended in acetonitrile and partitioned with hexane. Evaporation of the organic phase resulted in the crude acetonitrile extract (804 mg).

The fungus was cultivated using potato-dextrose-broth (PDB) as culture medium (4.0 g of potato extract, 20.0 g dextrose/L H2O). For the PDB, 20 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL) were used, each containing 100 mg of potato extract, 5.0 g dextrose and 250 mL distilled water, which were autoclaved at 125 degC for 15 min. Approx. 10 small pieces (1 cm2) of PDA medium from the Petri dish containing biomass of _Penicillium_ sp.1 were inoculated into each flask, and the flasks were sealed with cotton to permit aerobic growth. After incubation for 28 d at 25 degC on rotatory shakers at 150 rpm, the mycelia biomass accumulated in the flasks was separated from the aqueous medium by filtration, and the filtrate was partitioned with EtOAc (3 x 2.5 L). Collection and evaporation of the organic phase under reduced pressure yielded a brown, solid residue (507 mg).

### Preparation of the crude extract in corn of Penicillium sp.2

The cultivation in corn was accomplished in 9 Erlenmeyer flasks (500 mL) each containing as medium 90 g of corn and 75 mL of water. The media were autoclaved four times (four consecutive days) at 121 degC for 40 min. After cooling, the media were inoculated with the endophyte and incubated at 25 degC in static mode for 21 d. After the incubation period, the solid cultures were 

## Page 3

ground and extracted with EtOAc (6 x 250 mL); after that the solvent was evaporated, providing the crude EtOAc extract (15.0 g). The EtOAc extract was dissolved in acetonitrile and then subjected to liquid-liquid partition with hexane. The acetonitrile fraction was evaporated resulting in the crude acetonitrile extract (6.0 g).

### Isolation and identification of compounds **1**-**6_

The crude acetonitrile fraction obtained in corn of _Penicillium_ sp.1 (804 mg) was fractionated by CC using silica gel C18 eluted with a H2O/acetonitrile gradient (10-100% acetonitrile) affording 10 fractions (A-J). Fraction D (13.1 mg) afforded compound **1**. The crude EtOAc extract obtained in PDB of _Penicillium_ sp.1 (507 mg) was fractionated by CC using silica gel C18 eluted with a H2O/acetonitrile gradient (10-100% acetonitrile) affording 5 fractions (K-O). Fraction C (30.5 mg), after recrystallization with MeOH, led to compound **2** (4.5 mg). Fraction L (40.2 mg) was further purified using RP-HPLC [_l_ = 254 nm, 12.0 mL/min, H2O/acetonitrile (9:1, 40 min)] and supplied compound **3** (12.4 mg, _R_t = 3 min).

The crude acetonitrile fraction obtained in corn of _Penicillium_ sp.2 (6.0 g) was fractionated by CC using silica gel C18 eluted with a H2O/MeOH gradient (5-100% MeOH) affording 16 fractions (Fr1-Fr16). Fraction Fr2 (18.0 mg) was further purified using RP-HPLC [_l_ = 254 nm, 10.0 mL/min, H2O/acetonitrile (82., 80 min)] leading to compounds **4** (3.4 mg, _R_t = 24.5 min), **5** (5.3 mg, _R_t = 31.1 min) and **6** (6.3 mg, _R_t = 62.3 min).

_Orcinol_ (**1**): 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 8.97 (2H, _brs_, 1-OH and 5-OH), 6.01 (2H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-2 and H-4), 5.99 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-6), 2.43 (3H, \(s\), H-7). - 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 158.1 (C-1, C-5), 138.9 (C-3), 106.9 (C-2, C-4), 99.7 (C-6), 21.1 (C-7).

_Cyclo_(_L_-_Pro_-_L_-_Val_) (**2**): 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 7.92 (1H, _brs_, H-8), 4.12 (1H, \(t\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, H-6), 3.92 (1H, _brs_, H-9), 3.40 (2H, \(m\), H-3), 2.35 (1H, _dsept_, \(J\) = 2.5, 6.5 Hz, H-10), 2.13 (2H, \(m\), H-5), 1.78 (2H, \(m\), H-4), 1.02 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, H-12), 0.86 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, H-11). - 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 170.2 (C-7), 165.2 (C-1), 59.5 (C-9), 58.2 (C-6), 44.6 (C-3), 27.7 (C-5, C-10), 22.0 (C-4), 16.4 (C-11), 18.3 (C-12).

_Uracil_ (**3**): 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 7.38 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-6), 5.41 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5). - 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 164.4 (C-4), 151.9 (C-2), 142.9 (C-6), 99.9 (C-5).

_4-Hydroxymellein_ (**4**): 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-_d_o): \(d\) = 11.0 (1H, _brs_, 8-OH), 7.45 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 7.5, 8.5 Hz, H-6), 6.96 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, H-7), 6.86 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, H-5), 4.63 (1H, _dq_, \(J\) = 6.5, 2.0 Hz, H-3), 4.50 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-4), 1.90 (1H, _br_ = 4OH), 1.51 (3H, \(d\),

## Page 4

ed to the solution in order to stabilize the enzyme during the biochemical assay. The stock solution was kept at 4 degC. TLC plates were eluted with an appropriate solvent (acetone or isopropanol), in order to wash them, and were thoroughly dried just before use. After migration of the sample in a suitable solvent (or direct deposition of sample), the TLC plate was dried for complete removal of the solvent. The plate was then sprayed with enzyme stock solution and thoroughly dried again. For incubation of the enzyme, the plate was laid flat on plastic plugs in a plastic tank containing a little bit of water; by this means, water did not come directly into contact with the plate but the atmosphere was kept humid. The cover was placed on the tank and incubation was performed at 37 degC for 20 min. For detection of the AChE inhibitory activity, solutions of 1-naphthyl acetate (250 mg) in EtOH (100 mL) and of Fast Blue B salt (400 mg) in distilled water (160 mL) were prepared immediately before use. After incubation of the TLC plate, 10 mL of the 1-naphthyl acetate solution and 40 mL of the Fast Blue B salt solution were mixed and sprayed onto the plate to give a purple colouration after 1-2 min. Galanthamine was employed as positive control (Marston _et al._, 2002).

## Results and Discussion

The molecular structures of all isolates (Fig. 1) were confirmed by the MS and NMR data as shown below. Assignments were based on 2D-NMR experiments including _g_COSY, _g_HMQC, and _g_HMBC.

Compound **1** was isolated as a brown amorphous powder and its ESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C7H5O2 ([M-H]- at _m/z_ 123). The 1H NMR spectrum of **1** showed two aromatic signals, d_H 5.99 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, 1H, H-6) and d_H 6.01 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, 2H, H-2 and H-4) suggesting a trisubstituted aromatic ring. The 13C NMR and DEPT 135deg spectra showed five signals, assigned to one oxygenated aromatic groups at d_C 158.1 (C-1 and C-5), two methines attributed to signals at d_C 99.7 (C-6) and d_C 106.9 (C-2 and C-4) and one methyl group at d_C 21.1 (C-7). The position of the methyl substituent at position C-3 was attributed on the basis on the _g_HMBC experiment, which indicates a correlation of d_H 2.43 (H-7) with d_C 138.9 (C-3) and d_C 106.9 (C-2 and C-4). This data suggests that **1** is orcinol (Monde, 1998).

Compound **2** was isolated as a white amorphous solid and its ESI mass data indicated the molecular formula C10H18N2O2 ([M+H]+ at _m/z_ 197). The 1H NMR spectrum of **2** showed signals at d_H 0.86 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, 3H, H-11), d_H 1.02 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, 3H, H-12), d_H 4.12 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, 1H, H-6), and d_H 3.92 (_brs_, 1H, H-9). Also, three multiplets at d_H 3.40 (2H, H-3), 1.78 (2H, H-4), and 2.13 (2H, H-5) were observed. Analysis of the 13C NMR spectrum indicated two methyl groups, three methylene carbon atoms and three methine carbon atoms. The signals at d_C 170.2 and d_C 165.2 were attributed to two amide carbonyl groups at C-7 and C-1, respectively, and 1H NMR signals of an amino acid suggested that **2** belongs to the diketopiperazine class. The _g_HMBC cross-peaks between the signal for C-1 and the signals for H-3, H-6, H-9, and H-10, as well as the signal for C-7 and the signals for H-5, H-6, and H-9 confirmed that **2** was biosynthesized by condensation of the amino acids proline and valine. The interpretation of these results combined with comparison with literature data (Furtado _et al._, 2005) suggest that diketopiperazine **2** is _cyclo_-(L-Pro-L-Val).

Compound **3** was isolated as yellow amorphous solid and its ESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C4H4N2O2 ([M-H]- at _m/z_ 111). The 1H NMR spectrum of **3** appeared to be relatively simple, exhibiting two doublets at d_H 5.41 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, 1H, H-5) and d_H 7.38 (_d_, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, 1H, H-6). The 13C NMR spectrum showed only four signals, for two carbonyl groups [d_C 151.9 (C-2) and d_C 164.4 (C-4)] and two methines [d_C 99.9 (C-5) and d_C 142.9 (C-6)]. These data indicate that **3** is uracil (Schindler, 1998; Martin _et al._, 2007).

Fig. 1: Chemical structures of compounds **1–6** isolated from _Penicillium_ sp.1 and _Penicillium_ sp.2.



## Page 5

Compound **4** was isolated as a white amorphous solid and its ESI mass data indicated the molecular formula C10H10O4 ([M+Na]+ at _m/z_ 217). The 1H NMR spectrum showed doublets for three aromatic protons at _d_H 6.86 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, 1H, H-5), _d_H 6.96 (_d_, \(J\) = 7.5 Hz, 1H, H-7) and _d_H 7.45 (_dd_, \(J\) = 7.5, 8.5 Hz, 1H, H-6). Altogether these signals suggest that **4** presented a trisubstituted aromatic ring. The _g_COSY cross-peaks of the doublet at _d_H 1.51 (_d_, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, 3H, H-9) coupled to a methine hydrogen atom with a signal at _d_H 4.63 (_dq_, \(J\) = 6.5, 2.0 Hz, 1H, H-3) in turn coupled to a methine hydrogen atom at _d_H 4.50 (_d_, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, 1H, H-4), suggesting an _a_-methylhydroxy unit in the molecular structure of **4**. The broad singlet at _d_H 11.0 (1H) indicated the presence of an intramolecular hydrogen bond between a hydroxy group (8-OH) and a carbonyl group (C-1). The 13C NMR and DEPT 135deg spectra showed the presence of ten signals, assigned to one methyl [_d_C 16.0 (C-9)], five methine groups [_d_C 78.1 (C-3), _d_C 67.2 (C-4), _d_C 118.5 (C-5), _d_C 136.7 (C-6), _d_C 118.2 (C-7)], and three aromatic quaternary carbon atoms [_d_C 162.1 (C-8), _d_C 106.8 (C-8a), _d_C 140.5 (C-4a)], and one signal at _d_C 169.1 (C-1), which was attributed to a carbonyl group, suggesting that **4** is an dihydro-isocumarin. This information coupled to data of the literature (Holler _et al._, 1999) assigne **4** to the structure of 4-hydroxymellein.

Compound **5** was isolated as a white amorphous solid and its ESI mass data suggested the molecular formula C11H12O3 ([M+H]+ at _m/z_ 193). In particular, a high similarity between the NMR spectral data of compounds **5** and **4** was observed. The major difference was identified in the chemical shifts attributed to H-4 of **5**, which showed a multiplet at _d_H 2.80 (2H, H-4). Furthermore, the presence of a singlet at _d_H 3.88 (3H, H-10) suggested a methoxy substituent. A _g_HMBC correlation was observed between the signal at _d_C 161.2 (C-8) and H-10, which confirmed the position of the methoxy group at C-8. This information coupled to literature data (Kamisuki, 2007) assigne **5** to the structure of 8-methoxymellein.

The dihydroisocumarin **6** was isolated as a white amorphous solid and its ESI mass data indicated the molecular formula C10H10O4 ([M-H]+ at _m/z_ 193). Considering differences in the NMR spectral data between compounds **5** and **6**, the 1H NMR spectrum of **6** exhibited two ortho-coupled hydrogen atoms at _d_H 6.73 (_d_, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz, 1H, H-7) and _d_H 6.92 (_d_, \(J\) = 9.0 Hz, 1H, H-6), suggesting a tetrasubstituted aromatic ring. The 13C NMR and DEPT 135deg data indicated signals at _d_C 156.5 and _d_C 143.0, which where attributed to the hydroxylated aromatic carbon atoms C-8 and C-5, respectively. These data indicate a hydroquinone ring in the molecular structure of **6**, which was identified as 5-hydroxymellein (Harwood, 1984).

Compounds **1**-**6** were evaluated for their antifungal activity against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ using a direct bioautography assay (Table I). The most active compounds, orcinol (**1**) and 4-hydroxymellein (**4**), showed a potent effect towards the yeasts, exhibiting a detection limit of 5.00 and 10.0 _m_g against _C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_, respectively. **5** exhibited moderate fungitoxicity towards _C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_, showing a detection limit of 10.0 and 25.0 _m_g, re

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} Compound & Antifungal activitya & Acetylcholinesterase \\  & _Cladosporium_ & _Cladosporium_ & inhibitory activitya \\  & _cladosporioides_ & _sphaerospermum_ & \\
**1** & 5.00 & 10.0 & 60.0 \\
**2** & 50.0 & 50.0 & 10.0 \\
**3** & 25.0 & 25.0 & 60.0 \\
**4** & 5.00 & 10.0 & 30.0 \\
**5** & 10.0 & 25.0 & \textgreater{}100 \\
**6** & 50.0 & 50.0 & \textgreater{}100 \\ Nystatinb & 1.00 & 1.00 & – \\ Galanthaminec & – & – & 1.00 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table I: Antifungal and acetylcholinesterase inhibitory activities of compounds **1**–**6**.



## Page 6

spectively. 5-Hydroxymellein (6) proved to be not potent, since the content at which this compound showed activity was 50 _m_g. Altogether, these data indicate a clear positive correlation between the antifungal effect demonstrated by the dihydroisocumarins and free hydroxy groups at C-4 and C-8. The identification of the compounds **1**, **4** and **5**, potentially bioactive against the phytopathogenic fungi, indicates that they act as defence of the host species against possible attacks of pathogens.

Although a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activities has already been demonstrated for compounds isolated from _Penicillium_, few studies have been devoted to the acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitory activity. AChE catalyzes the hydrolysis of acetylcholine to terminate the impulse-transmitted action through cholinergic synapses (Stryer, 1995; Sigurdsson and Gudbjarnason, 2007). Although the fundamental reason of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is not clear so far, AD is firmly associated with impairment in the cholinergic transmission. A number of AChE inhibitors have been considered as candidates for the symptomatic treatment of AD as the most useful relieving strategy (Barbosa-Filho _et al._, 2006; Alarcon _et al._, 2008). The diketopiperazine 2 exhibited the highest AChE inhibitory activity displaying a detection limit of 10.0 _m_g (Table I). Compounds **1** and **3** showed a detection limit of 60 _m_g, which was considered as weakly potent. The dihydrosiocoumarin **4** displayed moderate AChE inhibitory activity, exhibiting a detection limit of 30.0 _m_g. On the other hand, compounds **5** and **6** were not active (detection limits over 100 _m_g). Similar to the observed antifungal activity, free hydroxy groups at C-4 and C-8 corroborate to increase the anti-AChE potency presented by dihydrosiocoumarins.

In conclusion, six metabolites from _Penicillium_ sp.1 and _Penicillium_ sp.2, two endophytes associated with _A. macrophylla_ leaves, exhibited potential bioactivity, including antifungal and AChE inhibitory activities. The results suggest that compounds **2** and **4** should be considered further in the development of new agrochemicals and/or hit compounds for the use in the drug design for Alzheimer's disease treatment.

###### Acknowledgements.

 This work was funded by grants of the Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) as part of Biota-FAPESP,The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br), grant no. 03/02176-7, awarded to V. S. B.; C. M. O. and L. O. R. acknowledge FAPESP and L. M. Z. acknowledges Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES) for MS and Ph.D. scholarships.

## References

- Alarcon _et al._ (2008) Alarcon J., Astudillo L., and Gutierrez M. (2008), Inhibition of acetylcholinesterase activity by dihydrosiocurines associated from Chilean Celastracae. Z. Naturforsch. **63c**, 853 -856.

- Barbosa-Filho _et al._ (2006) Barbosa-Filho J. M., Medeiros K. C. P., Diniz M. F. F. M., Batista L. M., Athayde-Filho P. F., Silva M. S., Cunha E. M., Almeida J. R. G. S., and Quintana-Junior L. J. (2006), Natural products inhibitors of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. Braz. J. Pharmacogn. **16**, 258 -285.

- Bolzani V. S., Trevisan M. L., and Young M. C. M. (1991), Caffeic acid esters and triterpenes of _Alibertia macrophylla_. Phytochemistry **30**, 2089 -2091.

- Cafeu M. C., Silva G. H., Teles H. L., Bolzani V. S., Araujo A. R., Young M. C. M., and Pfenning L. H. (2005), Substancias antifungiacas de _Xylaria_ sp., um fungo endofilte isolado de _Pallocurea marcgravii_ (Rubiaceae). Quim. Nova **28**, 991 -995.

- Fill T. P., Pereira G. K., Santos R. M. G., and Rodrigues-Filho E. (2007), Four additional meroterpenes produced by _Penicillium_ sp. found in association with _Melia azedarach_. Possible biosynthetic intermediates to austin. Z. Naturforsch. **62b**, 1035 -1044.

- Furtado N. A. J. C., Pupo M. T., Carvalho I., Campo V. L., Duarte M. C. T., and Bastos J. K. (2005), Diketopiperazines produced by an _Aspergillus fumigatus_ strain. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. **16**, 1448 -1453.

- Harwood L. M. (1984), Access to phenolic fungal metabolites _via_ the acid-catalysed Claisen rearrangement. The total synthesis of (+)-mellein, aurocitrin, and 5',6'-dihydrosurocitrin. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1, 2577 -2582.

- Holler U., Konig G. M., and Wright A. D. (1999), Three new metabolites from marine-derived fungi of the genera _Contolivrium_ and _Microphaeropsis_. J. Nat. Prod. **62**, 114 -118.

- Hormazabal E., Schmeda-Hirschmann G., Astudillo L., Rodriguez J., and Theoduluz C. (2005), Metabolites from _Microphaeropsis divacea_, an endophytic fungus of _Pilgerodendron wviferum_. Z. Naturforsch. **60c**, 11 -21.

- Inacio M. L., Silva G. H., Teles H. L., Trevisan H. C., Cavalheiro A. J., Bolzani V. S., Young M. C. M., Pfenning L. H., and Araujo A. R. (2006), Antifungal metabolites from _Colletotrichum glucosporioides_, an endophytic fungus in _Cryptocarya mandidoccana_ Nees (Lauraceae). Biochem. Syst. Ecol. **34**, 822 -824.



## Page 7

* Kamisuki (2007) Kamisuki S. (2007), Nodulisporol and nodulisporone, novel specific inhibitors of human DNA polymerase k from a fungus, _Nodulsporium_ sp. Bioorg. Med. Chem. **15**, 3109-3114.
* Marston _et al._ (2002) Marston A., Kissling J., and Hostettmann K. (2002), A rapid TLC bioautographic method for the detection of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors in plants. Phytochem. Anal. **13**, 51-54.
* Martin _et al._ (2007) Martin F. P. J., Wang Y., Sprenger N., Holmes E., Lindon J. C., Kochhar S., and Nicholson K. (2007), Effects of probiotic _Lactobacillus paracaser_ treatment on the host gut tissue metabolic profiles probed via magic-angle-spinning NMR spectroscopy. J. Proteome Res. **6**, 1471-1481.
* Monde (1998) Monde K. (1998), Organochlorine compounds from a terrestrial higher plant: structures and origin of chlorinated orchol derivatives from diseased bulbs of _Lilium maximowiczii_. J. Nat. Prod. **61**, 913-921.
* Raeder and Broda (1985) Raeder J. and Broda P. (1985), Rapid preparation of DNA from filamentous fungi. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. **1**, 17-20.
* Rahalison _et al._ (1991) Rahalison L., Hamburger M., Hostettmann K., Monod M., and Frenk E. (1991), A bioautographic agar overlay method for the detection of anti-fungal compounds from higher plants. Phytochem. Anal. **2**, 199-201.
* Schindler (1998) Schindler M. (1998), Magnetic properties in terms of localized quantities. The DNA bases and the protonation of adenine. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **110**, 6623-6630.
* Schmeda-Hirschmann _et al._ (2008) Schmeda-Hirschmann G., Hormazabal E., Rodriguez J. A., and Theoduloz C. (2008), Cycloaspeptide A and pseurotin A from the endophytic fungus _Penicillium janczewskii_. Z. Naturforsch. **63c**, 383-388.
* Sigurdsson and Gudbjaranson (2007) Sigurdsson S. and Gudbjaranson G. (2007), Inhibition of acetylcholinesterase by extracts and constituents from _Angelica archaea_ and _Geranium sylvaticum_. Z. Naturforsch. **62c**, 689-693.
* Silva _et al._ (2006) Silva G. H., Teles H. L., Zanardi L. M., Young M. C. M., Eberlin M. N., Haddad R., Pfenning L. H., Costa-Neto C., Castro-Gamboa I., Bolzani V. S., and Araujo A. R. (2006), Cadinane sesquiterpenoids of _Phomopsis cassiae_, an endophytic fungus associated with _Cassia spectabilis_ (Leguminose). Phytochemistry **67**, 1964-1969.
* Silva _et al._ (2007) Silva V. C., Faria A. O., Bolzani V. S., and Lopes M. N. (2007), A new _ent_-k_aurane diterpene from stems of _Alibertia macrophyilk_ K. Schum. (Rubiaceae). Helv. Chim. Acta **90**, 1781-1785.
* Singh (2003) Singh S. B. (2003), Isolation, structure, and HIV-1 integrase inhibitory activity of xanthoviridicatin E and F, two novel fungal metabolites produced by _Penicillium chrysogenum_. Helv. Chim. Acta **86**, 3380-3385.
* Stierle _et al._ (2006) Stierle A. A., Stierle D. B., and Kelly K. (2006), Berkelic acid, a novel spirkedit with selective anticancer activity from an acid mine waste fungal extremophile. J. Org. Chem. **71**, 5357-5360.
* Stryer (1995) Stryer L. (1995), Biochemistry, 4th ed. Freeman, San Francisco, p. 1017.
* Takahashi and Lucas (2008) Takahashi J. A. and Lucas E. M. A. (2008), Ocorrencia e diversidade estrutral de metabolites fungicos com attividade antibiotic. Quim. Nova **31**, 1807-1813.
* Teles _et al._ (2006) Teles H. L., Sordi R., Silva G. H., Castro-Gamboa I., Bolzani V. S., Pfenning L. H., Abreu L. M., Costa-Neto C. M., Young M. C. M., and Araujo A. R. (2006), Aromatic compounds produced by _Pericoraina atropururea_, an endophytic fungus associated with _Xylopia aromatica_. Phytochemistry **67**, 2686-2690.



