# 10.1590@S0100-40422010000200017.pdf

## Page 1



# AROMATIC COMPOUNDS FROM THREE BRAZILIAN LAURACEAE SPECIES

Andrea Nastri de Luca Batista*, Joao Marcos Batista Junior, Silvia Noeli Lopez, Mayas Furlan, Alberto Jose Cavalheiro, Dulee Helena Siqueira Silva e Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Departamento de Quimica Organica, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista "Julio de Mesquita Filho", Rua Francisco Degni, s/n, 14800-9000 Araraquara - SP, Brasil Sergio Massayoshi Nunomura

Departamento de Produtos Naturais, Divisao de Quimica de Produtos Naturais, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Av. Andre Araujo, 2936, 69083-000 Manaus - AM, Brasil Massayoshi Yoshida

Centro de Biotecnologia da Amazonia, Av. Governador Danilo de Matos Areosa, 690, 69075-351 Manaus - AM, Brasil

###### Abstract

Phylochemical investigations on three Brazilian Lauraceae species from the Cerrado region of Sao Paulo State, _Ocotea corymbosa_ (Meins) Mez., _O. elegans_ Mez. and _Persea pyrifolia_ Nees & Mart. ex Nees resulted in the isolation of flavonoids, an ester of the 4-_O-E_-caffeoylquinic acid, an aromatic sesquiterpene besides furofuran lignans. This is the first chemical study on the leaves of _Ocotea elegans_ and _O. corymbosa_ as well as the first report of non-volatile compounds from _Persea pyrifolia_.

Lauraceae; _Ocotea_, _Persea_.

## Introduction

The Lauraceae family comprises 52 genera and approximately 3000 species, mostly from tropical and warm subtropical regions of the world.1 Lauraceae species present several groups of secondary metabolites, most of them aromatic, which seem to be relevant for chemotaxonomic classification in Lauraceae.2

Footnote 1: e-mail: andrluca@yahoo.com.br

The genus _Ocotea_ comprises ca. 350 species. Previous phytochemicalstudies have revealed the presence of neolingans, benzylisouplinoline alkaloids, phenylpropanoids, flavonoids and sesquiterpenes,3 besides a variety of volatile components from its essential oils.1_Ocotea elegans_ is known as _canela de ferro_ or _canela preta_ in Brazil where it is widespread. Despite its huge distribution, the only study performed on _O. elegans_ reports the isolation of neoligans from the stems by using countercurrent chromatography:4_Ocotea corymbosa_ is popularly known as _canela de corvo_ or _canela fedorenta_ in Brazil and its wood is employed in the civil construction industry.5 Only two studies were performed on _O. corymbosa_; monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes as well as phytosterols were isolated from the unripe fruits3 and sesquiterpenes with calamenene skeleton were characterized from its bark.6 No previous studies have been performed on leaves of _O. corymbosa_.

Footnote 3: e-mail: andrluca@yahoo.com.br

_Persea_ is a genus that comprises ca. 200 species, the most well studied of these being _P. americana_ Mill, known as "avocado fruit". Previous phytochemicalstudies on avocado seeds identified various classes of natural products such as phytosterols, triterpenes,7 fatty acids with olefinic and acetylenic bonds,4 alkylfurans,9 dimers of flavonoids,10 oligomeric pomenthocyanidinis1 and glucosylated abscisic acids.12_Persea pyrifolia_ is popularly known as _macramadhao_ and it is frequently employed in the furniture manufacturing industry.13 The only study carried out on _P. pyrifolia_ dealt with volatile compounds from the leaves.14

Footnote 13: e-mail: andrluca@yahoo.com.br

As part of our on-going program devoted to phytochemical investigations on Brazilian Lauraceae species, in this work we report the isolation of an ester of the 4-_O-E_-caffeoylquinic acid (**1**) and three flavonoids (**2**-**4) from _O. corymbosa_, an aromatic sesquiterpene (**5**) and a flavonoid (**6**) from _O. elegans_ as well as four furofuran lignans (**7**-**10**) from _P. pyrifolia_. This is the first chemical study on the leaves of _O. elegans_ and _O. corymbosa_ as well as the first report of non-volatile compounds from _P. pyrifolia_.

## Experimental

### General

Analytical and preparative HPLC separations were performed by using stainless-steel Phenomenex Luna phenyl-hexyl (250 x 4.6 mm and 250 x 22 mm, 5 and 10 mm particle size, respectively) and Phenomenex Luna C-18 (250 x 4.6 mm and 250 x 22 mm, 5 and 10 mm particle size, respectively). Mobile phases for chromatography were prepared from HPLC grade solvents. Methanol and acetonitrile were obtained from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA) and Tedia (Fairfield, OH, USA), respectively. Water was purified in-house with a Millipore Milli-Q system (Billerica, MA, USA). The analytical HPLC separations were carried out using a Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) LC-10Ai pump system, a Shimadzu SIL-10Ai auto injector and a Shimadzu SPD-10Avp UV-Vis detector. The HPLC system used for preparative separations was a Varian (Walnut Creek, CA, USA) PrepStar SD-1 equipped with a Rheodyne (Cotati, CA, USA) injector with a 2 mL sample loop and a ProStar UV-Vis detector. NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Inova 500 FT-NMR (Palo Alto, CA, USA) spectrometer operating at 500 MHz ('H) and 125 MHz ('C). Chemical shifts were referenced relative to TMS or the corresponding residual solvent signals. Deuterated solvents (CDCI) and DMSO-_d_j_ were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc. (Andover, MA, USA). DCCC separations were performed using an EYELA D.C.C.- 300 (Tokyo Rikakikai CO LTD). All solvents used for column chromatography (CC) as well as for DCCC were from analytical grade. Silica gel for CC (60-200 mm) was purchased from Acros Organics (New Jersey, NJ, USA).

### Plant material

The specimens _O. elegans_ Mez. and _P. pyrifolia_ Nees & Mart. ex Nees were collected at Fazenda Campininha, Mogi-Guacu, SP;

## Page 2

_O. corymbosa_ (Meins) Mez. was collected in Araraquara, SP, Brazil. Voucher specimens of _O. elegans_ (Moraes 06), _O. corymbosa_ (deluca 001) and _P. pyrifolia_ (Lima 136) are deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Botanica, SP, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation of chemical constituents

In order to delineate this work, our selection criterion for the elected fractions was based on monitoring the occurrence of signals in the region of aromatic chemical shifts in the 1H NMR spectra. For each studied species, only fractions showing aromatic signals were selected for further chromatographic separations.

The dried and powdered leaves (200 g) of _O. corymbosa_ were sequentially extracted with hexane and methanol at room temperature (3 x 1000 mL, 3 days). The solvents were evaporated under reduced pressure. The methanolic residue (13.6 g) was suspended with methanol:water (9:1, v/v, 300 mL) and then partitioned successively with hexane, ethyl acetate and _n_-butanol (3 x 100 mL). The _n_-buta-nic residue (2.0 g) was submitted to DCCC in descendent mode yielding 33 fractions (180 mL). The solvent system employed was a mixture of chloroform:methanol:water (43:37:20, v/v/v). Fractions 30 (60.0 mg) and 31 (85.0 mg) were subsequently purified by preparative HPLC, using as eluent an isocratic mixture of methanol:water (47:53, v/v), 5 mL min-1, column: Phenomenex Luna phenyl-hexyl (250 x 22 mm, 10 mm particle size) and UV detection at \(l\) 254 nm. This procedure yielded the compounds **1** (12.0 mg, tk = 21.28 min), **2+3** (20.0 mg, tk = 28.61 min) and **4** (5.0 mg, tk = 31.53 min).

The dried and powdered leaves (50.0 g) of _O. elegans_ were submitted to extraction with ethanol at room temperature (3 x 200 mL, 3 days). The solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue (1.23 g) was suspended with methanol:water (9:1, v/v, 50 mL) and then washed with hexane. The hydroalcoholic residue (1.0 g) was submitted to silica gel (60-200 mm) CC, eluted with a gradient of hexane, ethyl acetate and methanol affording 17 fractions (50 mL). The fraction 2 afforded compound **5** (8.0 mg). The fraction 15 (200 mg) was further purified by preparative HPLC yielding compound **6** (120 mg, tk = 32.51 min). As eluent was used an isocratic mixture of water:acetonitrile (8:2, v/v), 12 mL min-1, column: Phenomenex Luna phenyl-hexyl (250 x 22 mm, 10 mm particle size) and UV detection at \(l\) 254 nm.

The dried and powdered leaves (250 g) of _P. pyrifolia_ were sequentially extracted with hexane and methanol at room temperature (3 x 1000 mL, 3 days). The solvents were evaporated under reduced pressure. The hexanic residue (8.0 g) was suspended with methanol:water (9:1, v/v, 200 mL) and then washed with hexane. The hydroalcoholic residue (1.0 g) was submitted to silica gel (60-200 mm) CC, eluted with a gradient of hexane, ethyl acetate and methanol yielding 30 fractions (25 mL). The fractions 4-7 were pooled together and furnished compound **7** (37.0 mg). Fractions 10 (90.0 mg) and 18 (80.0 mg) were purified by preparative HPLC. As eluent was used an isocratic mixture of methanol:water (55:45, v/v), 12.0 mL min-1, column: Phenomenex Luna C-18 (250 x 22 mm, 10 mm particle size) and UV detection at \(l\) 254 nm. This procedure afforded the compounds **8** (11.0 mg, tk = 35.05 min), **9** (3.0 mg, tk = 25.43 min) and **10** (3.0 mg, tk = 52.86 min).

By a combination of spectroscopic methods (1H and 11C NMR spectra) and comparison with the literature data, the compounds were identified as follows: 4-_O-E_-caffeoylquinic acid methyl ester (**1**),15 quercetin-3-O-b-D-glucose (**2**),16 quercetin-3-O-b-D-galactoside (**3**),16 quercetin-3-O-b-D-xyloside (**4**),16_rel_-(1R, 45)-7-hydroxycalamen (**5**),_rel_-(2R, 3R)-dihydroquercetin-3-O-a-C-L-thamosmic (astilb) (**6**),17_rel_-(7S, 75, 8R, 8'R)-sensitivean (**7**),18_rel_-(7S, 75, 8R, 8'R)-methylpiperin (**8**),18_rel_-(7S, 75, 8R, 8'R)-eucl-semin (**9**)18_rel_-(7S, 75, 8R, 8'R)-eucl-semin (**9**)18_rel_-(7S, 75, 8R, 8'R)-magnolin (**10**).19

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The present study reports the isolation of one ester of the 4-_O-E_-caffeoylquinic acid (**1**), four flavonoids (**2-4** and **6**), one aromatic sesquiterpene (**5**) and four furofuran lignans (**7-10**) from the leaves of three Lauraceae species from the Cerrado region of Saio Paulo state, Brazil (Figure 1). This is the first time that an aromatic sesquiterpene and flavonoids are reported for _O. elegans_, flavonoids and an ester of the 4-_O-E_-caffeoylquinic acid for _O. corymbosa_ as well as furofuran lignans for _P. pyrifolia_.

The sesquiterpene _rel_-(1R, 45)-7-hydroxycalamenene (**5**) isolated from _O. elegans_, has already been isolated from _O._ corymbosa.6 However, there are no reports regarding this compound on other Lauraceae genera.

All the flavonoids isolated are derived from quercetin (**2-4**) and dihydroquercetin (**6**) aglycones. This feature seems to be common to other Lauraceae species likewise _O. elegans_ and _O. corymbosa_.

The furofuran lignans (**7-10**) isolated from _P. pirifolia_ were reported previously from _Nectandra_, _Licaria_, and _Litsea_ species.20 This finding corroborates the importance of lignans and neoligans as phytochemical constituents in Lauraceae species.

The genera studied in this work encompass many species, which are difficult to identify based just on morphological features.21 Mistakes in botanical identification could be prevented by using the information obtained from a comprehensive analysis of the chemical profiles of the putative species.

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

NMR (1H and 11C) data for the isolated compounds **1**-**10** are available at [http://www.quimicanova.sbaq.org.br](http://www.quimicanova.sbaq.org.br), in PDF format with free access.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) and Conselho Nacional

Figure 1: Structure of the isolated compounds



## Page 3

de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), as well as by Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Amazonas research fellowship to M. Yoshida. The authors wish to thank FAPESP for providing scholarships.

## References

* Marques & Floresta (2001) Marques, C. A.; _Floresta e Ambiente_**2001**, \(8\), 195; Takaku, S.; Haber, W. A.; Setzer, W. N.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**2007**, _35_, 525.
* Gottlieb (1972) Gottlieb, O. R.; _Plytochemistry_**1972**, _11_, 1537.
* Chavez et al. (1995) Chavez, J. P.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Yoshida, M.; _Plytochemistry_**1995**, _39_, 849.
* de Oliveira et al. (2006) de Oliveira, R. R.; Heringer, A. P.; Figueiredo, M. R.; Futuro, D. O.; Kaplan, M. A. C.; _J. Liq. Chromatography Relat. Technol._**2006**, _29_, 229.
* Moraes & Biona (2005) Moraes, P. L. R.; _Blora__Neutrop._**2005**, \(5\), 1.
* David et al. (1998) David, J. P.; Yoshida, M.; Re: _Latinoame. Quim._**1998**, _26_, 91.
* Werman et al. (1990) Werman, M. J.; Mokady, S.; Neeman, L.; _J. Agric. Food Chem._**1990**, _38_, 2164; Lozano, Y. F.; Dhuique-Mayer, C. M.; Bannon, C.; Gaydou, E. M.; _J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc._**1993**, _70_, 561.
* Kashman et al. (1969) Kashman, Y.; Neeman, I.; Lifshitz, A.; _Tetrahedron_**1969**, _25_, 4617.
* Farines et al. (1995) Farines, M.; Soulier, J.; Rancurel, A.; Montaudoin, M. G.; Leborgne, L.; _J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc._**1995**, _72_, 473.
* Geissman & Dittmar (1965) Geissman, T. A.; Dittmar, H. F. K.; _Pytochemistry_**1965**, \(4\), 359.
* Valeri & Gimeno (1953) Valeri, H.; Gimeno, F.; _Rev. Med. Vet. Parasit._**1953**, _12_, 130; Thompson, R. S.; Jacques, D.; Haslam, E.; Tanner, R. J. N.; _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans._**1972**, \(1\), 1387.
* Ramos et al. (2004) Ramos, M. R.; Jerza, G.; Villanuevac, S.; Dellamaryb, F. L.; Waibeld, R.; Winterhaltera, P.; _Plytochemistry_**2004**, _65_, 955.
* [http://www.clubedaesmente.org.br/macaranduba.html](http://www.clubedaesmente.org.br/macaranduba.html), accessed in February 2008.
* Scora & Scora (2001) Scora, R. W.; Scora, P. E.; _J. Essent. Oil Res._**2001**, _13_, 37.
* Meira et al. (2008) Meira, M.; David, J. M.; David, J. P.; Araujo, S. V.; Regis, T. L.; Giulietti, A. M.; Queiroz, L. P. de; _Quim. Nova_**2008**, _31_, 751.
* Agrawal et al. (1989) Agrawal, P. K.; Thakur, R. S.; Bansal, M. C.; Foo, L. Y.; Markham, K. R.; Porter, K. J. Em _Carbon-13 NMR of Flavonoids_: Agrawal, P. K., ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1989.
* Lu et al. (1999) Lu, Y.; Foo, L. Y.; _Food Chem._**1999**, _65_, 1.
* Iida et al. (1982) Iida, T.; Nakano, M.; Ito, K.; _Plytochemistry_**1982**, _21_, 673.
* Miyazawa et al. (1993) Miyazawa, M.; Kasahara, H.; Kameoka, H.; _Plytochemistry_**1993**, _32_, 1421.
* Algerio et al. (1987) Algerio, L. V.; Braz Filho, R.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Maia, J. G. S.; _Plytochemistry_**1981**, _20_, 1963; Carvalho, M. G.; Yoshida, M.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Gottlieb, H. E.; _Plytochemistry_**1987**, _26_, 265; Holloway, D.; Scheinmann, F.; _Plytochemistry_**1974**, _13_, 1233; Barbosa Filho, J. M.; Yoshida, M.; Gottlieb, O. R.; _Plytochemistry_**1989**, _28_, 1991.
* Gomes et al. (1983) Gomes, M. C. C. P.; Yoshida, M.; Gottlieb, O. R.; Martinez, V.; Gottlieb, H. E.; _Plytochemistry_**1983**, _22_, 269.



## Page 4



**AROMATIC COMPOUNDS FROM THREE BRAZILIAN LAURACEAE SPECIES**

**Andrea Nastri de Luca Batista*, Joao Marcos Batista Junior, Silvia Noeli Lopez, Maysa Furlan, Alberto Jose Cavalheiro, Dulee Helena Siqueuriza Silva e Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani**

Departamento de Quimica Organica, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista "Julio de Mesquita Filho", Rua Francisco Degni, s/n, 14800-900 Araraquara - SP, Brasil

**Sergio Massayoshi Nunomura**

Departamento de Produtos Naturais, Divisao de Quimica de Produtos Naturais, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Av. Andre Araujo, 2936, 69083-000 Manaus - AM, Brasil

**Massayoshi Yoshida**

Centro de Biotecnologia da Amazonia, Av. Governador Danilo de Matos Areosa, 690, 69075-351 Manaus - AM, Brasil

_rel-_(1**_R_, 4S)-7-hydroxycalamenene (**5**): \({}^{1}\)H NMR (CDCl\({}_{3}\), 500 MHz) \(\delta\) : 2.64 (1H, m, H-1), 1.25 (1H, m, H-2a), 1.18 (1H, m, H-2b), 1.49 (1H, m, H-3a), 1.74 (1H, m, H-3b), 2.56 (1H, m, H-4), 6.86 (1H, s, H-5), 6.57 (1H, s, H-8), 2.12 (1H, m, H-11), 0.64 (3H, d, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, H-12), 0.91 (3H, d, \(J\) = 6.5 Hz, H-13), 1.16 (3H, d, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, H-14), 2.13 (3H, s, H-15), 1.15 (3H, s, H-15), 1.16 (3H, d, \(J\) = 8.5

## Page 5

\(\delta\) : 6.83 (2H, d, \(J\) = 1.5 Hz, H-2 and H-2'), 6.77 (2H, d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5 and H-5'), 6.79 (2H, dd, \(J\) = 1.5 and 8.0 Hz, H-6 and H-6'), 4.68 (2H, d, \(J\) = 4.0 Hz, H-7 and H-7'), 3.03 (2H, m, H-8 and H-8'), 4.18 (2H, dd, \(J\) = 7.0 and 9.0 Hz, H-9eq., and H-9' eq.), 3.81 (2H, m, H-9ax.), and H-9' ax.), 3.80 (6H, s, OMe-3 and OMe-3'), 3.82 (6H, s, OMe-4 and OMe-4). 10C NMR (CDCl\({}_{x}\), 125 MHz) \(\delta\) : 133.6 (C-1 and C-1'), 109.3 (C-2 and C-2'), 148.7 (C-3 and C-3'), 149.2 (C-4 and C-4'), 111.1 (C-5 and C-5'), 118.2 (C-6 and C-6'), 85.8 (C-7 and C-7'), 54.2 (C-8 and C-8'), 71.7 (C-9 and C-9'), 55.9 (OMe-3, OMe-3', OMe-4 and OMe-4').

_rel-(7S, 7'S, 8R, 8'R)-magnolin (**10**): 1H NMR (CDCl\({}_{x}\), 500 MHz) \(\delta\) : 6.83 (1H, d, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz, H-2), 6.77 (1H, d, \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5), 6.80 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 2.0 and 8.0 Hz, H-6), 4.69 (1H, d, \(J\) = 4.5 Hz, H-7), 3.03 (1H, m, H-8), 4.21 (1H, dd, \(J\) = 7.0 and 9.0 Hz, H-eq.), 3.82 (1H, m, H-9ax.), 6.50 (1H, s, H-2' and H-6'), 4.67 (1H, d, \(J\) = 5.0 Hz, H-7'), 3.03 (1H, m, H-8'), 4.20 (1H, m, H-9' eq.), 3.84 (1H, m, H-9' ax.), 3.80 (3H, s, OMe-3), 3.82 (3H, s, OMe-4'), 3.79 (3H, s, OMe-3' and OMe-5'), 3.76 (3H, s, OMe-4'). 13C NMR (CDCl\({}_{x}\), 125 MHz) \(\delta\) : 133.1 (C-1), 109.3 (C-2), 148.7 (C-3), 149.2 (C-4), 111.1 (C-5), 118.2 (C-6), 85.7 (C-7 and C-7'), 54.1 (C-8), 71.9 (C-9), 136.8 (C-1'), 102.9 (C-2' and C 

