# 10.1021@np50006a014.pdf

## Page 1



# Essential oils from Brazilian _Rutaceae_. I. GENUS _Pilocarpus_

A. A. Craveiro, C. H. S. Andrade, F. J. A. Maros and J. W. Alencar

Departamento de Quimica Orgdnica e Inorgdmica, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Fortaleza-Ceara-Brasil

###### Abstract.

Essential oil of _Pilocarpus microphylilus_ Stapf, _P. jaborandi_ Holmes, _P. affinis pauciformis_ Stapf. _P. sp_ 192 and _P. sp_ 212 contains terpenes, sesquiterpenes and ketones. Some of them are reported for the first time in the genus.

The leaves of jaborandi are commercially exploited in the Brazilian Northeast for industrial extraction of pilocarpine, an alkaloid with potent cholinergic activity (1).

In the leaves, there is also an essential oil present whose composition is registered in the literature in a confusing and incomplete way (2, 3, 4) which might be attributed to improper selection of plant material or lack of suitable identification because analyses were made on commercial materials. Therefore, chemical reexamination of the essential oil from five distinct _Pilocarpus_ species was conducted together with an analysis of the leaves used by local industry.

## DISCUSSION

The plants were collected in the states of Ceara, Maranhao, and Pernambuco. Commercial material was obtained from the industry in the state of Piaui. The last material was mainly composed of _Pilocarpus microphylilus_ Stapf. leaflets according to pharmaeognostic examination (3). _P. jaborandi_ Holmes, _P. microphylilus_ and _P. affinis pauciformis_ Stapf. were identified among the species collected; two other distinct species of the genus are in the stage of botanical identification. Essential oil from each sample was obtained by steam distillation. Yields and collection sites are described in table 1.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c|c c c c} No. & Common name & Botanical species & From & Oil yield \% \\
01 & Jaborandi do Maranhao & _P. mycrophyillus_ Stapf. & S. Quiteria—Ma. & 0.25 \\  & & & 1at. long. & 3°33′S 42°35′W \\
02 & Jaborandi Branco & _P. jaborandi_ Holmes & Metuoca—Ce. & 0.5 \\  & & & 1at. long. & 3°30′S 40°30′W \\
03 & Jaborandi & _P. affinis pauciformis_ Stapf. & Crate—Ce. & 0.6 \\  & & & 1at. long. & 7°10′S 39°25′W \\
04 & Jaborandi da Folha & _Pilocarpus_ sp.—192 & Viscosa—Ce. & 1.2 \\  & & & 1at. long. & 9°28′S 36°25′W \\
05 & Pimentina & _Pilocarpus_ sp.—212 & Bodoco—Pe. & 0.6 \\  & & & 1at. long. & 7°35′S 39°55′W \\
06 & Commercial jaborandi & _P. mycrophyillus_a Stapf. & Parnabia—Pi. & 0.3 \\  & & & 1at. long. & 2°25′S 41°45′W \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1. Essential oils of pilocarpus species: yields and collections sites.



## Page 2

Table 2 presents the chemical composition of the essential oil from the five _Pilocarpus_ species and includes, also, analysis of a commercial sample. a-Pinene is the only constituent present in all species studied, and the rare diterpene sandaracopimaradiene is characteristic of _Pilocarpus jaborandi_.

The chemical constituents of the essential oil from commercial pilocarpus leaves confirms the pharmacognostic identification of _P. mycrophyllus_ as the major species present in the mixture. The presence of all compounds except limonene and 2-undecanone is being reported for the first time in the genus.

## EXPERIMENTAL

The plants were collected on the locations mentioned in table 1. Botanical identifications were made by Prof. Afranio G. Fernandes. Voucher specimens were deposited in the herbarium of the Departamento de Biologia--Universidade Federal do Ceara under number 3028, 2969, 3229, 3251 and 3563.

Isolation of constituents.--Essential oil extraction was carried out by steam distillation of finely ground leaves in an apparatus developed in our laboratory (5). The yields (volume/volume) are reported in table 1. Each essential oil, after separation, was dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and sealed in glass vials under nitrogen atmosphere.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c}  & Component* & Species* & Identification process \\  & I & II & III & IV & V & VI & \\
1 & limonene & 47.0* & 2.0 & 4.0 & — & 7.0 & — & ir, pmr, ms \\
2 & myrcene & 0.5 & — & 2.0 & — & 4.0 & — & ir, pmr, ms \\
3 & β-ocimene* & — & 1.0 & — & — & — & — & ms \\
4 & α-pinene & 2.5 & 1.0 & 8.0 & 2.5 & 13.0 & 0.8 & ir, pmr, ms \\
5 & sabinee & — & — & 20.0 & 6.0 & 30.0 & 3.0 & ir, pmr, ms \\
6 & α-terpinene & — & — & 2.0 & — & 4.0 & — & ir, pmr, ms \\
7 & γ-terpinene & — & — & — & 10.0 & — & ir, pmr, ms \\
8 & tricyclene* & — & — & — & 1.0 & — & ms \\
9 & 3.7.7-trimethylbicyclo[3.1.1.]- & & & & & & & \\
2-heptene* & — & 12.0 & 2.0 & — & — & — & ms \\
10 & terpinene-4-ol* & — & — & — & 1.0 & — & ms \\
11 & β-cadinene* & — & 4.7* & — & — & 11.0 & 5.6 & ms \\
12 & γ-cadinene* & — & — & — & 11.0 & — & ms \\
13 & expropylplenene & — & 19.0 & — & 8.0 & 5.0 & 15.0 & ir, pmr, ms \\
14 & α-copene & — & 3.0 & — & — & 9.5 & ir, pmr, ms \\
15 & γ-elemene & — & — & — & 4.0 & — & pmr, ms \\
16 & α-guyene & — & 4.4 & — & — & — & ir, ms \\
17 & humuleene & — & 4.0 & — & — & 1.0 & — & ir, pmr, ms \\
18 & β-selinene* & — & — & 2.0 & — & — & ms \\
19 & sandaracopimaradiene & 0.5 & — & — & — & — & ms, pmr \\
20 & 2-undecanone* & 22.5 & — & 43.0 & 33.0 & — & — & ms \\
21 & 2-tridecanone* & — & 22.0 & — & — & — & 23.0 & ms \\
22 & vinyl dodecanoste* & 0.5 & — & — & — & — & — & ms \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Chemical composition of essential oils from _Pilocarpus_ species from Brazilian northeast.



## Page 3

The fresh oils were analyzed by glc on a VARIAN FID instrument equipped with a stainless steel column (1.5 m x 3.0 mm) packed with 5% OV-101 on chromosorb W, at the programmed temperature 50-250degC/4degmin, and with nitrogen as carrier gas.

Limonene, myrcene, a-pinene, sabinene, caryophyllene, humulene, g-elemene, and sandara-copimaradiene were isolated by preparative glc performed in a VARIAN FID instrument with an aluminum column (6.5 m x 9 mm) packed with 3% OV-101 on chromosorb W.

The oils were submitted to gc/ms separation on a FINNIGAN 3300 quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to a gc equipped with a glass column (1,5 m x 3,1 mm) packed with 3% OV-101 on chromosorb W with helium as the carrier gas and ms spectra recorded at 70 eV. The infrared spectra were obtained on a Zeiss UR-20 instrument using liquid films.

The pmr spectra were obtained on a VARIAN 60 MHz instrument in carbon tetrachloride solution with TMS as internal standard.

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Banco do Nordeste do Brasil S.A., Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for financial support and YEGETEX S.A. (Parnaiba, Piaui), for the sample of commercial jaborandi.

## References

* [1] M. Windhol E.R., "The Merck Index", 966, 9th Ed., Merck & Co., U.S.A. (1976).
* [2] E. Guenther, "The Essential Oils", R. Krieger Publ. Co., N. York, 1949, Vol. III, p. 374.
* [3] T. E. Wallis, "Textbook of Pharmacognosy", Churchill Ltd, London, 1955, p. 12.
* [4] J. Golse, "Precis de Matiere Medicale", G. Doin Ed., Paris 1955, p. 782.
* [5] A. A. Craveiro, F. J. A. Matos and J. W. Alencar, _J. Chem. Educ._, 53, 652 (1976).
* [6] E. Stenhagen and S. Abrahamson, "Registry of Mass Spectral Data", F. W. McLafferty, Fd., Wiley, N. York (1974).



