# 10.1016@0031-9422(80)83022-6.pdf

## Page 1



# PTEROCAPANS FROM _Swartzia Laevicarpa_

Raimundo Braz Filho, Miguel P. L. De Moraes and Otto R. Gottlieb

# Abstract

An ethanol extract of the trunkwood from _Swartzia laevicarpa_ (Leguminosae) gave four (6a,R,11a_R_)-8-hydroxy-3,9-dimethoxyytrocerapms differentiated by additional 2-hydroxy, 2-hydroxy-10-methoxy, 4,10-dimethoxy and 2-hydroxy-4,10-dimethoxy substitution; besides two 8-hydroxy-6-methoxy-3-methylisocoumarins differentiated by 5-chloro and 7-chloro substitution; 5-hydroxy-7,8-dimethoxy-2-methylchromone and the known 8-hydroxy-5-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyisocoumarin.

## INTRODUCTION

Rationalization of the ethnopharmacological importance of _Swartzia_[2] is not yet possible. In spite of the wide distribution over Africa and chiefly South America, little is known about the chemical composition of the genus. Three of its era 130 species, the African _S. madagascariensis_ and _S. leiocalycina_ and the South American _S. ulei_ Harms were analysed and found to contain pterocarpanoids (Table 1). The present paper reports the occurrence of four additional pterocarpanols and of some other constituents in a fourth species, _S. laevicarpa_ Amsh. (_= S. benthamiana_ Rh.) from a forest near Manaus, Amazonas, which is periodically previoualy reported pterocarpanoids, is assumed to exist inundated by the Rio Negro. The species is widely distributed over the basin of the Amazonas river. Its dark heartwood is much appreciated in Manaus, where it is sold under the name'saboarana' [6].

## RESULTS

The four pterocarpans **ij**-**lm** were recognised as such by the typical NMR signals corresponding to the ABMX-system of four protons [3, 7] and, in the case of **1k**, the three carbons (_d_ 40.8, C-6a; 66.4, C-6; 78.2, C-11a) of the central oxygen-heterocyclic rings. Assignment of aromatic proton signals by chemical shift and multiplicity is trivial (Table 2), chiefly if the 3,9-dioxygenation pattern, ubiquitous in all 77 previously reported pterocarpanoids, is assumed to exist

## Page 2

also in the present cases. For **1k** hydrogenolysis and MS of the resulting isofluavan **3** revealed the distribution of hydroxy-methoxy groups among the two aromatic rings. The relative location of OH-OMe followed, in all cases, comparative 1H NMR analysis of the spectrum of the compounds and their acetates (Table 2). The assignment of hydroxyls to C-2 and C-3 in **1k** was confirmed by paramagnetic pyridine-induced 1H NMR shifts {8}; \(A\)0.49 (H-1), 0.27 (H-4), 0.46 (H-7); as well as by 13C NMR comparison of the compound and its acetate [9]; paramagneticshifts of 9.3 (C-1) and 7.8 (C-7). The four pterocarpans **1j**-**1m** are characterized by the same multiple ORD Cotton effects in the 250- 350 nm region as the three (-)-pterocarpans from _Dahlegia spruceana_ Benth. [10] and must thus possess the same _GaR_,11aR-configuration.

Besides sitosterol and stigmasterd, four additional compounds with molecular formulae (1,1H2O3, (4), \(C\)1,1H2O3, (4), \(C\)1,1H2O3, (5a, 5b) and C12H12O3 (6) were isolated from the extract. The known dihydroisocoumarin **4** was identified by direct comparison with an authentic sample [11]. Isocumarin or chromone skeletons were proposed for the remaining three compounds in view of MS, MW,IR and 1H NMR characteristics which included quartets (_J_ = 0.5 Hz) for olefinic proton signals. The coupling with methyl protons thus indicated was confirmed by the appearance of C-Me signals as doublets (_J_ = 0.5 Hz) and by double resonance experiments. The chemical shifts of the olefinic proton signals, +- 3.34 and 3.36 for **5a** and **5b** vs 3.82 for **6** is diagnostic respectively for isocumariums (+-3.3-6 [12 15]) vs chromones (+-3.8 4.1 [16, 17]). The carbonyls of all three compounds are chelated by hydroxyls at the adjacent aromatic positions (AlCl3 shifts of UV maxima). In both isocumarins these hydroxyls must be _meta_-related with methoxys, the lone aromatic protons being exposed to the shielding effect of two oxy-substituents (r 3.47 **5a**, 3.44 **5b**). Finally, the C1 atoms were assigned to C-7 in **5a** and C-5 in **5b** in view of respectively positive and negative Gibbs tests [18]. Acetylation of the chromone results in a 0.22 ppm paramagnetic shift of the 1H NMR singlet at +- 3.62. The lone aromatic proton must thus be either _ortho_- or _para_-related with the hydroxyl, the former alternative (6) being more likely in view of a negative Gibbs test [18].

## Discussion

It has been observed [11] that the presence of polyketides, such as isocumarins and chromones, in the wood of a flowering plant could be due to contamination by fungi during storage prior to extraction. If contamination had occurred again in the present case, the possibly antifungal pterocarpanoids [19] may have been restricted to the resistant heartwood.

## Experimental

_Isolation of the constituents_. Percolation of trunkwood (11 kg) with EtOH gave an extract (226 g) which was adsorbed on Si gel. The powder was first washed with petrol and then with C4H6. The C4H6-cluate (20 g) was chromatographed on Si gel (600 g). Upon elution with CHCl3, 68 successive 250 ml fractions were collected. Evap of the solvent of fractions 6(A), 7(B), 8-10(C), 19(D), 20 25(E), 26 36(F), 37.39(G), 60-68(H) gave the indicated products. A (25 mg), washed with petrol gave **5a** (15 mg) B(15 mg) was washed with C6H6. petrol and cryst. from MeOH to **5b** (5 mg). C(40 mg) was rechromatographed on Si gel, CHCl3-C4H6.8.2: chelating a product which, after recryst. in C6H6, gave **4** (12 mg). D was cryst. from petrol to sitosterol + stigmasterd (1.2 g). E (1.2 g) was rechromatographed on Si gel, CHCl3 eluting in succession, first a product which, after recryst. from MeOH, gave **6** (18 mg) and next another product which, after recryst. from petrol, gave sitosterol + stigmasterd (450 mg). F was rechromatographed on Si gel, CHCl3 eluting successively 3 products. The first one (50 mg) was cryst. from C6H6 into 1H (20 mg). The residue of the mother liquor gave, upon addition of petrol, **1j** (10 mg). The second one was cryst. from C6H6-petrol into **1j** (15 mg). The third one was cryst. from C6H6. M62CO to **1K** (70 mg). G (100 mg) was cryst. from C6H6. M62CO to **1K** (20 mg). H (80 mg) was fused from acid impurities by washing of a CHCl3 soln with aq. NaHCO3. The CHCl3 was evapd and the residue cryst. from petrol to **1m** (40 mg).

(6aR.11aR-2,8-_Dihydroxy_-2,9-_dimethoxyperocarpan_ (**1j**), mp 178-180 (C6H6-petrol) [ M found: 316.0955: C1,1H6O6 requires: 316.0947 \(\begin{equation*}{\mathrm{a}}{\mathrm{m}}{\mathrm{e}}^{{\mathrm{-}{\mathrm{m}}{\mathrm{e}}{\mathrm{m}}}}\end{equation*}\) 13480, 1630, 1600, 14095 \(\begin{equation*}{\mathrm{a}}{\mathrm{m}}^{{\mathrm{-}{\mathrm{m}}{\mathrm{e}}{\mathrm{m}}}}\end{equation*}\) 2090, 304 \(\begin{equation*}{\mathrm{a}}{\mathrm{m}}^{{\mathrm{-}{\mathrm{m}}{\mathrm{e}}{

## Page 3



## Page 4

AcknowledgementsThis work was financially supported by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico. We are grateful to Dr. P. M. Baker, NPPN, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, for the registry of NMR and MS.

## References

* [1] Maranduba, A., Oliveira, A. B. de Oliveira, G. G. de, Reis, J. E. de P. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18**, 815.
* [2] Schultes, R. E. (1979) _J. Ethnopharmacol._**1**, 79.
* [3] Harper, S. H., Kemp, A. D. and Underwood, W. G. E. (1969) _J. Chem. Soc. C_ 1109.
* [4] Donnelly, D. M. X. and Fitzgerald, M. A. (1971) _Phytochemistry_**10**, 3147.
* [5] Formiga, M. D., Gottlieb, O. R., Mendes, P. H., Koketsu, M., Almeida, M. E. L. de, Pereira, M. O. da S., Magalhaes, M. T. (1975) _Phytochemistry_**14**, 828.
* [6] Ducke, A. (1949) _As Leguminosas da Amazonia Brasileira_, 2nd edn, p. 139. Boletim Tecnico do Instituto Agronomico do Norte, Belem.
* [7] Pachier, K. G. and Underwood, W. G. E. (1967) _Tetrahedron_**23**, 1817.
* [8] Demarco, P. V., Farkas, E., Doddrell, D., Mylari, B. L. and Wenkert, E. (1968) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**90**, 5480.
* [9] Chalmers, A. A., Rall, G. J. H. and Oberholzer, M. E. (1977) _Tetrahedron_**33**, 1735.
* [10] Cook, J. T., Ollis, W. D., Sutherland, I. O. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1978) _Phytochemistry_**17**, 1419.
* [11] Alvarenga, M. A. de, Braz Fo., R., Gottlieb, O. R., Dias, J. P. de P., Magalhaes, A. F., Magalhaes, E. G., Magalhaes, G. C., Magalhaes, M. T., Maia, J. G. S., Marques, R., Marsaioil, A. J., Mesquita, A. A. L., Moracs, A. A. de, Oliveira, A. B. de, Oliveira, G. G. de, Pedreira, G., Pereira, S. A., Pinho, S. L. V., Sant' Ana, A. E. G. and Santos, C. C. (1978) _Phytochemistry_**17**, 511.
* [12] Aldridge, D. C., Grose, J. F. and Turner, W. B. (1966) _J. Chem. Soc. C_ 126.
* [13] Eaton, M. A. W. and Hutchinson, D. W. (1971) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 1337.
* [14] Guger, H. (1977) _Phytochemistry_**16**, 795.
* [15] Roberts, J. C. and Woolsen, P. (1970) _J. Chem. Soc. C_ 278.
* [16] Pachler, K. G. R. and Roux, D. G. (1967) _J. Chem. Soc. C_ 604.
* [17] Aberhort, D. J. (1969) _J. Chem. Soc. C_ 704.
* [18] Mesquita, A. A. L., Correa, D. de B., Gottlieb, O. R. and Magalhaes, M. T. (1968) _Analyt. Chim. Acta_**42**, 311.
* [19] Harborne, J. B. (1977) _Pure Appl. Chem._**49**, 1403.



