# 10.1021@np0496845.pdf

## Page 1



# Acylperoxylated and _seco_-Mexicanolides from Stems of _Khaya anthotheca_

Izabel C. Piloto Ferreira, Diogenes A. Garcia Cortez, M. Fatima das G. F. da Silva, Edson Rodrigues Fo., Paulo C. Vieira, Joao B. Fernandes

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa postal 676, 13565-905, Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil, Departamento de Farmacia e Farmacologia da Universidade Estadual de Maringa, Avenida Colombo 5790, Campus Universitario, 87020-900, Maringa-Parana, Brazil

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +55-16-3351-8093.Fax: +55-16-3351/8350.E-mail: dmfs@power.ufscar.br.Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos.Universidade Estadual de Maringa.

###### Abstract

The stems of _Khaya anthotheca_ yielded two new limonoids, which were identified on the basis of spectroscopic analysis as 1a,8o-oxido-3/2-acetoxy-2a-acylperoxy-1a,14a-dihydroxy-[3.3.1102]-bicyclomicale-7,19-olide (3) and 3-acetoxy-8,14-dien-8,30-seco-khhayalactone (4). Methyl 1a,2b,3a,6,8a,14d-hexahydroxy-[4.2.110,30.114]-tricylcomeliae-7-oate, scopoletin, and 3-O-b-glucopyranosylistosterol were also isolated. The limonoids were of little value to clarify the basis of the nonresistance against _Hypispiyla grandella_.

## References

- _Khaya senegalensis_ (Desr.) A. Juss. (Meliaceae) occurs in the sub-Saharan savanna area from Senegal to Uganda.1 However, this was introduced in Brazil and showed excellent growth and an absence of attacks by the shoot borer _Hypispiyla grandella_, in contrast to the native _K. anthothecca_.2,3 To determine the phytochemical basis of this resistance, we examined the exotic _K. senegalensis_ and we isolated five limonoids, e.g., methyl 1a,6,8a,14d,30b-pen-thalydry-3-oxo-[3.3.1102]-tricylcomeliae-7-oate (1) and methyl 1a,2b,3a,6,8a,14d-hexahydroxy-[4.2.110,30.114]-tricylcomeliae-7-oate (2).2,3 The latter represented a new group of methyl tricyclomeliae-7-oates. Thus, the resistance of exotic _K. senegalensis_ to native _H. grandella_ may well be due to the presence of the methyl [4.2.110,30.114]-tricylcomeliae-7-oate limonoids. However, it would not be surprising if these limonoids had remained undiscovered in the _K. anthotheca_ because of their low concentrations or due to seasonal variations in the chemical composition of its species. Therefore, it was premature to draw any conclusions about the role of tricyclo-[4.2.110,30.114]-decane limonoids in a possible coevolutionary relationship between Meliaceae and _H. grandella_, until the native _K. anthotheca_ could be re-evaluated for the presence of these limonoids. To establish this, we have now undertaken a further investigation of stems of _K. anthotheca_.

A dichloromethane-soluble fraction of the MeOH extract of the stems of _K. anthotheca_ was purified by repeated column chromatography on silica gel and preparative TLC to give 2,23 seopoletin, situosterol, stigmasterol, campestored, 3-O-b-glucopyranosylistosterol, and two new limonoids (3, 4). The limonoid 3 was identified on the basis of the following data. The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1) indicated the presence of three tertiary methyl groups (_d_ 0.92, 0.99, 1.48), three downfied shifted signals attributed to a 3-substituted furan ring (_d_ 7.47, 7.46, 6.40), four signals characteristic of protons attached to a carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (_d_ 4.20 d, \(J\) = 12.0 Hz; 4.40 d, \(J\) = 12.0 Hz; 5.27 s; 5.59 s), and two AB-type methylenes (_d_ 2.86 d, \(J\) = 19 Hz; 3.04 d, \(J\) = 19 Hz; and 1.89 d, \(J\) = 14 Hz; 2.69 d, \(J\) = 14 Hz). From the HMBC experiments (Table 1) the observed correlation between the 1H signal \(d\) 5.27, assigned to H-17, and the C signal at \(d\) 140.8 (C-21) determined the position of the furan ring at C-17. The signal for H-17 showed a one-bond correlation with the C signal at \(d\) 77.2. The methyl proton at \(d\) 0.99 showed long-range correlations with the C-17 signal (_d_ 77.2) and the C signals at \(d\) 30.4 (CH2, by HSQC and DEPT 135deg), 40.3 (quaternary), and 71.9 (quaternary), thus indicating the hydroxyl group to be located at C-14 and leading to their assignments as H3-18, C-12, C-13, and C-14, respectively. The C-12 signal at \(d\) 30.4 showed a one-bond correlation with the protons at \(d\) 1.54 and 1.84, which were coupled to each other and to the hydrogens at \(d\) 1.39 and 1.63, and both latter signals also showed cross-peaks with the C at \(d\) 20.6 in the HSQC experiments. These signals were then assigned to H2-12, H2-11, and C-11, respectively. The large

## Page 2

geminal coupling constant of the C-15 methylene protons was consistent with their position a to a carbonyl group with C-14 fully substituted. This was supported by the long-range correlations of the H\({}_{2}\)-15 signals at d 2.86 and 3.04 to the C-16 signal at d 169.0, indicating a D-ring d-lactone system. Moreover, the existence of correlation between the H\({}_{2}\)-15 signals and the carbon at d 81.2 indicated a tertiary hydroxyl substituent at C-8 or cyclic ether. The AB-type methylene protons at d 2.69 and 1.89 (d, \(J=14.0\) Hz) were attributed to H\({}_{2}\)-30 by their correlation with the C-8 and suggested the presence of a mexic-candolic limonoid. Two methyl groups at d 0.92 and 1.48 showed cross-peaks with the C signal at d 75.6, which showed a one-bond correlation with the proton at d 5.59, and this in turn had a long-range correlation to the C signal at d 170.0, thus indicating an acetyl substituent at C-3 and establishing their assignments as H\({}_{2}\)-28, H\({}_{2}\)-29, C-3, and H-3, respectively. The chemical shifts of C-4 and C-5 were established as d 38.8 (quaternary) and 37.7 (CH), respectively, via correlations of H\({}_{3}\)-28 and H\({}_{3}\)-29 and the carbon signals. The oxymethylene protons at d 4.20 and 4.40 were coupled only to each other and showed a one-bond correlation with the carbon at d 73.3 (CH\({}_{2}\)) and long-range correlations with C-5 and the carbon at d 173.2, suggesting the presence of a 19\(-\)7 lactone ring, since it was the only location left in the nucleus. The H\({}_{2}\)-d chemical shift was established as d\(\beta_{1}\) 25.4 nm (d 29.8, by HSQC) via correlation with C-7 (d 173.2). Similarly, C-10 and C-9 were assigned via correlation of H\({}_{2}\)-19 signals and the carbons at d 47.5 (quaternary) and 52.5 (CH), respectively. Two oxygen atoms must also be connected at C-1 due to the observed correlations between H\({}_{2}\)-19 and the carbon at d 107.6. The deshielded carbon resonance required the presence of a hemiketal involving a tertiary hydroxyl at C-1 and a cyclic ether formed by joining C-1 to O-8, which agreed closely with published data for senseonidle (**5**, d 107.7, C-1).4 The relationship of the hydroxylic proton at d 7.64 to C-1 and C-10, as well as of a second hydroxylic proton at d 2.82 to C-13, led to their assignments as OH-1 and OH-14, respectively. Moreover, the OH-1 also showed a long-range correlation with the carbon at d 93.6, which was attributed to C-2. The deshielded resonance observed here (d 93.6) is not typical of a 2-acetoxyxicanide, when compared with procerin (a 2-acetoxytricyclo-[3.3.102.11.4]-decane system, d 83.1, C-2).5 The \({}^{13C}\) NMR showed the presence of a second \(O\)-acetyl group (d 175.2, Table 1). The HR-mass spectrum and ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula to be C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{30}\)O\({}_{13}\) (m/z 604.21559), and the fragments at _m/z_ 611 (M + K \(-\) O\({}_{2}\), 35%)6 suggested the presence of an acylperoxy group at C-2, whose spectroscopic properties are in accord with the above data. Several limonoids with peroxide substituents have been isolated;7 however, the presence of an acylperoxy functionality is reported here for the first time. Various stable peroxy esters have been synthesized, 1-(acylperoxy)adamantanes8 and 1-acetoperoxy-2-oxabicyclo-[4.3.0]-nonane, 1-acetoperoxy-2-oxabicyclo[4.4.0]-decane, and 1-acetoperoxy-2-oxabicyclo-[4.10.0]-hexadecane.9

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c c c c c c c} \hline  & \multicolumn{4}{c}{compound **3**} & \multicolumn{4}{c}{compound **4**} \\ \hline  & \multicolumn{4}{c}{mult.,} & & & & & mult., & & & & \\ position & \(\delta\) \({}^{1}\)H & \(J\) Hz & NOESY/NOEDIF & \(\delta\) \({}^{13C}\) & HMBC (C) & position & \(\delta\) \({}^{1}\)H & \(J\) Hz & NOESY & \(\delta\) \({}^{13C}\) & HMBC (C) \\ \hline
1 & & & & 107.6 & 1 & & & & & & 117.2 & \\
2 & & & & 93.6 & & 2 & & & & 205.6 & \\
3 & 5.59 & s & 3-OAc, 28, 29 & 75.6 & 2, 3-OAc, 4, 5, 28, 30 & & & & 80.4 & 2, 3-OAc, 4, 5, 28 \\
4 & & & & 38.8 & & 4 & & & & & 44.3 & \\
5 & 2.25 & m & 28, 11\(\beta\) & 37.7 & 10 & & 5 & 2.74 & t, 4.2 & 28 & 46.8 & 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 19, 28 \\
6 & 2.54 & m & 5, 28, 29, & 29.8 & 4, 5, 7, 10 & & 6 & 2.39 & dd, 4.2, 19 & 31.8 & 4, 5, 7, 10 \\  & & & & 3-OAc & & & & 7.3; 2H & & & \\
7 & & & & 173.2 & & 7 & & & & 173.4 & \\
8 & & & & 81.2 & & 8 & & & & 141.9 & \\
9 & 2.55 & m & 11o, 12\(\alpha\) & 52.5 & 5, 10 & & & & & 130.6 & \\
10 & & & & 47.5 & & 10 & & & & 57.6 & \\
11\(\beta\) & 1.39 & m & & & 20.6 & & & 11a & 2.14 & m & & 16.8

## Page 3

The configuration suggested for **3** was based on the biosynthesis of limonoids;\({}^{10}\) however, these were supported by the NOESY and NOEDIFF experiments (Table 1). The NOEs between the hydroxyl proton at \(\delta\) 2.82 and H\({}_{3}\)-18 and H-15\(\alpha\) allowed the assignment of this signal to 14-OH, also showing that the hydroxyl group at C-14 is thus in the \(\alpha\)-orientation. In the same way, the NOEs between the hydroxyl proton at \(\delta\) 7.64 and H\({}_{2}\)-29\(\alpha\) and H-3 show that this signal can be attributed to the 1\(\alpha\)-OH and that H-3 is on the \(\alpha\)-side of the molecule. The new natural product is, therefore, 1\(\alpha\),8\(\alpha\)-oxide-3\(\beta\)-acetoxy-2\(\alpha\)-acycloryoxy-1\(\alpha\),14\(\alpha\)-dihydroxy-[3.3.1\({}^{10}\),\(\beta\)]-bicyclomeliac-7,19-olide (**3**). The structural assignment was also supported by comparison of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum with that of senseapalide (**5**).\({}^{4}\)

Limonoid **4** also showed the spectroscopic characteristics of a furan ring at C-17 and a D-ring \(\delta\)-lactone system. However, instead of signals for a 14-hydroxy \(\delta\)-lactone, it showed a signal for one olefinic proton (\(\delta\) 6.02, \(\delta\)), which was attributed to H-15 by its HMBC correlation with C-16 (\(\delta\) 165.8). Moreover, the existence of a correlation between H-15 and the carbon at \(\delta\) 141.9 indicated a double bond between C-8 and C-9 or C-8 and C-30. A mexicanobile limonoid with a double bond between C-8 and C-30 would show a signal for an olefinic proton at ca. \(\delta\) 5.40 in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum.\({}^{5}\) Thus, placement of the double bond between C-8 and C-9 was confirmed by the absence of a second olefinic proton. The chemical shift of C-12 was established as \(\delta\) 31.8, via correlations between H-17 (\(\delta\) 5.18, \(s\)) and C-12. C-12 showed one-bond correlations with the protons at \(\delta\) 2.18 and 1.57, and the latter signal also showed cross-peaks with the carbon at \(\delta\) 130.6, which was attributed to C-9, confirming the presence of a double bond between C-8 and C-9. In the same way, C-14 emerged from the correlation between H\({}_{3}\)-18 (\(\delta\) 1.02) and the carbon at \(\delta\) 150.8. The resonances observed for C-8 (\(\delta\) 141.9) and C-9 (\(\delta\) 130.6) are not typical of an 8,14-dien-mexicanolate, when compared with methyl 1,3-dioxo-8,14-dien-[3.3.1\({}^{10,2}\)]-bicyclomeliac-7-olide (C-8, \(\delta\) 124.6; C-9, \(\delta\) 150.9).\({}^{5}\) The above data indicated that compound **4** was not a normal mexicanolide limonoid. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1) indicated the presence of an \(O\)-methyl singlet (\(\delta\) 3.84, s), showing a cross-peak with the carbon at \(\delta\) 173.4 in the HMBC experiments (Table 1), hence indicating a carbomethoxy group at C-7. H\({}_{2}\)-6 resonated at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 2.39 dd, \(J\) = 4.2 and 7.3 H\({}_{2}\) (\(\delta\) 31.8, by HSQC), as established by its correlation with C-7 (\(\delta\) 173.4). C-4, C-5, and C-10 were assigned via the correlations of H\({}_{2}\)-6 and the carbons at \(\delta\) 44.3 (quaternary), 46.8 (CH), and 57.6 (quaternary), respectively. The methyl proton at \(\delta\) 1.13 showed long-range correlations with C-5 and C-10 and the carbon at \(\delta\) 117.2 (quaternary), leading to its assignments as H\({}_{3}\)-19 and indicating a hydroxyl group to be located at C-1. The AB-type methylene protons at \(\delta\) 2.50 and 1.97 (d, \(J\) = 14.0 Hz) were attributed to H\({}_{2}\)-29 by their correlation with C-1, C-4, C-5, and C-10. Moreover, H\({}_{2}\)-29 also showed cross-peaks with the carbons at \(\delta\) 80.4 (CH by DEPT 135\({}^{\circ}\)) and 18.5 (CH\({}_{3}\)), confirming their assignments as C-3 and C-28, respectively. The carbon at \(\delta\) 80.4 showed a one-bond correlation with the proton at \(\delta\) 4.63 and this long-range correlation to the carbons at \(\delta\) 170.4 and 205.6, thus indicating an acetoxyl substituent at C-3 and a carbonyl at C-2 (or C-30), if we would be dealing with a normal 1,29-cyclomeliac skeleton. The deshalted resonance for C-1 (\(\delta\) 117.2) is typical of senseapalide (**5**, \(\delta\) 107.7, C-1),\({}^{4}\) requiring the presence of a hemiketal involving a tertiary hydroxyl at C-1 and a cyclic ether formed by joining C-1 to O-8. Oxygenated C-8 may have caused an upfield shift for C-9 (\(\delta\) 130.6) and a downfield shift for C-8 (\(\delta\) 141.9), when compared with 1,3-dioxo-8,14-dien-[3.3.1\({}^{10,2}\)]-bicyclomeliac-7-olide (C-8, \(\delta\) 124.6; C-9, \(\delta\) 150.9).\({}^{5}\) The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR showed an additional methyl group (\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 2.19, s; \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 28.7; Table 1). From HMBC experiments these methyl protons showed a correlation with the carbon at \(\delta\) 205.6. It is interesting to note that a similar structure, khayalactone (**6**), has been isolated from _Khaya grandifolio_.\({}^{11}\) In principle cleavage of C-8 and C-30 and formation of double bonds between C-8/C-9 and C-14/C-15 may have occurred, resulting in 8,14-dien-8,30-seco-hayalactone, whose spectroscopic properties correspond with the above data. The protons at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 2.19, \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 28.7 and 205.6 were then assigned 

## Page 4

to H\({}_{3}\)-30, C-30, and C-2, respectively, and suggested the presence of an isolated structural unit, \(-\)CH(OAc)COCH\({}_{3}\) (C3\(-\)C2\(-\)C30), connected at C-4. The NOESY experiments (Table 1) showed correlations between H-3 and H\({}_{2}\)-6, H\({}_{3}\)-19, and H-29\(\alpha\) (\(\delta\) 2.50). This implies that the unit \(-\)CH(OAc)COCH\({}_{3}\) (C3\(-\)C2\(-\)C30) is on the \(\alpha\)-side of the molecule. In the NOESY 1D experiment measured in DMSO-\(\delta\)\({}_{6}\), irradiation of the 1-OH signal did not influence any group with a spatial proximity such as Me-19. However, the hydroxylic proton was detected as a weak resonance at \(\delta\) 8.30. Thus, this experiment did not facilitate elucidation of the relative configuration of C-1. Molecules containing an unusual _trans_-fused cyclopentane ring system have been synthesized; nevertheless, they are thermodynamically less favorable.[12] This observation suggests that in **4** both 1-OH and Me-19 occupy the \(\alpha\)-face of the molecule. The HR-mass spectrum confirmed the molecular formula as C\({}_{29}\)H\({}_{34}\)O\({}_{10}\) (_m/z_ 542.2152), and the largest fragment observed in the ESI-MS/MS was _m/z_ 469 for [M + H -OAc - Me]\({}^{+}\). Thus, the structure of the new limonoid was characterized as 3-acetoxy-8,14-dien-8,30-_seco_-khayalactone (**4**). The structural assignment was also supported by comparison of the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum with those of khayalactone (**6**).[11]

As reported in previous paper, the resistance of exotic _K. senegalensis_ to native _H. grandella_ may well be owing to the presence of the methyl [4.2.10,30.1,1.4]-tricyclomeliac-7-oate limonoids as **2**,[2,3] However, their action is now debatable, since unresistant _K. antitheoce_ afforded limonoid **2**. Limonoids with a tricyclo-[3.3.10,2,1.4]-decane system (**1**) were found in _K. senegalensis_, but not in _K. anthotheca_; however they might be the biosynthetic intermediates to limonoids **2** and **4**. Thus, the limonoids were of little value to clarify the basis of the resistance in _K. senegalensis_ against _Hypsipyla grandella_.

A possible pathway leading to the formation of khayalactone (**6**) and limonoid **4** can be proposed by comparison with the route reported for tricyclo-[4.2.110,30,1.14]-decane limonoids.[2,3] A pinacid\(-\)minacolome rearrangement of 2,3-dihydroxy-1,8-peroxy-1,29-cyclomeliaicate (**7**) and 2,3,14-trihydroxy-1,8-peroxy-1,29-cyclomeliacate (**8**) precursors may have occurred, resulting in the intermediates **9** and **10**, respectively. Subsequent addition of a hydroxyl group at C-8 to C-1 in **9** may lead to khayalactone (**6**). Elimination of H\({}_{2}\)O at C-14/C-15, the loss of H-9 with formation of an enolate at C-8, subsequent addition of a hydroxyl group at C-8 to C-1, and acetylation of 3-OH may have occurred in **10**, resulting in **4** (Scheme 1).

## Experimental Section

**General Experimental Procedures.** NMR spectra ('H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR; DEPT; HMBC; HSQC; COSY; NOESY-TPPI; and NOEDIF) were obtained on a Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as internal standard and the solvent CDCl3; ESI-MSMS low resolution spectra were performed on a triple quadrupole Micromass Quattro LC instrument, equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source; HRMS were obtained on a Fisons VG Autospec; IR spectra were recorded on a Bomen-Ft/IR; [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}\) was measured with a Perkin-Elmer 241 instrument.

**Plant Material.**_Khaya anthotheca_ was collected in Vicosa, MG, Brazil, and identified by J. R. Pirani (Universidade de Sao Paulo). A voucher (4863) is deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias, USP, Sao Paulo.

**Extraction and Isolation.** Grounds stems (1000 g) were extracted with hexane, then EtOAc and finally with MeOH. The concentrated MeOH extract was partitioned into CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc- and _n_-BuOH-soluble fractions. The concentrated CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract was subjected to CC over silica gel. Elution with a CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOAc-MeOH gradient afforded eight fractions and 3-_O_-b_-glucopyranosyllostosterol (20 mg). Fraction 5 was repeatedly chromatographed on silica gel (hexane\(-\)CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH gradient, 2:10:1), yielding scopoletin, distosterol, stigmasterd, campesterd, and a mixture of limonoids, which after final purification by TLC (hexane\(-\)CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH; 2:8:1) afforded compounds **2** (4 mg), **3** (5 mg), and **4** (6 mg).

**1\(\alpha\),8a-Oxido-3\(\beta\)-acetoxy-2a-acylperoxy-1a,14a-dihydroxy-[3.3.110,2]-bicyclomeliac-7,19-olide (3):** gum; [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}\) -69\({}^{\circ}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\), \(c\) 0.003); IR _vma_ (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) - 3438, 1732, 1638, 1368, 1368, 1368, 1240, 1019, 866, 743; NMR data, Table 1; ESI-MS/MS, _m/z_ (rel) int 643 [M + K] (32), 611 [M + K - O\({}_{2}^{\circ}\)] (35), 583 [(100), 523 (10); HR-MS _m/z_ 604.2123 (caled for C\({}_{30}\)H\({}_{30}\)O\({}_{13}\), 604.2155).

**3-Acetoxy-8,14-dien-8,30-_seco_-khayalactone (4):** gum; [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}\) +68\({}^{\circ}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\), \(c\) 0.005); IR _vma_ (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) - 3422, 3020, 1730, 1646, 1209, 758, 669; NMR data, Table 1; ESI-MS/MS, _m/z_ (rel int) 543 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (200, 469 [M + H -OAc - CH\({}_{3}\)]\({}^{+}\) (100), 301 (70), 177 (75); HR-MS _m/z_ 542.2133 (caled for C\({}_{29}\)H\({}_{34}\)O\({}_{10}\), 542.2152).

**Acknowledgment.** The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), and Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior (CAPES) for the financial support.

## References

* (1) Pennington, T. D.; Styles, B. T. _Blume_**1975**, 22, 419-540.
* (2) Olmo, L. R. V.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Marsaioli, A. J.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. _Pitochemistry_**1996**, 42, 831-837.
* (3) Olmo, L. R. V.; Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. _Pitochemistry_**1997**, 4157-1161.
* (4) Nakatani, M.; Abdelgali, S. A. M.; Okamura, H.; Iwayawa, T.; Doe, M. Chem. Lett. **2000**, 876-877.
* (5) Taylor, D. A. H. J. _Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. **1974**, 1, 437-441.
* (6) Porter, Q. N. _Mass Spectrometry of Heterocyclic Compounds_; John Wiley & Sons: New York, 1985; pp 310-350.
* (7) Connolly, J. D. In _Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales: Chemistry of limonoids of the Meliaceae and Cheoraceae_; Waterman, P. G., Grundon, M. F., Eds. Academic Press: London, 1983; pp 175-213.
* (8) No, B. I.; Rurov, G. M.; Mokhov, V. M.; Safonov, S. A. _Russ. J. Org. Chem._**1998**, 34, 892-893.
* (9) Ogbin, Y. N.; Terenberg, A. O.; Kutkin, A. V.; Nikishin, G. I. _Texthedron Lett._**2002**, 43, 1321-1324.
* (10) Silva, M. F. das G. F. da; Gottlieb, O. R. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1987**, 15, 85-103.
* (11) Tchuendem, M.-H. K.; Ayafar, J. F.; Connolly, J. D.; Sterner, O. _Tetrabendron Lett._**1998**, 379-722.
* (12) To access articles about sources of natural _trans_-fused cyclopentanes, ISI Web of Science was used searching for records containing the words _trans_-fused cyclopentane." The general search afforded only articles concerning synthesis of these compounds, e.g.: Lautens, M.; Lough, A. J.; Tam, W. _Acta Crystallogr._, Sect. C **1995**, 5_,1944-1946.
* (13) Pihlaja, K.; Nummelin, H.; Klika, K. D.; Czombos, J. _Magn. Reson. Chem._**2001**, 39, 657-671.



