# 10.1016@0031-9422(94)00568-E.pdf

## Page 1



# Limonoids from Seeds of _Toona Ciliata_ and Their Chemosystematic Significance

Joao Oiano Neto, Sueli M. M. Agostinho, M. Fatima Das G. F. Da Silva, Paulo C. Vieira, Joao B. Fernandes, Antonio L. Pinheiro

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal 676, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil, +Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, 36570-000 Vicosa, MG, Brazil, +Departamento de Biologia Animal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, 36570-000 Vicosa, MG, Brazil

E-mail:

###### Abstract

From the seeds of _Toona ciliata_ were isolated, besides toonacilin, two novel limonoids: 12-deacetoxytoonacilin and 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazadirone. These results do not seem to support the affiliation of _Toona_ to the Swietenioideae.

## Introduction

_Toona_ was originally described by Endlicher (1840) as a section of _Cedrela_[1]. However, Roemer later (1846) recognized that they could be separated by a number of sound morphological characters, raising _Toona_ to generic rank and most monographers have followed this lead [1]. Thus, the old world species of _Cedrela_ were transferred to _Toona_ (Endlicher) M. J. Roemer. The two genera were placed by Harms (1940) in the tribe Cedreleae under Cedreloidaee [2]. Pennington and Styles, in their more recent monograph, include the Cedreleae in the Swietenioideae [3].

As reported in previous papers [4, 5] genera of Swietenioideae explore limonoid chemistry along only one route which leads to the mexicanolide group. In contrast, genera of Melioideae should form the more primitive taxon, split off from the common ancestral lineage before synthesis of the mexicanolide types. The ring B-seco limonoids then persisted into the Melioideae with development of the ring C-seco limonoids. The known limonoids from _Cedrela_ are typical of the Swietenioideae [4, 5]. On the other hand, _Toona_ appear to be peripheral Melioideae as well as Swietenioideae [4, 5].

Recently, we have described the isolation and identification of two novel meilacin butenolides, 21-hydroxy-cedrelonelide and 23-hydroxy-cedrelonelide from the stem of _T. ciliata_[6]. These limonoids are very closely related to those isolated from the melioid genus _Trichilia_[7, 8], showing that the affiliation of _Toona_ to the Swietenioideae is still rather problematic. Clearly much more detailed phytochemical investigations of _Toona_ species will be essential for a better understanding of its chemo-taxonomic position in the Meliaceae.

## Results and Discussion

The dichloromethane extract from the seeds of _T. ciliata_, afforded three typically Meliaceous limonoids. The limonoid **1** showed all the spectral data (Tables 1 and 2) of toonacilin which have previously been isolated from the bark of _T. ciliata_[9, 10]. Toonacilin can assume any of several rotations, although the rotamer **1** appears to be sterically the most favourable, since very strong correlations between H-5 and H-11, and between Me-19 and H-30b were revealed from NOESY experiments (Table 3). Moreover, there was a strong correlation between H-9 and H-30b.

The limonoid **2** showed spectral data (Tables 1 and 2) suggestive of a structure similar to toonacilin, but having only one a-acetoxy substituent in ring C(d5.23 _br s_, 70.9). The \({}^{1}\)H-1\({}^{1}\)H COSY spectrum revealed the oxymethine proton to be coupled only to the 'H signal at d1.89 (H-12). The signal for H-9 was still visible as a broad singlet at d2.46 as in **1**, so placing the a-acetoxy substituent at C-11. This was supported by the NOESY spectrum which showed a very strong correlation between H-11 and H-5 (Table 3). The correlations between H-30b and H-9, and between H-30a and H-15 confirm their assignments and are consistent with the stereochemistry as in **2** (a-H at C-5 and _a-H at C-15). A \({}^{1}\)H-13C COSY experiment permitted the assignments of all the protonated carboni including the tertiary methyl groups. The quaternar) carbons were assigned on the basis of the \({}^{1}\)H-13C long range correlations listed in Table 4. Thus, the observe

## Page 2

correlation between the Me-18 at d0.70 and the 13C signal at d40.9 (2_J_) led unequivocally to the assignment of C-13 to this signal, but not of C-10. The new natural product is, therefore, 12-deacetoxytoonacilin (2).

Compound 3 exhibited similar spectral data to surenin (4), which has previously been isolated from the leaves of _Toona sureri_ (Blume) Merill [11]. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) showed signals at d157.6 (C-1), 126.1 (C-2) and 204.6 (C-3), characteristic of a ring A 1-en-3-one, as in the model compound 5 [12], instead of an a,b-unsaturated d-lactone. Moreover, the chemical shifts of the ring B-D carbons were comparable with those reported for surerin (Table 2). From several 2D experiments it was possible to assign the chemical shifts for many protons and all carbons in the molecule (Tables 1 and 2). The assignment of the stereochemistry of the acetoxy groups received further support from NOESY experiments which showed very strong correlations of H-6 and H-7 with Me-30, and H-6 with Me-29. The new natural product is, therefore, 6a-acetoxy-14b, 15b-epoxy-azadirone.

The chemical evidence to hand strongly supports Roemer's taxonomic conclusions. However, limonoids (ring B-seco) of _Toona_ can be considered to be biogenetic precursors of the mexicanolide types which are common in _Cedrela_, suggesting a direct derivation of this latter from _Toona_-like ancestors.

_General._ IR: KBr; 1H and 13C NMR, NOESY and HMQC; 400 and 100 MHz, respectively, 1H-13C COSY long-range correlation: 200 MHz, 3_J_CH = 7 Hz, containing TMS as int. standard; GC-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument.

_Isolation of constituents. Toona ciliata_ was collected in Vicosa, MG, Brazil, and a voucher is deposited in the Herbarium of Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Vicosa, MG. The seeds were dried, powdered and extracted with hexane, CH2Cl2 and MeOH. The CH2Cl2 extract (77.5 g) was submitted to vacuum chromatography over silica gel using hexane, hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:1), CH2Cl2, CH2Cl2-EtOAc (1:1), EtOHAc and MeOH. The CH2Cl2-EtOAc fr. was chromatographed on a DCCC (hexane-EtOH-EtOAc-H2O, 5:4:2:1, ascending method). The organic fr. yielded a ppt. of 1 (150 mg) and 2 (90 mg) which was purified by 2 prep. TLC (silica gel, hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 12.5:12.5:0.5; silica gel, hexane-EtOAc-MeOH, 20:5:0.5). The remaining organic fr. was recfromatographed over silica gel using hexane-CH2Cl2 (1:1), CH2Cl2, EtOHAc and MeOH at different ratios of increasing polarity, yielding 25 frs 8-12 were purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 12.5:12.5:0.5) to yield a new fr. containing 3 (20 mg). The latter was then repurified by prep. TLC (silica gel, hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH, 20:5:0.5).

_Toonacilin_ (1). Amorphous solid. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) Table 1; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): Table 2; NOESY (400 MHz, CDCl3): Table 3.

_12_-Deacetoxytoonacillin_ (2). Amorphous solid, np 165.9-166.6deg, [a]0 +- 25.5deg (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.0047). IR \(\nu_{\text{ms}}^{\text{Br}}\,\text{cm}^{-}\,\text{1}\): 1734, 1679, 841. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): Table 1; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): Table 2; 13H-13C COSY long-range corr. (200 MHz, CDCl3):

## Page 3



## Page 4



## Page 5

ring D involving one hydrogen transfer from Me-18 to epoxide with concomitant hemolysis of 13-O bond from 230; 107 [136\(-\)CHO]\({}^{+}\) (100).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) for the financial support.

## References

* [1] Roemer, M. J. (1846) in _Familiarum Naturalium Regni Vegetabilis Synopses Monographicae. I. Hesperides_, p. 76.
* [2] Harms, H. (1940) in _Die Naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien_ (Engler, A. and Prantl, K., eds), 2nd Edn, Vol. **19**, b1, 1.
* [3] Pennington, T. D. and Styles, B. T. (1975) _Blumea_**22**, 419.
* [4] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Gottlieb, O. R. and Dreyer, D. L. (1984) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**12**, 299.
* [5] Silva, M. F. das G. F. da and Gottlieb, O. R. (1987) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol_**15**, 85.
* [6] Agostinho, S. M. M., Silva, M. F. das G. F. da, Fernandes, J. B., Vieira, P. C., Pinheiro, A. L. and Vilela, E. F. (1994) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**22**, 323.
* [7] Cortez, D. A. G., Vieira, P. C., Fernandes, J. B., Silva, M. F. das G. F. da and Ferreira, A. G. (1992) _Phytochemistry_, **31**, 625.
* [8] Arenas, C. and Hahn, L. R. (1990) _Phytochemistry_, **29**, 2953.
* [9] Kraus, W., Grimminger, W. and Sawitzki, G. (1978) _Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl._**17**, 452.
* [10] Kraus, W. and Grimminger, W. (1980) _Nouveau J. Chimie_**4**, 651.
* [11] Kraus, W. and Kypke, K. (1979) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 2715.
* [12] Connolly, J. D., Labbe, C., Rycroft, D. S. and Taylor, D. A. H. (1979) _J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans I_ 2959.



