# 10.1016@j.bse.2006.06.007.pdf

## Page 1

Antifungal metabolites from _Colletotrichum gloeosporioides_, an endophytic fungus in _Cryptocarya manlioccana_ Nees (Lauraceae)

Maysa L. Inacio, Geraldo H. Silva, Helder L. Teles, Henrique C. Trevisan, Alberto J. Cavalheiro, Vanderlan da S. Bolzani, Maria C.M. Young, Ludwig H. Pfenning, Angela R. Araujo

# Abstract

## 1 Subject and source

In the course of our continuous search for bioactive compounds from endophytic fungi living in plants from Cerrado and Atlantic Forest (Cafeu et al., 2005; Teles et al., 2005; Silva et al., 2005), healthy leaves of _Cryptocarya manlioccana_ were submitted to isolation of endophytes and 15 strains were isolated. Among them _Colletotrichum gloeosporioides_ (Penz) Penz & Sacc., was selected for chemical and biological investigation because of the strong antifungal activity of the crude EtOAc extract against the phytopathogenic fungi _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _Cladosporium sphareospermum_.

_C. gloeosporioides_ was identified by Dr. Ludwig H. Pfenning and deposited in the fungal herbarium of the Universidade Federal de Lavras (CML 737).

## 2 Previous work

_Colletotrichum_ spp. have been reported as endophytes of some plants. Aspergillus Aspergillusiformisamins B (Ballio et al., 1969), aspergillomarasmine A (Bousquet et al., 1971), gloeosporone (Meyer et al., 1987), ferricocin (Ohra et al., 1995), diketopiperazines (Trigos et al., 1997), polysaccharides (Park et al., 2001) and colletotrich acid, 3B,5a,6b-trihydroxyergosta-7,22-diene, uracil and lumin chrome (Zou et al., 2000) have been isolated from _C. gloeosporioides_.



## Page 2



## 3 Present study

_C. gloeosporioides_ was subcultured in Petri plates containing PDA and incubated for seven days. After this period, it was inoculated at 25\(-\)28 \({}^{\circ}\)C in 20 \(\times\) 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks, each containing 200 mL of Potato Dextrose Broth (PDB). The cultures were incubated at 25 \({}^{\circ}\)C and aerated by agitation on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm for 28 days. The filtered fermentation broth (ca. 4.0 L) was extracted with ethyl acetate (3 x 1.5 L); the organic phase was dried with MgSO4 and concentrated to yield 195.3 mg of crude extract.

The crude extract was cleaned-up in reversed-phase silica gel (C-18) using MeOH as eluent and subsequently purified by reversed-phase preparation HPLC [C-18 column - Phenomenex-Luna (210 x 21.2 mm), \(\lambda = 254\) nm, 10.0 mL/min, H2O:MeOH (75:25) to MeOH (100%) over 120 min], affording (-) _cis_-4-hydroxy-6-deoxyscytalone (**1**) [22.8 mg, \(I_{\text{R}} = 25\) min, \(\alpha_{\text{O}}^{25} - 133\) (ca. 0.024, CHCl3)] and (4_R_)-4,8-dihydroxy-a-tetradone (**2**) [10.1 mg, \(t_{\text{R}} = 60\) min, \(\alpha_{\text{O}}^{25} - 17.7\) (ca. 0.018, CHCl3)]. The chemical structure of these compounds was elucidated on the basis of 1D and 2D NMR and MS spectral data and by comparison with those reported in the literature (Venkatasubbaiah and Chilton, 1992; Krohn et al., 2002; Aldridge et al., 1974; Kokubun et al., 2003; Machida et al., 2005).

The antifungal activity of **1** and **2** was evaluated by means of direct bioautography on TLC plate (Rahalison et al., 1991). The detection limit of these compounds required to inhibit growth of the phytopathogenic fungi _C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ was 5.0 mg, comparable with the positive control nystatin.

## 4 Ecological significance

The strong antifungal activity against the phytopathogenic fungi _C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ of the compounds **1** and **2** suggests that the endophytic fungi _C. gloeosporioides_ in _C. mandioccana_ could protect the host by producing metabolites, which may be toxic or even lethal to phytopathogens, and highlights the potential of endo-phytic fungi in producing bioactive metabolites.

To our knowledge, this is the first report of _C. gloeosporioides_ as an endophytic fungus inhabiting plants from Brazilian Atlantic Forest and _C. mandioccana_.

## Acknowledgments

This work was funded by grants from the Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biot-FAPESP - The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br); Grant # 03/02176-7 awarded to Dr. Bolzani, principal investigator. Maysa L. Inacio acknowledges FAPESP for undergraduate fellowship. Geraldo H. Silva and Helder L. Teles acknowledge CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico) and CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior) for Ph.D. fellowships, respectively.

## References

* [1] Aldridge, D.C., Davies, A.B., Jackson, M.R., Turner, W.B., 1974, J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. I 13, 1540.
* [2] Ballio, A., Bottalico, A., Buonocore, V., Carilli, A., Di Vittorio, V., Graniti, A., 1969. Phytopathol. Mediterr. 8, 187.
* [3] Bousquet, J.F., Vegh, I., Pouteau-T, M., Barbier, M., 1971. Ann. Phytopathol. 3, 407.
* [4] Cafeu, M.C., Silva, G.H., Teles, H.L., Bolzani, V.da S., Araujo, A.R., Young, M.C.M., Pfenning, L.H., 2005. Quim. Nova 28, 991.



## Page 3

Kokubun, T., Veitch, N.C., Bridge, P.D., Simmonds, M.S.J., 2003. Phytochemistry 62, 779.
* [2002] Krohn, K., Biele, C., Drogies, Karl-Heinz, Steingrover, K., Aust, Hans-Jurgen, Draeger, S., Schulz, B., 2002. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 14, 2331.
* [2005] Machida, K., Matsuoka, E., Kasahara, T., Kikuchi, M., 2005. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 53, 934.
* [1987] Meyer, W.L., Schweizer, W.B., Beck, A.K., Scheifele, W., Seebach, D., Schreiber, S.L., Kelly, S.E., 1987. Helv. Chim. Acta 70, 281.
* [1995] Ohra, J., Morita, K., Tsujino, Y., Tazaki, H., Fujimori, T., Goering, M., Evans, S., Zorner, P., 1995. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 59, 113.
* [2001] Park, S.H., Choi, C.W., Shim, M.Y., Park, W.M., Hwang, S.S., Koo, J.-Mo., 2001. Biotechnol. Lett. 23, 1719.
* [1991] Rahalison, L., Hamburger, M., Hostettmann, K., Monod, M., Frenk, E., 1991. Phytochem. Anal. 2, 199.
* [2005] Silva, G.H., Teles, H.L., Trevisan, H.C., Young, M.C.M., Pfenning, L.H., Eberlin, M.N., Haddad, R., Costa-Neto, C., Bolzani, V.da S., Araujo, A.R., 2005. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 6B, 1463.
* [2005] Teles, H.L., Silva, G.H., Castro-Gamboa, I., Bolzani, V.da S., Pereira, J.O., Costa-Neto, C.M., Haddad, R., Eberlin, M.N., Young, M.C.M., Araujo, A.R., 2005. Phytochemistry 66, 2363.
* [1997] Triggs, A., Reyna, S., Gutierrez, M.L., Sanchez, M., 1997. Nat. Prod. Lett. 11, 13.
* [1992] Venkatasubabiah, P., Dhillon, W.S., 1992. Mycopathologia 120, 33.
* [2000] Zou, W.X., Meng, J.C., Lu, H., Chen, G.X., Shi, G.X., Zhang, T.Y., Tan, R.X., 2000. J. Nat. Prod. 63, 1529.



