# 10.1016@S0031-9422(99)00197-1.pdf

## Page 1



# Prenylated flavones from _Neoraputia paraensis_

Jose Pio I. de Souza, Alberto C. Arruda

Based in part on the M.Sc. dissertation that was presented by J.P.I.S. to the Universidade Federal do Para, Belem, Para, Brazil.

Gaspar D. Munoz, Mara S. P. Arruda, Adolfo H. Muller

Departamento de Quimica, Centro de Ciencias Exatas e Naturais, Universidade Federal do Para, Campus Universitario, 66075-970 Belem, Para, Brazil

###### Abstract

Three new prenylated flavones were isolated from the aerial parts of _Neoraputia paraensis_. On the basis of spectral data these flavones were identified as 5,7,5'-trimethoxy-6-(3'-hydroxy,3'-methyl-_trans_-but-1'-enyl)-3',4'-methylenedioxy-flavone; 5,4'-dihydroxy-3',5'-dimethoxy-6-7-(2',2'-dimethylpyran)flavone and 5,4'-dihydroxy-8,3',5'-trimethoxy-6,7-(2',2'-dimethylpyran)-flavone. (c) 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

keywords: _Neoraputia paraensis_; Rutaceae; Prenylated flavones +
Footnote †: journal:

## 1 Introduction

The genus _Neoraputia_ (Rutaceae), containing six species, was described in 1978 by Emmerich during the study of the tribe Cuspariaeae (Emmerich, 1978). Some species previously described in _Raputia_, like _R. paraensis_ and _R. alba_, were moved to the new created genus _Neoraputia_. The species _Neoraputia alba_ was chemically investigated and ten flavones and one flavanone were reported (Arruda, Vieira, Fernandes & Silva, 1993; Arruda et al., 1991). The main structural features of these flavonoids were the highly methoxylated substitution pattern and the presence in some structures of a 2,2-dimethylpyran moiety attached to the A-ring of the flavone skeleton. In a previous paper (Souza, Arruda & Arruda, 1995), we reported the isolation of seven flavones from _Neoraputia paraensis_, six highly methoxylated flavones and one pyranoflavone. In a continuation of our chemical investigation on this species, we now report the isolation and structural determination of three new prenylated flavones (1-3).

## 2 Results and discussion

Stems and leaves of _N. paraensis_ were percolated separately with hexane and dichloromethane, successively. The dichloromethane extract of leaves, when submitted to chromatography on silica gel columns, afforded compounds **1** and **2**. The dichloromethane extract of stems, using similar techniques, furnished compound **3**. These compounds (1-3) were identified as flavones mainly via the characteristic \({}^{13}\)C NMR signals of C-2, C-3 and C-4 (Table 1) (Markham & Chari, 1982), together with their UV spectra (see Experimental) (Markham & Mabry, 1982). Unlike **1**, compounds **2** and **3** have hydroxyl groups at C-5 positions (\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 13.05 and 12.75, respectively) supported by the lower field signals of carbon C-4 (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 182.4 and 183.8, respectively).

Compound **1** was isolated as a colorless solid with a molecular ion peak at \(m/z\) 440 (EIMS) corresponding to the formula C\({}_{24}\)H\({}_{24}\)O\({}_{8}\). The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum showed two doublets at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 6.74 and 6.84 (1H each, \(J=16.4\) Hz) and a singlet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 1.41 (6H, a pair of magnetically equivalent methyl groups) which is consistent with a 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-_trans_-but-1-enyl moiety (Khalid & Waterman, 1981). The mass spectral fragments at \(m/z\) 381 \(\left[{\rm M-C}_{3}{\rm H}_{7}{\rm O}\right]^{+}\) and 59 \(\left[{\rm C}_{3}{\rm H}_{7}{\rm O}\right]^{+}\)

## Page 2

confirmed this group. Further examination of the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum revealed the presence of one methylenedioxy group [\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 6.07 (_s_, 2H)], three methoxys [\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.83, 3.97 and 4.00 (_s_, 3H each)] and an AB coupling system [\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 7.07 and 7.11 (_J_ = 1.3 Hz)]. The AB coupling system and fragment ion at _m_/_z_ 176 (**4**), produced by C-ring RDA fission, indicated that the B-ring was substituted at 3', 4' and 5' positions with a methylenedioxy and methoxyl group. The absence of a [M-15]\({}^{+}\) peak in the mass spectrum suggested that there was no methoxyl group attached to C-6 or C-8 on the A-ring (Mabry & Markham, 1975). Moreover, the signals observed at \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 96.8 and \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 6.80 are typical of a non-substituted C-8 A-ring (Markham & Chari, 1982; Markham & Mabry, 1982), therefore the 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-_trans_-but-1-enyl substituent was assigned to C-6 and the remaining methoxyls at C-5 and C-7. This was confirmed by the presence of a methoxyl signal at \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 61.1 (OMe-5), which is characteristic of an _ortho_-disubstituted methoxyl group (Panichpol & Waterman,

## Page 3

1978). Finally, the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data supported the proposed structure by comparison with values for related compounds **6** and **7** (Khalid & Waterman, 1981; Arruda et al., 1993). From these spectral data, **1** was identified as 5,7,5'-trimethoxy-6-(3'-hydroxy,3'-methyl-_trans_-but-1"-enyl)-3',4'-methylenedioxy-flavone.

NMR, UV and EIMS data of compounds **2** and **3**, obtained as yellow prisms and yellow pellets respectively, suggested very similar structures, with compound **3** having an additional methoxyl group \(\{\)[M]\({}^{+}\)\(m/z\) 396 (**2**) and 426 (**3**). UV showed bands at \(\lambda_{\rm max}\) 359 nm (**2**) and 357 nm (**3**), typical of flavones, the bathochromic shifts (54 and 55 nm, respectively) induced by 2 M NaOH solution, indicating a 4'-OH (Mabry, Markham & Thomas, 1970). The symmetrical B-ring system for both compounds, with methoxyl groups at C-3' and C-5' \(\{\delta_{\rm H}\) 4.00 (\(s\), 6H) for **2** and 3.99 (\(s\), 6H) for **3**\(\}\), was confirmed by the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra showing a 2H singlet peak at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 7.09 (**2**) and 7.19 (**3**) which corresponded to the H-2'/6'. This was supported by the C-ring RDA fragment ion at \(m/z\) 178 (**5**) in its mass spectrum. The presence of a 2,2-dimethylpyran ring was deduced from the 6H singlet at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 1.47 (**2**) and 1.60 (**3**) due to the _gem_-dimethyl group and two doublets (\(J=10.0\) Hz) at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 5.62 and 6.71 for (**2**) and 5.64 and 6.74 for (**3**), corresponding to the two _cis_-coupled olefinic protons. The 2,2-dimethylpyran ring at 6- and 7-positions on A-ring was deduced on the basis of \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra of the diacetylated derivatives **2a** and **3a** which exhibited upfield shift for H-4" (0.21 and 0.23 ppm, respectively) and downfield shift for H-3" (0.15 and 0.16 ppm, respectively). The acetylation of the 5-OH group is observed to cause a marked diamagnetic shift (\(\Delta\delta_{\rm acetyl}\) = + 0.25 to + 0.4) of the _peri_-H (H-4') and a small paramagnetic shift (\(\Delta\delta_{\rm acetyl}\) = -0.1 to -0.15) of H-3", attributed to steric effects, while the acetylation of an angular system (2,2-dimethylpyran ring at 7- and 8-positions) does not show any appreciable effect on H-4" (Arnone, Cardillo, Merlini & Mondelli, 1967). Therefore, the remaining signals in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **2**\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 6.54 and 6.44 (\(s\), 1H each) were attributed to H-3 and H-8, respectively. The absence of a singlet around \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 6.4 in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **3** was indicative of the presence of a methoxyl group [\(\delta_{\rm H}\) 3.95 (\(s\), 3H) and \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 62.1] at C-8. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectral data for **2** and **3** were assigned by comparison with data from literature (**8**-**10**) (Agrawal & Rastogi, 1981; Arruda et al., 1993). From the above data, the structures **2** and **3** were characterized as 5,4'-dihydroxy-3',5'-dimethoxy-6,7-(2",2"-dimethylpyran)flavone and 5,4'-dihydroxy-8,3',5'-trimethoxy-6,7-(2",2"-dimethylpyran)flavone, respectively.

## 3 Experimental

### General

Mps uncorr. UV: MeOH; IR: KBr discs; EIMS: 70 eV, Finnigan-INCOS-X; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz): Bruker-ARX 400, CDCl\({}_{3}\) with TMS as int. standard; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (300 MHz) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR (75 MHz): Varian-GEMINI-300, CDCl\({}_{3}\) and CD\({}_{3}\)OD, \(\delta\) 7.26 for \({}^{1}\)H and \(\delta\) 48.7 for \({}^{13}\)C as int. references; TLC: Silica gel 60H (Merck 7736); CC: Silica gel (Merck 7734).

### Plant material

Leaves and stems of _Neoraputia paraensis_ (Ducke) Emmerich were collected in Paragominas, State of Para, Brazil in December 1991 and identified by Dr. Elisabeth van den Berg. A voucher specimen (code number 8822) is deposited in the herbarium of the Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi, Belem, Para, Brazil.

### Extraction and isolation

The dried and powdered leaves (1.53 kg) of _N. paraensis_ were successively extracted with hexane, CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) and MeOH at room temp. A part of the residue (10

## Page 4

g), obtained after evaporation of the CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract (38 g), was subjected to silica gel CC and mixts of hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) and CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH of increasing polarity were used as eluents affording 40 hrs. Fr. 14 eluted with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) was obtained as amorphous yellow solid. This was purified by prep. TLC (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH, 99:1) and after recrystallization (MeOH-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)) yielded **2** (45 mg). Frs 26-28 eluted with a mixt. of CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH were washed with MeOH to afford **1** (29 mg) after recrystallization (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH).

The dried and pulverized stems (2 kg) were treated in the same manner as described above for the leaves. A part of the residue (10 g), obtained after evaporation. of the CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) extract (18 g), was chromatographed over silica gel, eluted first with hexane followed by hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOH mixts. Frs 32-33 eluted with a mixt. of CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-EtOH were submitted to a selective dissolution with hexane-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) 7:3 and the remaining solid was purified by recrystallization (CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-MeOH) yielding **3** (15 mg).

### 5,7,5'-Trimethoxy-6-(3"-hydroxy,3"-methyl-trans-but-1"-enyl)-3',4'-methylenedioxy-flavone (1)

Colorless solid, mp 200-202\({}^{\circ}\)C (MeOH-CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)); UV \({}^{2}\)MoOH nm (log \(\epsilon\)): 342 (4.50), 253 sh (4.49), 235 (4.59); IR \(v^{\rm{R}\rm

## Page 5

* (1970) Mabry, T. J., Markham, K. R., & Thomas, M. B. (1970). _The systematic identification of flavonoids_. Berlin: Springer.
* (1982) Markham, K. R., & Chari, V. M. (1982). Carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy of flavonoids. In J. B. Harborne, & T. J. Mabry, _The flavonoids: advances in research_ (p. 19). London: Chapman and Hall.
* (1975) Markham, K. R., & Mabry, T. J. (1975). Ultraviolet-visible and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy of flavonoids. In J. B. Harborne, K. R. Mabry, & H. Mabry, _The flavonoids_ (p. 45). New York: Academic Press (Part 1).
* (1978) Panichpol, K., & Waterman, P. G. (1978). _Phytochemistry_, _17_, 1363.
* (1995) Souza, J. P. I., Arruda, A. C., & Arruda, M. S. P. (1995). _Fitoterapia_, _LXVI_, 465.



