# 10.1016@0031-9422(92)83701-Y.pdf

## Page 1



# Fungitoxic non-glycosidic irrediods from _Alibertia macrophylla_

M. Claudia M. Young, Marcia R. Braga, Sonia M. C. Dietrich, Hugo E. Gottlieb, Ligia M. V. Trevisan, Vanderlan da S. Bolzant

# Abstract

The aqueous alcohol extract of the leaves of _Alibertia macrophylla_ afforded two epimeric pairs of iridoid aglycones and one of them showed high inhibitory activity against _Aspergillus niger_, _Cladosporiumphaerospermum_, _C. cladosporioides_ and _Colletotrichum gloesporioides_. Three of the compounds are reported for the first time from natural sources. Their structures were established on the basis of spectroscopic studies, mainly through 13C NMR analysis.

## Introduction

Several tropical Brazilian Rubiaceae species from the rain forest and 'cerrado', produce phytoalexins in response to fungal inoculation [1]. It has been shown that the response is dependent on the seasonal conditions. Among 15 assayed species, _Alibertia macrophylla_ K. Schum. and _A. mycifolia_ Spruce ex. Schum. have shown negative phytoalexin response all year round. On the other hand, the species of _Alibertia_ contain the highest quantities of diffusable phenols, although no fungitoxic activity had been detected [2]. Furthermore, extracts obtained from leaves of _A. macrophylla_ have revealed, after TLC bioassays, three different fungitoxic zones [2]. Photochemical studies evidenced that two caffeic acid esters, one of them with antifungal activity, should correspond to one of the inhibitory zones [3]. In addition, another fraction that showed strong inhibitory activity against fungal growth was analysed. The isolation and structural elucidation of the compounds of this fraction revealed the presence of the epimeric mixtures of non-glycosidic iridoids **1a**–**1d**. The aglycones **1b**, **1c** and **1d** are being reported for the first time from natural sources. In this paper we present the structure elucidation of these compounds and the bioassay results with one of the iridoid epimeric pairs.

## Results and discussion

The 40% aqueous alcohol extract prepared from dried and powdered leaves of _A. macrophylla_ was submitted to partition into hexane and ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetat-soluble fraction was examined by TLC and three fungitoxic zones (_Rf_ 0.22, 0.36 and 0.65) were detected, using a spore suspension of _Cladosporiumphaerospermum_[4]. This extract was fractioned on a silica gel column and by preparative TLC to provide two pairs of epimeric iridoid aglycones **1a**, **1b** and **1c**, **1d**. The 13C NMR (Table 1) and 13C NMR (Table 2) spectral data for **1a** and **1b** revealed an iridodal skeleton with a carbomethoxy substituent at C-4 and a methyl group at C-8. These data resemble those which were reported for the aglycone loganetin [5, 6]. The close similarity of their UV absorption maxima and their molecular ions at _m/z_ 228, pointed to loganetin as one of the isomers. This assumption was confirmed by 13C NMR chemical shifts and multiplicities (DEPT). Taking the 13C NMR \(d\) values assigned to loganetin as reference data [5, 6], it could be deduced that the epimeric mixture was at C-1.

The UV absorption maxima and molecular ions obtained for **1c** and **1d** were identical to those observed for **1a** and **1b**. The analysis of the 13H NMR (Table 1) and 13C NMR (Table 2) data evidenced that **1c** and **1d** are also iridoidal aglycones whose skeleton must be the same as that of **1a** and **1b**. The main differences observed in the 13C NMR spectra correspond to the carbonicic carbons at 678.8/78.5 and to the methyl groups at 616.9/15.1. To elucidate the differences in the substitution pattern of **1c** and **1d**, 1H NMR correlated spectroscopy COSY was used to assign all resonance signals in the 13H NMR spectra. The carbonic protons at 64.15 (_J_ = 9.0; 6.7; 2.8 Hz)/d.20 (_J_ = 6.5; 2.5; 1.5 Hz) were consistent with H-C-6. Besides, it was evidenced that the protons at C-1

## Page 2

\([\delta 5.10\ (J = 6.0\,{\rm Hz})/\delta 5.40\ (J = 3.0\,{\rm Hz})\)], show correlation with the protons at C-9 [\(\delta 2.22\,dt\ (J = 8.2;5.5\,{\rm Hz})/\delta 2.35\,dt\) (\(J = 7.2;3.5\,{\rm Hz})\)]. Comparison of the "C NMR data of **1c** and **1d** with those for dihydrocoronin [7] indicated this iridodal system for **1c** and **1d**; the observed differences between them are due to the size and functionality of the glucose moiety present in dihydrocoronin. Thus it was possible to propose that one of the isomers corresponded to the aglycones of dihydrocoronin and the other would be its eplmer at C-1. The acetylation (Ac2O/pyridine) of **1a**, **1b** and **1c**, **1d** confirmed the position of epimerization. The _b_-configuration assigned to the acetyl function at C-1 of **1e** and **1f** was deduced mainly through analysis of the H-1 chemical shift and \(J\)1, values recorded in the 1H NMR spectra of these derivatives. On the basis of the Karplus rule for dihedral angles between H-1 and H-9, the pseudoequatorial position of the substituent at C-1 was revealed since dihedral angles of _ca_ 118deg were observed for **1c** (_J_1,9 = 3.5 Hz) and **1f** (_J_1,9 = 3.2 Hz). This assumption is quite consistent with previously reported considerations of changes in the different hemi-chair conformations of the flexible dihydroproxin ring of iridodial systems [7].

The epimeric pair **1c** and **1d**, corresponding to the \(R_{f}\) 0.36 zone, showed antifungal activity against _Aspergillus niger_, _Cladosporium_ _sphaerospergumm_, _C.__cladosporioles_ and _Colletotrichum gloosporioles_. The acetyl derivatives were similarly assayed with _C.__sphaerospergumm_ and also displayed growth inhibitory activity. No previous report was found concerning the occurrence of these iridoids as natural aglycones and their presence and biological activity suggest that they can play a defensive role against fungal attack.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline
**C** & **1a, 1b** & **1c,1d** & **1f** \\
1 & 95.2\(d\) & 95.4\(d\) & 90.1\(d\) \\  & 96.0\(d\) & 95.5\(d\) & \\
3 & 152.0\(d\) & 153.8\(d\) & 152.2\(d\) \\
15

## Page 3



## Experimental

### Plant material

Leaves from _Aliberia macrophylla_ were collected in the Estacao Ecologica e Experimental de Mogi-Guxu (SP), by Dr M. C. M. Young and identified by Dr Z. L. Jung-Mendaoolli (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo).

_Extraction and isolation of constituents_. Fungitoxic substances were extracted from dried and powdered leaves (314 g) with 40% EtOH-H2O. Partition into hexane, CHCl3 and EtOHAC as well as the CC fractionation of the EtOHAC solubles into 22 fractions were described earlier [3]. Fractions 3-6 (109 mg) yielded **1a** (57 mg) after prep. TLC [silica gel, CHCl3-MeOH (97:3)] and **1a** and **1b** (27 mg) were isolated from fractions 9 and 10 (64 mg) through prep. TLC (silica gel) and successive tations [2 x CHCl3-MeOH (97:3)], 1 x CHCl3-MeOH (9:3)]. Fungitoxic zones were detected using a spore suspension of _Cladosporium sphaerosporum_ [4] on TLC plates [silica gel, CHCl3-MeOH (9:3) and hexane-EtOAc (1:1)].

_Loganatin_ (1a) and _i-n__i_n__i_n0/2 (rel. int.) 282 [M], 182 (20), 150 (25), 122 (22), 97 (18), 81 (100), 79 (36); 1H and 13C NMR data: see Tables 1 and 2.

_1b-Hydroxy-dihydrocromin aglycone_ (1e) + 1a-_hydroxy-dihydrocromin aglycone_ (1d). UV \(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{MOH}}\) nm: 238; IR \(\nu_{\text{max}}^{\text{MOH}}\) cm-1; 3650.1720; EIMS (probe) 70 eV, _m_/_z_ (rel. int.) 228 [M] (23), 210 [M] (15), 138 (100), 124 (35), 97 (69), 81 (80). The diacetates **1e** and **1f** were prepared from the epimeric mixtures **1a** + **1b** and **1e**+ **1d** under treatment with Ac2O/pyridine; **1e**, [a]25 - 303 deg (CHCl3; < 9:34); **1f** [a]25 - 56.5 deg (CHCl3; < 14.1).

###### Acknowledgements.

The authors are grateful to Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) for financial support, to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico for fellowship to V. da S. Bolzani and to Mr L. C. Roque, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo for 13C NMR spectra.

## References

* (1) Braga, M. R., Young, M. C. M., Ponte, J. V. A., Dietrich, S. M. C., Emerenciano, V. P. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1986) _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**14**, 507.
* (2) Braga, M. R., Young, M. C. M., Dietrich, S. M. C. and Gottlieb, O. R. (1991) _J. Chem. Ecol._**17**, 1079.
* (3) Bolzani, V. da S., Trevisan, L. M. V. and Young, M. C. M. (1991) _Phytochemistry_**30**, 2089.
* (4) Homanas, A. L. and Fuchs, A. (1970) _J. Chromatogr._**51**, 325.
* (5) Jensen, S. R., Lyse-Petersen, S. E. and Nielsen, B. J. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18**, 273.
* (6) Mpondo, M. E. and Garcia, J. (1989) _Phytochemistry_**28**, 2503.
* (7) Bianco, A., Passacantilli, P., Polidori, G. and Nicoletti, M. (1983) _Org. Magn. Res._**21**, 461.



