# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)00285-5.pdf

## Page 1

Biosynthesis of friedelane and quinonemethide triterpenoids is compartmentalized in _Maytenus aquifolium_ and _Salacia campestris_1
Footnote 1: In honour of Professor Otto R. Gottlieb’s 80th birthday.

Joaquim Corsino

Corresponding author. Tel.: +55-16-2016661; fax: 55-16-2227932.

Paulo Roberto F. de Carvalho

Jassuo Jorge Kato

Leandro Ribeiro Latorre

Olga Maria M.F. Oliveira

Angela Regina Araujo

Vanderlan da S. Bolzani

Suzelei C. Franca

Ana Maria S. Pereira

Maysa Furlan

maysa@iq.unesp.br Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14801-970 Aeraquara, SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 26077, 05599-970 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil Departamento de Biotechnologia da Universidade de Ribeirao Preto, 14096-380 Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

_Maytenus aquifolium_ (Celastraceae) and _Salacia campestris_ (Hippocrataceae) species accumulate friedelane and quinonemethide triterpenoids in their leaves and root bark, respectively. Enzymatic extracts obtained from leaves displayed cyclase activity with conversion of the substrate oxidosquelene to the triterpenes, 3_b_-friedelanol and friedelin. In addition, administration of (\(\pm\))5-3H myelonolactone in leaves of \(M\). _aquifolium_ seedlings produced radio labelled friedelin in the leaves, twigs and stems, while the root bark accumulated labelled maytenin and pristimerin. These experiments indicated that the triterpenes once biosynthesized in the leaves are translocated to the root bark and further transformed to the antitumoral quinonemethide triterpenoids. C 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

keywords: _Maytenus aquifolium_; Celastraceae; _Salacia campestris_; Hippocrataceae; Friedelanes; Quinonemethides; Oxidosquelene; Cyclase activity; (\(\pm\)5-3H-mevalonolactone; Biosynthesis

## 1 Introduction

Quinonemethide triterpenoids are secondary metabolites restricted to the higher plant families, Celastraceae and Hippocrataceae (Bruning and Wagner, 1978). These compounds have shown a variety of biological activity such as antitumoral (Bhatnagar et al., 1951; Goncalves de Lima et al., 1971), antimicrobial (Ferreira de Santana et al., 1971), antibiotic (Bhatagar et al., 1951; Goncalves de Lima et al., 1969a; Gonzalez et al., 1977), antimalarial (Pavanand et al., 1989) and spermaticidal activities.

The co-occurrence of friedelanes and quinonemethides in several plants and in cell cultures has led to the postulation of a biogenetic relationship between these two classes of triterpenoids (Marini-Bettolo, 1979; Kutney et al., 1981; Gunaherath and Gunatilaka, 1983; Gunatilaka and Nanayakkara, 1984; Corsino et al., 1998) (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, no experimental work has been addressed to answer this question and thus the biosynthetic origin of the quinonemethide triterpenoids remains uncertain.

The working model under evaluation in this study is based on the compartmentalized biosynthesis and accumulation of friedelane derivatives and quinonemethides, respectively, in leaves and in root bark of Celastraceae and Hippocrataceae species (Goncalves de Lima et al., 1969b, 1972; Martin, 1973; Gonzalez et al., 1975; Martinod et al., 1976; Reddy et al., 1976; Dominguez et al., 1979; Furlan et al., 1990; Gamlath et al., 1990).

The entry point for biosynthesis of quinonemethides requires oxidosquelene as a central intermediate, which by the action of a cyclase would give rise to the first cyclic intermediate, 3_b_-friedelanol (Fig. 1) and then, by the action of an oxidoreductase, the conversion to friedelin should occur between leaves and root bark. The transformation/translocation steps for the 

## Page 2

quinonemethide triterpenoids should take place in the root bark.

In order to evaluate the enzyme activity for the biosynthetic step involving the cyclase and its localization in leaves and/or root bark of _M. aquifolium_ (Celastraceae) and _S. campestris_ (Hippocrateaceae), we developed a protocol to solubilize and to determine the activity of this cyclase using oxidosqualene as substrate. If the quinonemethide and friedelane triterpenoids present in root bark and leaves, respectively, are continuously synthesized, then the corresponding tissue should display this cyclase activity.

Administration experiments with (+-)5-3H-mevalonolactone carried out in leaves of _M. aquifolium_ seedlings were crucial in the determination of the translocation hypothesis of the friedelin from leaves to root bark, and thus the biosynthetic relationship with the quinone-methide triterpenoids. The results obtained are described below.

## Results and discussion

### Friedelane and quinonemethide content

The friedelane and quinonemethide contents in leaves and root bark of _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_ are shown in Table 1. Leaves of _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_ yielded the highest friedelane derivative amounts, with 3_b_-friedelanol (**1**) and friedelin (**2**) accounting for more than one half of the triterpene content. As previously shown, the quinonemethides were not detected in leaves of either species. Nevertheless, in the root bark, the quinonemethides **3-8** were detected as the major components accounting for up to 0.2%. The extracts prepared from 3-year old _M. aquifolium_ root bark yielded a high content of mayetenin (**3**) (0.024%) and pristimerin (**4**) (0.097%) (Table 1). The root bark extracts of 7 year old plants of _S. campestris_, showed, in addition to **3** (0.32%) and **4** (0.033%), in increasing order of concentration 22_b_-hydroxymethyl (**5**), 20_a_-hydroxymethyl (**6**), eclastrol (**7**) and netzahualcoyone (**8**) (Fig. 2).

The pattern of triterpene distribution in these two species is similar to that previously reported (Goncalves de Lima et al., 1972; Reddy et al., 1975; Martinod et al., 1976; Dominguez et al., 1979; Furlan et al., 1990) i.e. with the exclusive accumulation of friedelane derivatives in the leaves, whereas the quinonemethides are the major constituents in the root bark and are absent in leaves of both species.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c} Plant tissue & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & **5** & **6** & **7** & **8** \\ _M. aquifolium_ leaves & 0.0088 & 0.0092 & – & – & – & – & – & – \\ Root bark & – & – & 0.024 & 0.097 & – & – & – & – \\ _S. campestris_ leaves & 0.0094 & 0.0098 & – & – & – & – & – & – \\ Root bark & – & – & 0.032 & 0.033 & 0.013 & 0.022 & 0.021 & 0.052 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Content of friedelane and quinonemethide derivatives in leaves and root bark of _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_ (contents are expressed as % of dry wt)

Fig. 1: Conversion of oxidosqualene to 3_β_-friedelanol and friedelin and their involvement as the biosynthetic precursor to the quinonemethides in _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_.



## Page 3



### Formation of triterpenoid products

Since the accumulation of friedelanes and quinone-methides is a clear indication of their compartmentalized biosynthesis in the leaves and roots of \(M\). _aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_, the presence or absence of cyclase activity in these tissues would provide direct evidence for this assumption. Thus a protocol for the determination of cyclase activity was developed, by examining the conversion of oxidosqualone as a substrate using a cell-free extract prepared from leaves and root bark of \(M\). _aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_. The in vitro conversion of oxidosqualone to the friedelane derivatives 3_b_-friedelanol (**1**) was monitored by a GC method (see Section 3). The GC analysis also revealed that the enzymatic extracts catalyzed the formation of friedelin (**2**) (Fig. 4A and B) (see Section 3). The identification of these compounds was carried out by examination of their retention times with those of authentic samples (Fig. 3), and also by GC/MS in which both friedelanes could be identified by the presence of molecular ions and other significant peaks. Under the assay conditions studied, the formation of **1** and **2** appeared to be linear until ca. 50 min and up to 1.2 mg protein/ml. The control experiments in the absence of the substrate, oxidosqualone, or protein extracts showed no triterpene formation. The cofactor requirement was next investigated using the following conversion assays: (i) 1 mM EDTA; (ii) dialysis (to remove divalent cations in the buffer); (iii) dialysis and readdition of 30 mM Mg2+ or 30 mM Mn2+ ions. It was clear from these results that a divalent cation was required for cyclase activity as Mg2+ stimulated the cyclase activity, whereas Mn2+ inhibited the reaction. (Hohn and Vanmiddlesworth, 1986; Cane and Pargellis, 1987; Dehal and Croteau, 1988; Croteau and Purkett, 1989). This cyclase activity in crude extracts could not be concentrated by (NH4)2SO4 precipitation (40-80% saturation), because a great loss of activity was observed, showing this methodology not to be efficient for future purification of this cyclase.

Having established the authenticity of the enzymatic transformation, a time-course analysis was next carried out, this being linear over a 50 min time-frame and reaching a maximum level within ca. 2 h. Assays were also conducted at various pH values, ranging from pH 6.5 to 9.0 (see Section 3). A broad peak of activity, centered at pH 7.0 was observed for friedelane derivative biosynthesis, typical of terpene cyclases (Croteau, 1987; Croteau and Purkett, 1989). The temperature dependence of the reaction was also investigated, and a maximum activity at 40degC was observed.



## Page 4

The cell-free extracts prepared from root bark of both species were incubated with oxidosqualene similarly but did not yield friedelane derivatives, thus this cyclase is present only in the leaves of these two species.

### Possible sites for the biosynthesis of triterpenoids

Cell-free extracts prepared from leaves were capable of converting the oxidosqualene to 3_b_-friedelanol **(1)** and friedelin **(2)** as determined by GC (Fig. 4A and B). The percentages of conversion into 3_b_-friedelanol **(1)** and friedelin **(2)** were 0.020% **(1)** and 0.018% **(2)**, respectively, in _S. campestris_ whereas in _M. aquifolium_ the conversion were 0.013% **(1)** and 0.012% **(2)**. The control experiments indicated clearly that an enzyme was involved in this transformation as the boiled leaf extracts resulted in a major loss of activity. In conclusion, assays using protein extracts from leaves and root bark from Celastraceae and Hippocrateaceae species indicated the leaves as the possible site of biosynthesis of friedelane derivatives which should be further translocated to the roots and transformed to the quinone-methide triterpenoids. In order to confirm the possible translocation of friedelin derivatives from the leaves to root bark, a solution of (+-)5-3H-mevalonolactone was administered to the leaves of _M. aquifolium_ seedlings (3 years old). Friedelin **(2)** was isolated from the leaves, twigs and stems after 3 days of incorporation, diluted with unlabelled carrier products followed by recrystallization (five times) to constant specific radioactivity. The results of the radioactivity measurements for friedelin **(2)** and quinonemethide triterpenes maytenin **(3)** and pristimerin **(4)** are given in Table 2. A dilution of relative specific activity for friedelin **(2)** was observed between leaves and stems. No labelled friedelin was detected in the root bark of _M. aquifolium_ but, importantly, labelled quinoneethides maytenin and pristimerin could be observed.

These experiments including the determination of triterpenes and quinomemethides content, the feeding of (+-)5-3H-mevalonolactone associated with the determination of cyclase activity in cell-free extracts from leaves, twigs, stems and root bark of Celastraceae represents the first direct evidence to show compartmentalization of friedelane and quinonemethide triterpenoids.

## Experimental

### Plant material

Three year old seedlings of _M. aquifolium_ were grown in the greenhouse of Departamento de Biotecnologia da UNAERP. The plants were harvested and immediately divided into root bark and leaves and frozen in liquid N2. Leaves and root bark of _S. campestris_ were collected in Fazenda Canchin at Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos (20 miles from Aranaquara) frozen in liquid N2, and immediately transported to Aranaquara, where cell-free extracts were prepared.

### Instrumentation

HPLC quantification was carried out as described by Corsino et al. (1998). Response factors were calculated with freshly prepared reference solutions of quinone-methides **3-8**. HPLC analyses were performed on a Shimadzu LC-10 AD Liquid Chromatograph using a reverse phase C18 column (150 x 4.6 mm i.d.) with a precolumn (20 x 4.6 mm i.d.) in the isocratic mode with eluent EtOAc:MeOH (95:05) at a flow of 1.0 ml/min. The column was purged with the mobile phase for 5 min, followed by equilibration for 4 h: the total analytical run time was 30 min. The spectral data were collected using a refraction index detector. The characteristic retention times for compounds **1** and **2** under these HPLC conditions were 23.26 and 24.03 min. GC analyses were performed on a Hewlett-Packard 5890 Series II Gas Chromatography with a split injector at 270deg and a flame ionization detector (FID) at 310deg. The injection volume was 2 ml and the split ratio was 1:10. Nitrogen was employed as carrier gas. A 30 mx 0.25 mm SPB-5 capillary column was employed with temperature

Fig. 3: GC chromatogram of the standards friedelan-3_β_-ol **(1)** and friedelin **(2)**.



## Page 5



## Page 6

programming from 180\({}^{\circ}\) for 2.0 min, then increased by 5\({}^{\circ}\)/min to 280\({}^{\circ}\), and maintained for 25 min. The data were collected with an HP 3396A integrator. GC/MS analyses were performed on a Hewlett-Packard 5970B. The injection volume was 2 ul and the split ratio was 1:10. Nitrogen was employed as carrier gas. A 30 m\(\times\)0.25 um HP-1 capillary column was employed with temperature programming from 50\({}^{\circ}\) for 2.0 min, then increased by 15\({}^{\circ}\)/min to 290\({}^{\circ}\), and maintained for 25 min. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker AC 200 spectrometer at 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, using CDCl3 as a solvent and TMS as reference. ES-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. Radioactivity was measured by liquid scintillation counting. (\(\pm\))5-3H-mevalonolactone (33mCi/mmol) was purchased from Sigma.

### Friedelane and quinonemethide triterpenoids analysis

Root bark and leaves of _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_ were dried for 24 h at 40\({}^{\circ}\) in an oven with forced air circulation. The dried and powdered leaves of _M. aquifolium_ (4500 g) and _S. campestris_ (3200 g) obtained were exhaustively extracted with ethanol. The resulting ethanol extracts were filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford green gummy residues, 896.7 and 687.1 g, for _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_, respectively. The hexane soluble part of the ethanol extract _M. aquifolium_ (96.5 g) and _S. campestris_ (45.0 g) were applied to a Si-gel column (70-230 Mesh), eluted with hexane and increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give 55 and 35 fractions, respectively. Fraction 9 (0.175 g) of _M. aquifolium_ and 7 (0.186 g) of _S. campestris_ were subjected to Si gel column (230-400 mesh) chromatography, this being eluted with hexane and increasing amounts of EtOAc to give 3_b_-friedelanol **1** (0.043 and 0.074 g, respectively) and friedelin **2** (0.052 and 0.089 g, respectively). The structures of the compounds **1** and **2** were elucidated by comparison of their 1H NMR, 13C NMR and ES-MS data with literature values (Mahato and Kundu, 1994). The isolated and characterized compounds obtained were used as standards. The dried and powdered root bark of _S. campestris_ (485 g) was extracted with CH2Cl2. The resulting CH2Cl2 extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford a red gum (100.9 g). This extract was submitted to filtration chromatography on Si gel (300 g) eluted with hexane-EtOAc (1:1), EtOAc and EtOAc-MeOH (1:1) and MeOH. The hexane-EtOAc (1:1) (11.6 g) fraction was subjected to silica-gel column chromatography, eluted with hexane containing increasing amount of EtOAc to give 45 fractions. Fraction 6 (0.296 g) was applied to preparative TLC, eluted with hexane-EtOAc-HAc (98:02:1%) yielding the fraction 6-3 (0.093 g) which was further purified by prep. TLC, eluted with hexane-EtOAc-HAc (90:10:1%) to give **3** (0.030 g), **7** (0.026 g) and **8** (0.046 g). Fraction 31 was subjected to preparative TLC, eluted with CHCl3-MeOH-acetic acid (99:01:1%) to give **5** (0.007 g), **4** (0.012 g) and **6** (0.043 g).

The dried and powdered root bark of 3 year old _M. aquifolium_ seedlings (20.24 g) was extracted with CH2Cl2. The resulting CH2Cl2 extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford a red gum (0.52 g). This extract was submitted to silica gel column chromatography (100 g) eluted with hexane with increasing amount of EtOAc to give 48 fractions. Fraction 35 (0.183 g) was applied to preparative TLC, eluted with hexane-EtOAc (4:1) to yield **3** (0.021 g) and **4** (0.053 g). The structures of compounds **3-8** were elucidated by comparison of their 1H NMR, 13C NMR and ES-MS data with literature values (Gunatilaka, 1996).

### Protein extraction from leaves and root bark of _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_

All steps were carried out at 4\({}^{\circ}\). Frozen leaves and roots (100 g) were ground in liquid N2, using a mortar and pestle in the presence of XAD-4, and 30% (w/w) PVPP, 75 mM MES buffer, pH 7.0, containing 30 mM MgCl2 or MnCl2, 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 20% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM Na2S2O4, 5 mM Na2HPO4 and 10 mM sodium ascorbate. The homogenate was stirred at 4\({}^{\circ}\)/60 min, filtered through Miracaloth (Calbiochem) with the filtrate centrifuged (30 000 g, 20 min) to provide a supernatant which was used as the enzyme source.

Incubation of oxidosqualene with _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_ leaves and root bark enzymatic extracts

The protocol for cyclase activity required protein extracts (190 ul) of leaves and root bark of the _M. aquifolium_ and _S. campestris_, 50 ul of oxidosqualene (30 mM), and MES buffer (750 ul), pH 7.0 at 4\({}^{\circ}\). Five assays were conducted in parallel. After 2 h incubation at 40\({}^{\circ}\) with shaking, the reaction mixture was extracted with EtOAc (300 ul). Thereafter, the EtOAc layer was evaporated to dryness and analysed by GC. For determining cofactor requirements, 10 ul of a 30 mM

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Compound and tissue & Specific activity (dpm/mmol) & Relative specific activity (\%) \\ _Friedelin (2)_ & & \\ Leaves & 15.5\(\times\)10\({}^{5}\) & 100 \\ Twigs & 10.1\(\times\)10\({}^{5}\) & 65.2 \\ Stems & 9.0\(\times\)10\({}^{5}\) & 58.1 \\ _Maytenin (3)_ & & \\ Root bark & 7.0\(\times\)10\({}^{5}\) & 45.2 \\ _Pristimerin (4)_ & & \\ Root bark & 10.9\(\times\)10\({}^{5}\) & 70.3 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Specific activities of friedelin (**2**), maytenin (**3**) and pristimerin (**4**)

## Page 7

solution of MgCl2 and MnCl2 were individually added to the assay mixture.

### Protein assay

Protein concentrations were determined according to Hartree (1972), using bovine serum albumin as the standard.

### Chemical syntheses

#### 3.7.1 Epoxidation of squalene

A solution of squalene (0.858 g, 2.09 mmol) in CH2Cl2 (6 ml), saturated aqueous sodium carbonate (6 ml) and _m_CPBA (0.719 g, 4.18 mmol) was stirred at 4deg for 4 h. After the reaction was complete, as indicated by TLC, H2O (4 ml) was were added, followed by solid Na2SO4 (0.100 g). To the reaction mixture was added Et2O (3x20 ml), with the organic layer separated, washed successively with saturated aqueous NaHCO3, saturated aqueous NaCl and H2O (3x10 ml, each). The organic layer was dried (Na2SO4) and evaporated to dryness to yield a residue (0.092 g), which was purified by silica gel column (150 g) chromatography, eluted with hexane: EtOAc (95:05) to furnish the oxidosqualene (0.061 g, 68.5% of yield). The oxidosqualene obtained was submitted to gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis and the molecular ion at _m/z_ 476, corresponding to the molecular formula of the oxidosqualene was monitored and compared with authentic sample data.

### pH and temperature optimum

Standard assay conditions were used to determine the pH optimum of the cyclase, except that the buffer was either MES-NaOH (0.1 M, pH 5.0-7.0), Tris-HCl (0.1 M, pH 7.0-9.0). Temperatures between 0deg and 60deg were evaluated for the capacity to promote 3_b_-friedeland **1** and friedelin **2** formation under the standard enzymatic assay.

### Feeding experiment

(+-)5-3H-mevalonolactone in an ethanol solution (100 Ci) was evaporated, dissolved in methyl cellosolve and the solution painted on intact leaves of _M. aquifolium_ seedlings (3 years old). After 3 days, the leaves, twigs, stems and root bark were harvested and extracted with dichloromethane. The extracts on concentration deposited triterpenoid derivatives which were further processed for the isolation of the friedelin derivatives and/or quinonemethide triterpenoids as described above. The radioactive compounds were diluted with unlabelled carrier (ca. 50 mg) and recrystallized (five times) to constant sp. act. (Table 2). The identities of the products were determined by both HPLC and analysis of the 1H NMR spectra, these being compared to authentic standards.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants provided by FAPESP. MF, MJK and VSB are grateful to CNPq for fellowships. JC and PRFC thanks CAPES and FAPESP, respectively for providing them scholarships. JC thanks UFMS (Brazil) for a leave of absence. The authors are grateful to Mara Beatriz Costantin for technical assistance. The authors are also grateful to Dr Paulo Cesar Vieira for collection of _Salacia campestris_ and to Dr Anita Joeclyne Marsaioli and Andre Luis Meleiro Porto for the GC-MS analysis.

## References

* Bruning and Wagner (1978) Bruning, R., Wagner, H., 1978. Ubersicht uber die Celastraceen-Inhaltsstoffle: Chemie, chemotaxonomie, biosynthese, pharmacokinetics 17, 1821-1858.
* Bhatnagar et al. (1979) Bhatnagar, S.S., Divekar, P.V., Dutta, N.L.., 1979. Chemical Abstracts 45, 5885d.
* Cane and Pargellis (1987) Cane, D.E., Pargellis, C., 1987. Partial-purification and characterization of pentalene synthase. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 254, 421-429.
* Corsino et al. (1998) Corsino, J., Alcio, A.C., Ribeiro, M.L., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Duarte, I.B., Furlan, M., 1998. Quantitative determination of maytenin and 22 _b_-hydroxymaytenin in callus of _Maytenus aquifolium_ (Celastracae) by reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography. Phytochemical Analysis 9, 245-247.
* Croteau (1987) Croteau, R., 1987. Biosynthesis and catabolism of monoterpenoids. Chemical Review 87, 929-954.
* Croteau and Purkett (1989) Croteau, R., Purkett, P.T., 1989. Geranyl pyrophosphate synthase-characterization of the enzyme and evidence that this chain-length specific prenyltransferase is associated with monoterpene biosynthesis in Sage (_Solar officinalis_). Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 271, 524-535.
* Dehal and Croteau (1988) Dehal, S.S., Croteau, R., 1988. Partial purification and characterization of 2 sesquiterpene cyclases from Sage (_Salvia officinalis_) which catalyze the respective conversion of farnesyl pyrophosphate to humuleane and acrylorphylene. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 261, 346-356.
* Dominguez et al. (1979) Dominguez, X.A., Franco, R., Cano, G., Garcia, S., Zamudio, A., Amezcua, B., Dominguez Jr., X.A., 1979. Triterpene quinone-methides from _Schaefferia cuneifolia_ roots. Phytochemistry 18, 898-899.
* Ferreira et al. (1971) Ferreira de Santana, C., Cortias, C.T., Pinto, K. de V., Satiro, M.W., Satiro, A.L., Lacerda, A.L., Moreira, I.C., 1971. Primeiras observacoes sobre o emprego da inaitemia em pacientes cancerosis. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 11, 37-49.
* Furlan et al. (1990) Furlan, M., Alvarenga, M.A., Akizue, G., 1990. Triterpenoids and flavonoids from _Maytemus evomynoides_. Revista Latinoamericana de Quimica 21, 72-74.
* Gamalti et al. (1990) Gamalti, C.B., Gunatilaka, A.A.L., Tezuka, Y., Kikuchi, T., Balasubramaniam, S., 1990. Quinone-methide, phenolic and related triterpenoids of plants of Celastraceaea: further evidence for the structure of celastranhydride. Phytochemistry 29, 3189-3192.
* Goncalves de Lima et al. (1969) Goncalves de Lima, O., D'Albuquerque, I.L., Maciel, G.M., 1969a. Substancias antimicrobianas de plantas superieros. Comunicacao XXIX. Primeiras observacoes sobre ativido antimicrobiana de celastrol. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 9, 75-77.



## Page 8

Goncalves de Lima, O., D'Albuquerque, I.L., De Barros Coelho, J.S., Martins, D.G., Lacerda, A.L., Maciel, G.M., 1969b. Substancias antimicrobianas de plantas superiores. Comunicacao XXXI. Maintenia, novo antimicrobiano com acao antineoplastica, isolado de Celastracaee de Pernambuco. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 9, 17-21.
* Goncalves de Lima et al. (1971) Goncalves de Lima, O., D'Albuquerque, I.L., De Barros Coelho, J.S., Martins, D.G., Lacerda, A.L., Maciel, G.M., 1971. Substancias antimicrobianas de plantas superiores. Comunicacao XXXVI. Sobre a presenae de matienina a priorimenta na parte cortical das razies de _Maytemus lilifolia_, procedente do Brasil Meridional. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 11, 35-38.
* Goncalves de Lima et al. (1972) Goncalves de Lima, O., Weigert, E., Marini-Bettolo, G.B., Maciel, G.M., De Barros Coelho, J.S., 1972. Substancias antimicrobianas de plantas superiores. Comunicacao XXXIX. Identificacao de primerina como um componente ativo do "Bacupari" do Araguaia, _Salacia crassifollia_ (Mart) G. Don. (Hippocrataceae). Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 12, 19-24.
* Gonzalez et al. (1975) Gonzalez, A.G., Francisco, C.G., Freire, R., Hernandez, R., Salazar, J.A., Suarez, E., 1975. Iguesterin, a new quinonoid triterpene from _Catha cassioides_. Phytochemistry 14, 1067-1070.
* Gonzalez et al. (1977) Gonzalez, A.G., Darias, V., Boada, J., Alonso, G., 1977. Study of cytostatic activity of iguesterin and related compounds. Planta Medica 32, 282-286.
* Gunaherath and Gunatilaka (1983) Gunaherath, G.M.K.B., Gunatilaka, A.A.L., 1983. Studies on terpenoids and steroids. Part 3. Structure and synthesis of a new phenolic D:A-Friedo-24-noroleanane triterpenoid, zeylasterone, from _Kokoona zeylanca_. Journal of Chemical Society, Perkin Trans 1 24, 2845-2847.
* Gunatilaka (1996) Gunatilaka, A.A.L., 1996. Triterpenoid quinonemethides and related compounds (Celastroloids). Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products 67, 2-123.
* Gunatilaka and Nanayakkara (1984) Gunatilaka, A.A.L., Nanayakkara, N.P.D., 1984. Studies on terpenoids and steroids-2; structures of two new tri- and tetra-oxygenated D:A _Friedo_-oleanan triterpenes from _Kokoona zeylanca_. Tetrahedron 40, 805-809.
* Hartree (1972) Hartree, E., 1972. Determination of protein: a modification of the Lowry methods that gives a linear photometric response. Biochemistry 48, 422-427.
* Hohn and Vammiddlesworth (1986) Hohn, T.M., Vammiddlesworth, F., 1986. Purification and characterization of the sesquiterpene cyclase trichodiene synthetase from _Fusarium-sporotrichoides_. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 251, 756-761.
* Kutney et al. (1981) Kutney, J.P., Bale, M.H., Salisbury, P.J., Stuart, K.L., Worth, B.R., Towsley, P.M., Chalmers, W.T., Nilsson, K., Jacobi, G.C., 1981. Isolation and characterization of natural products from plant tissue cultures of _Maytemus buchannii_. Phytochemistry 20, 653-657.
* Mahato and Kundu (1994) Mahato, S.B., Kundu, A.P., 1994. \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra of pentacyclic triterpenoids -- a compilation and some salient features. Phytochemistry 37, 1517-1575.
* Marin-Bettolo (1979) Marin-Bettolo, G.B., 1979. Un grupo particular de substancias naturales. Las fenolidenonas triterpenicas. Revista Latinoamericana de Quimica 10, 97-104.
* Martin (1973) Martin, J.D., 1973. Structure of dispermoquinone-triterpenoid quinone methide from _Maytemus dispersums_. Tetrahedron 29, 2997-3000.
* Martinod et al. (1976) Martinod, P., Paredes, A., Delle-Monache, F., Marini-Bettolo, G.B., 1976. Isolation of tingenone and pristimerin from _Maytemus chuchuhnusca_. Phytochemistry 15, 562-563.
* Pavanand et al. (1989) Pavanand, K., Webster, H.K., Yongvanitchit, K., Kun-Anake, A., Dechatiwongse, T., Nutakul, W., Bansiddhi, J., 1989. Schizontocidal activity of _Celastrus-ponatulatus_ wild against _Plasmodium falciparum_ in vitro. Phytotherapy Research 3, 136-139.
* Reddy et al. (1975) Reddy, G.C.S., Ayengar, K.N.N., Rangaswani, S., 1975. Chemical components of root bark of _Salacia fruiticosa_ Heyne. Indian Journal of Chemistry 13, 342-343.



