# 10.1016@0031-9422(92)80374-N.pdf

## Page 1



# Isolation of Secoisolariciresinol Diesters from Stems of _Simaba Cuneata_

Edson Rodrigues Fo., Joao B. Fernandes, Paulo C. Vieira and M. Fatima Das G. F. Da Silva

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13560 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

28 October 1991

###### Abstract

A mixture of seciosolaricinesinol lignans acylated at C-9 and C-9 with dodecanoic, tetradecanoic and hexadecanoic acids, the triterpenes 3-oxo-firucalla-7,24-diene and 3,21-dioxo-firucalla-7,24-diene, and the steroids isstosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol, sitostenone, stigmasterol, campesterol, and campestenone were isolated from the stems of _Simaba cuneata_. Their structures were established based on full spectral analysis and chemical methods.

28 October 1991

## Introduction

Many species of the genus _Simaba_ Aubl. have been shown to contain quasinoids [1]. An investigation of the stems of the previously uninvestigated _S. cuneata_ St. HiI. (Tull) which grows in Sao Paulo state, Brazil, has led to the isolation of two triterpenes based on tirucallane, six steroids and a mixture of lignans acylated with fatty acids. GC-mass spectral analysis and interpretation of 13C NMR data showed that the fatty acids had non-branched chains. This appears to be the first record of fatty acid esters of lignans from the Simaroubaceae or from the allied families of the order Rutales [2]. Secoisolaricinesiondiesters have also been isolated from _Salvia plebeia_ (Labiaate) [3].

## Results and Discussion

The major compounds investigated in this study were identified as a mixture of lignans acylated with long-chain saturated fatty acids (I) which yielded secoisolaricresinol (2) [3, 4] upon hydrolysis. The acids were esterified by diazomethane and identified as dodecanoate, tetradecanoate and hexadecanoate methyl esters by GC-mass spectral analysis and comparison with published data [5].

The identification of the acids as nonbranched fatty acids was also supported by the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 1) which showed a signal at \(\begin{equation*}{\delta}13.9\end{equation*}\) for a methyl group indicating the absence of a \(\begin{equation*}{\eta}2\end{equation*}\)-cache effect as occurs on the terminal methyl group in 3-methylpentane [6]. The mass spectra gave significant fragments for _m/z_ 43 [C3H]+ and 57 [C4H]+ as well as successive loss of _m/z_ 14 [CH2] requiring the presence of nonbranched fatty acids.

These observations suggested that this group of natural products belongs to the secoisolaricrinsol series and that C-9 and C-9' have been acylated by dodecanoic, tetradecanoic and hexadecanoic acids. All these compounds appear to be novel. The corresponding 9-(12-methyltetradecanoate)-9'-furalte [4] and 9,9'-(di-12-methyltetradecanoate) [3] derivatives of secoisolaricresinol have only been reported from _Salvia plebeia_ (Labiaate).

The initial fractions of the chromatographic analysis yielded large amounts of a solid which was rechromatographed affording two triterpenes 3-oxo-firucalla-7,24-diene and 3,21-dioxo-firucalla-7,24-diene [7, 8] and six steroids: stioset, stigmasterol, campesterol, sitostenone, stigmasterol, campesterol, sitostenone, stigmasterol and campestenone [3, 4]. The fraction containing hydroxy steroids was acylated with acetic anhydride in pyridine prior to analysis. The latter fraction and fraction containing keto steroids were identified by GC-mass spectrometry and comparison with published spectral data [5].

The most common tetracyclic triterpenes in Simaroubaceae are triucalla-7-ene derivatives which are the precursors of quasinoids, compounds that are major chemotaxonomic characters of the family [1]. However, this represents the first report of 1.4-diarylbutane-type lignans from this family. Indeed lignans do not seem to be common in Simaroubaceae. As the distribution of lignans is, to date, restricted to the two rutalean families Rutaceae and Burseraceae, this report would appear to reinforce that Simaroubaceae has strong affinities with the other rutalena families.



## Page 2



## Appendix A Experimental

_General._ IR: KBr; 1H and 13C NMR: 200 and 20 MHz, respectively, TMS as int. standard; mp: uncorr; CG-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument; GC: HP-1 column 50 m x 0.25 mm programmed from 110-220deg at 3.5deg min-1 (FAMEs) or 180-300deg at 4.5deg min-1 (steroids).

_Plant material. Simaba cuneata_ was collected in Brazil by Jose R. Pirani (Departamento de Botanica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, S.P.). A voucher spccimen (SPF 38208) is deposited at the Herbarium of the Departamento de Botanica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, S.P. The stems (734 g) were dried, powdered, and extracted with hexane for over a week.

_Separation and identification of compounds._ The hexane extract of the stems (3.679 g) was chromatographed over silica gel using a gradient of hexane-EtOAc as eluent. Crystallization from hexane of the fr. eluted with hexane-EtOAc (24:1) yielded 3-oxo-titucalla-7,24-diene (410 mg). Continued elution of the column with hexane-EtOAc (19:1) yielded, after crystallization, a mixture of the ketone steroids sistostenone, stigmastenone and campestenone (93 mg), the triterpene 3,21-dioxo-tirucalla-7,24-diene (48 mg), and the 3-hydroxy-steroids sistosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol (121 mg). Prep. TLC (hexane-CH2Cl2-Me2CO, 3:16:1) of the fr. eluted with hexane-EtOAc (17:1) yielded the lignans diesters (28 mg) as a single spot on TLC using several different eluents.

_Lignans diesters._ Pale yellow oil. IR \(\nu_{\text{S}}^{\text{kBr}}\) cm-1: 3110, 2936, 2933, 2854, 1726, 1515, 1456, 1374, 1256, 1252, 1174, 1033, 811, 756; UV \(\nu_{\text{S}}^{\text{2HCl}}\) nm-241, 243, 274, 280

