# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)98552-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Humirianthenolides, new degraded diterpenoids from _Humirianthera rupestris_+
Footnote †: Based on part of the doctorate thesis presented by M. G. B. Zoghbi to Universidade de São Paulo (1979). Sponsored by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo.

Maria Das G. B. Zoghbi, Nidia F. Roque Hugo E. Gottlieb

# Abstract

The tuber of _Humirianthera rupestris_ (Icacinaceae) contains the degraded diterpenoids 3\(b\),20-epoxy-3a-hydroxy-14-oxo-9_b-podocarpan-19.6_b_-olide (humirianthenolide A), 3\(b\),20-epoxy-3a-hydroxy-17-oxo-9_b-podocarpan-19.6_b_-olide (humirianthenolide B), 3\(b\),20-epoxy-3a,14-dihydroxy-13-oxo-9_b-podocarp-8(14)-en-19.6_b_-olide D), 3\(b\),20-epoxy-3a-hydroxy-14-oxo-8a,9_b-podocarpan-19.6_b_-olide (humirianthenolide E) and 3\(b\),20-epoxy-3a,14_b_-dihydroxy-8a,9_b-podocarpan-19.6_b_-olide (humirianthenolide F). 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectroscopy were effective for the determination of the humirianthenolide structures.

## Introduction

_Humirianthera rupestris_ (Icacinaceae) is a shrub whose tuber, weighing about 40 kg, is eaten like flour after several water washings [1]. A chemical investigation of a tuber collected in Manaus (Amazon) Brazil revealed the presence of six new degraded diterpenoids.

## Results

The benzene and ethanol extracts from the tuber of _Humirianthera rupestris_ contained sitosterol and six crystalline substances, for which the names humirianthenolide A (**1a**), B (**1b**), C (**2a**), D (**3**), E (**4a**) and F (**4b**) are proposed.

Humirianthenolide A (**1a**), C17.H2O5, possessed a _g_-lactone (IR: 1766 cm-1 and 13C NMR: \(d\)179.9), hemiacetal (13C NMR: \(d\)96.8), saturated ketone (IR: 1710 cm-1 and 13C NMR: \(d\)212.4) and C--Me (4H NMR: \(d\)1.37) functions, and contained, therefore, five rings. Catalytic dehydrogenation yielded a

## Page 2

phenanthrene derivative (as determined by its UV spectrum), suggesting that the natural product was a degraded alterepnoid. The presence of only one methyl, as well as the hydrogen bond between the hemiacetad hydroxyl and the g-lactone carbonyl groups indicated an A/B ring pattern as shown in structure **1**. This assumption was confirmed by the strong similarity between the 1H and 13C NMR spectral data of **1a** and those of monilactone B [2] and annonalide [3], both of which share these same features.

The 1H NMR spectrum at 270 MHz, with couplings unambiguously established by comprehensive double-irradiation experiments, was instrumental in the determination of the stereochemical features of the humirianthendoides (Tables 1 and 2). Thus, for **1a**, the two protons on C-20 showed 4H,H values of relatively large magnitudes implying _W_-type arrangements. The highest field of the two signals was split by H-5 (1.5 Hz), indicating the _trans_ junction between rings A and B and that the proton giving rise to this signal was _cisoid_ to C-1. The

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c}  & **1a\(\uparrow\)** & **1b\(\uparrow\)** & **1c\(\uparrow\)** & **1d\(\uparrow\)** & **1e\(\uparrow\)** & **2a\(\downarrow\)** & **

## Page 3

other proton of the oxymethylene was located over ring B and showed an even larger 4J4H,N coupling (3.5 Hz), presumably with H-1a. H-6 appeared as a broad triplet, with almost no coupling with H-7b. This observation is best explained by a chair-ring B with the lactonic oxygen substituent in an axial position. The saturated ketone function must be located at C-14, in view of the low-field absorption of H-8. The coupling pattern of this hydrogen showed only one proton in an _anti_ relationship and this must be H-7a (axial). Therefore, the B/C ring junction was _cis_, with both H-8 and H-9 b-orientated. In the 13C NMR spectrum (Table 3) this arrangement was reflected by the high-field position of C-11, which was axial to ring B in addition to the _gauche_ relationship with C-1 (three g-effects). Thus this compound has structure 1a.

Humirianthendoide B (**1b**) had two more mass units than **1a** and was converted to the latter by Jones oxidation. The stereochemistry of the alcohol function was defined by the 1H and 13C NMR spectral data. Thus, the carbonic proton signal had splittings consistent with an equatorial hydroxyl group (Table 2). This was confirmed by the invariance of the C-12 absorption and the shielding of the C-7 by the _gauche_ hydroxyl group. The IR spectral data showed that the lactone carbonyl of **1b** had both intra- and inter-molecular hydrogen bonds (with 3-OH and 14-OH, respectively, giving a band at 1760 cm-1 that was eliminated by conversion to derivative **1e**, which had no free hydroxyl groups). The b-arrangement of the g-lactone and hemiacetal functions was also indicated by an alkaline hydrolysis of **1b**, which resulted in a retro-aldol reaction, in agreement with previous observations [2,3]. In our case, a 2:1 mixture of the isomers **5a** and **5b**, respectively, was obtained. The characteristic feature of the 1H NMR spectrum of these compounds was the splitting of the methyl signal into a doublet, and therefore indicating the presence of a 4-H. In the major compound, the signal of the latter proton was not split further than a quartet, indicating an approximately 90deg dihedral angle with H-5. In the minor product, such a coupling existed (7.5 Hz). This is consistent with the configurations shown in formula **5**.

Humirianthendoic C (**2a**), with the same ring A and B pattern as compound 1, had two additional carbon atoms. IR (1700, 1640 cm-1), UV (4J4HOH 267 nm, 20000), 13C NMR (three singlets at d 200.6, 191.4 and 111.2) and 1H NMR (d 3.78, s, 2 H) spectra define a dihydrofuran-4-one moiety. The allylic nature of H-8 (d 2.73) and the high-

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c}  & **1a\(\uparrow\), ** & **1b\(\uparrow\)** & **1b\(\delta\)** & **1c\(\delta\)** & **2a\(\delta\)** & **3\(\delta\)** \\
1 & 30.3 & 29.6 & 30.3 & 29.8 & 30.0 & 29.1 \\
2 & 27.7 & 27.0 & 28.4 & 28.8 & 28.8 & 27.8 \\
3 & 96.8 & 96.3 & 96.4 & 96.1 & 96.2 & 96.4 \\
4 & 51.8 & 51.3 & 51.7 & 51.



## Page 4

field position of C-12 (17.7), shielded by a g-effect on the carbonyl oxygen, located the side-chain as shown in **2**.

Humirianthendole **D (3)** had an enolized a-diketone system, as shown by IR (1670 and 1650 cm-1), UV (\(\lambda_{\text{HOH}}^{\text{MOH}}\) 272 nm, \(e\) 10 500) and 13C NMR (three singlets at \(d\) 192.8, 144.9 and 129.0). C-8 was part of this system, since one of the hydrogens on C-7 was strongly deshielded by the r-system and its signal showed only coupling to H-6, in addition to the geminal splitting. The signals in the 1H and 13C NMR spectra due to the A- and B-ring nuclei were slightly changed in **3** relative to compounds **1** and **2**. A very diagnostic feature was the shape of the H-6 signal, a quartet with three couplings (to H-5, H-7a and H-7b) of 8 Hz. The sp2 nature of C-8, a bridgehead carbon, forces ring B into a boat conformation, with different dihedral angles between its peripheral protons. H-9 remains b-orientated, since the alternative configuration would entail more drastic changes, e.g. a g-effect between C-20 and C-11. Instead, C-11 is deshielded by the loss of a _gauche_ interaction with C-7, now above the plane of the boat-shaped ring B.

Humiroanthenolide E (**a**a) was an isomer of **1a** and, indeed, its IR spectrum showed the presence of a saturated ketone (1700 cm-1). However, it differed from **1a** in the geometry of rings B and C, H-6 being split by large coupling constants by all its three neighbours. This pattern was strongly reminiscent of the one described for **3**, suggesting a _trans_ junction between rings B and C, and a boat-like ring B, similar to **3** where C-8 was sp2-hybridized. One of the two protons on C-7 absorbed at low-field (_d_ 2.67), indicating that the ketone was probably located at C-14. The small coupling between this proton and H-8 was in agreement with a _quasi_-equatorial and axial positioning, respectively, for these two hydrogen atoms.

Humirianthendole F (**4b**) had the same molecular weight as **1b** and its molecular ion in the MS lost two molecules of water, as was the case with **1b** (but not with **1a** or **4a**, which lost only one water molecule), indicating the presence of an hydroxyl group other than the one located at C-3. The _trans_ nature of the B/C ring junction was determined by the shape of the 1H NMR signal of H-6 which was very similar to that in the spectrum of **4a**. The proton spectrum showed also a carbonic hydrogen as a multiplet with \(W_{1,2} = 7\) Hz, which was only consistent with an axial secondary alcohol. Biogenetic considerations would suggest that the hydroxyl is located at C-14.

The configurations shown in formulae **1**-**4** are meant to be relative. The fact that they also may represent absolute configurations follows from the similarity of the ORD curve of **1b** (see Experimental) and the ORD curves of monilactones A and B [3].

## Discussion

Only four di terpenoids with the phenanthrene skeleton feature a _trans_-_syn_ stereochemistry, i.e. with H-9 and C-20 in a _cis_ relationship. These are annonalide [3] and momilactones A, B [2] and C [4], all of which are \(\Upgamma^{\text{7}}\) compounds. This work, therefore, constitutes the first example of di terpenoids with _trans_-_syn_-_cis_ and _trans_-_syn_-_trans_ arrangements. While the former stereochemistry predominates in this species, an interconversion of the two forms by the conilization of a 14-carbonyl function, as shown in compound **3**, could be visualized. The apparently lower stability of the B/C _trans_ ring junction may be a result of the boat-like forms of ring B that must be assumed in these compounds.

The humirianthendoles may derive from successive oxidative degradations of a precursor with an abietane skeleton. This sequence could start with the removal of one of the methyls of the isopropyl side-chain, leaving a carbonyl group in its place, as in compound **2a**. Since this product contains a masked b-diketone functionality, a retro-added reaction would lead to compounds oxidized in ring C only at C-14, such as **1** and **5**.

## Experimental

### Extraction and isolation

A tuber of _Humirianhera nupstris_ Ducle (40 kg) collected in Manaus (Amazon) and classified by Dr. W. Rodrigues (Herbraia INPA, Manaus: 46811) was over dried at 60deg. The ground material (2.4 kg) was extracted with C 

## Page 5



