# 10.1016@S0031-9422(01)00315-6.pdf

## Page 1



# Susquiterpene pyridine alkaloids from _Peritassa campestris_

Luciano M. Liao

luciano@quimica.ufg.br

 Paulo C. Vieira

leon@quimica.ufg.br

 Edson Rodrigues-Filho

Joao B. Fernandes

Maria F.G.F. da Silva

Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Goias, C.P. 131, 74001-970 Goiania, GO, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, C.P. 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil

20 December 20002002001 revised form 14 May 200120 December 20002001 revised form 14 May 2001

###### Abstract

An investigation of the methanol and ethyl acetate extracts from the roots of _Peritassa campestris_ (Hippocrateaceae) afforded the sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloid, 4-hydroxy-7-epi-chuchuhuanine E-V, and nine known alkaloids, forrestine, euonimine, ebenifoline E-I, wilforine, euojaponine F, euonine, wilforine, newoiforine, and wilforine. The structures of the isolates were elucidated on the basis of spectral data, particularly HMQC and HMBC experiments. (c) 2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

_Keywords: Peritassa campestris_; Hippocrateaceae; Sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids; 4-Hydroxy-7-epi-chuchuhuanine E-V

## 1 Introduction

Sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids, based on a highly oxygenated dihydro-b-agaofuran core on a sesquiterpene moiety, and evoninoate or wilfordate esters on their alkaloid moiety, constitute a relatively small group of natural products frequently found in plants of the Celastracee family (Bruning and Wagner, 1978). Recently, these alkaloids have also been described in plants of the Hippocrateaceae (Mata et al., 1990; Liao et al., 1997). This chemical aspect reinforces the recent botanical classification in which the two families, Celastracee and Hippocrateaceae, appear to be grouped in the Celastracee (Bruning and Wagner, 1978; Heywood, 1993). These alkaloids have also been of interest due to their cytotoxicity against several human tumour cell lines (Kuo et al., 1994), and their insect antifecadant, and insecticidal activities (Shirota et al., 1994). Sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids isolated from _Tripterygium_ species have also shown immunosuppressive activity (Zheng et al., 1989).

As part of our continuing search for bioactive compounds from plants, especially from the savanna, we investigated the MeOH and EtOAc soluble portions of the crude extract of the roots of _Peritassa campestris_ Cambess. (Hippocrateaceae), a plant that occurs in the Brazilian savanna (Cerrado), popularly known as "bacupari do campo", and which is used in folk medicine for wound healing in the form of a decoction (Septtimio, 1994). In this paper we report the isolation and structure elucidation of a new sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloid, 4-hydroxy-7-epi-chuchuhuanine E-V (**1**), and the isolation of nine known alkaloids forrestine (Chunquan et al., 1992), euonimine, ebenifoline E-I, euojaponine F, euonine (Itokawa et al., 1993), wilforine (Beroza, 1951), wilforjine (Deng et al., 1992), newoiforine (He et al., 1989), and wilforzine (He et al., 1987).

## 2 Results and discussion

4-Hydroxy-7-epi-chuchuhuanine E-V (**1**) was isolated as a colorless amorphous solid, in low yield, and its IR spectrum displayed absorptions at 3614, 1740, and 1583 cm\({}^{-1}\). The \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra suggested a dihydro-b-agaofuran sesquiterpene skeleton with an evoninic diester bridge. The sesquiterpene moiety was characterised in the \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum by tertiary methyl groups at \(\delta\) 1.67 (3H, \(s\), Me-14) and \(\delta\) 1.58 (3H, \(d\), \(J\) = 1.2 Hz, Me-12), coupling with one hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl group at \(\delta\) 4.50 (\(q\), \(J\) = 1.2 Hz, OH-4), two sets of methylene protons at \(\delta\) 4.62 (\(d\), \(J\) = 13.6 Hz, H-11a), \(\delta\) 5.28 (\(d\), \(J\) = 13.6 Hz, H-11b), \(\delta\) 3.67 (\(d\), \(J\) = 11.6 Hz, H-15a) and \(\delta\) 5.98 (\(d\), \(J\) = 11.6 Hz, H-15b), seven methine protons at \(\delta\) 5.43 (\(d\), \(J\) = 4.0 Hz, H-1), 4.07 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 4.0

## Page 2

and 2.4 Hz, H-2), 4.76 (\(d\), \(J\) = 2.4 Hz, H-3), 7.03 (\(s\), H-5), 2.33 (\(d\), \(J\) = 4.0 Hz, H-6), 5.53 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 6.0 and 4.0 Hz, H-7) and 5.35 (\(d\), \(J\) = 6.0 Hz, H-8), and five acetyl groups at \(\delta\) 2.31, 2.21, 2.15, 2.01 and 1.95. A further oxygenated functional group was assumed to be a hydroxyl group, based on a broad singlet at \(\delta\) 3.65 (exchanged with D\({}_{2}\)O). The evoninic acid fragment in **1** was assigned by the signals at \(\delta\) 8.05 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 8.0 and 2.0 Hz, H-4\({}^{\prime}\)), 7.26 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 8.0 and 4.8 Hz, H-5\({}^{\prime}\)) and 8.69 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 4.8 and 2.0 Hz, H-6\({}^{\prime}\)), corresponding to a 2,3-disubstituted pyridine unit. It also contains two secondary methyl groups at \(\delta\) 1.38 (\(d\), \(J\) = 6.8 Hz, Me-9\({}^{\prime}\)) and 1.15 (\(d\), \(J\) = 7.2 Hz, Me-10\({}^{\prime}\)), coupled with two methine protons at \(\delta\) 4.66 (\(dq\), \(J\) = 6.8 and 1.0 Hz, H-7) and 2.53 (\(dq\), \(J\) = 7.2 and 1.0 Hz, H-8\({}^{\prime}\)). This sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloid includes one macrocyclic structure formed by two ester linkages between one sesquiterpene molecule and one evoninic acid, at positions 3 and 15. In order to determine the positions of the acetate groups and consequently the hydroxyl group position, \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H COSY, HMQC and HMBC spectra were recorded. In the former the cross-peak of H-2 (\(\delta\) 4.07) with H-1 (\(\delta\) 5.43) and H-3 (\(\delta\) 4.76), suggested the position of the hydroxyl group at C-2, which reinforced by the observation that H-2 was at higher field than the corresponding proton in alkaloids containing a benzoyl or acetyl group, attached to this position. This proposal was confirmed by the HMBC spectrum which located the acetate groups by cross-peaks between these groups and H-1, H-5, H-7, H-8, and H-11. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum showed 36 signals, characteristic of evoninoate sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids and showing five acetate groups. The carbon attached to the hydroxyl group appeared at \(\delta\) 69.65, approximately \(\delta\) 1.0 deshielded when compared with alkaloids with an acetate group at carbon 2. Additional support was obtained by a full scan ESI mass spectrum, where the molecular ion peak for this compound was detected at \(m/z\) 764 ([M + H]\({}^{+}\)), reinforcing this structural proposal.

The relative stereochemistry around the dihydroagar-ofuran nucleus was determined from the coupling constants to be the same as other alkaloids isolated, including wilforine, wherein the stereochemistry was determined by X-ray analysis (Liao et al., 1997). The C-7 epimeric relationship between this compound and chuchhuanine E-V (**1a**), was defined by the coupling constant between H-7 and H-8. While in **1** this coupling constant was 6.0 Hz, in **1a** it was 9.4 Hz (Shirota et al., 1994), indicating a _cis_ and _trans_ H-7/H-8 relationship for **1** and **1a**, respectively.

Alkaloid **1** was assayed for lethality in the brine shrimp toxicity (BST) test, and showed LC\({}_{50}\) 99.0 mg/ml. This test is proposed as a simple bioassay for natural product research, which active compounds could then be subjected to more elaborate bioassays for specific pharmacological activities. Sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids was assayed against several tumor cell lines, and emarginating F turned out to be active against some cell lines (Kuo et al., 1994).

## 3 Experimental

### General experimental procedures

NMR: Bruker DRX 400, in CDCl\({}_{3}\) and TMS as int. standard; ESI-MSMS: low resolution on a triple quadrupole Micromass Quattro LC instrument, equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source; HRMS were obtained on a Fisons VG Autospec; [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{\rm D}\): Perkin-Elmer 241 instrument; DCCC: Tokyo Rikakikai Co. with 300 columns of 40 cm\(\times\)2 mm i.d.

### Plant material

Roots of _P. campestris_ were collected in a Savanna Reserve at Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, in October 1992 and identified by Dr. Maria Helena de O. Antunes, Departamento de Botanica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Sao Paulo, Brazil, wherein a voucher specimen (no. 2845) is deposited.

### Extraction and isolation

The roots were dried, powdered (2.8 kg) and successively extracted with hexane, CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) and MeOH at room temperature. The combined extracts were submitted to liquid-liquid partition, resulting in hexane (5.1 g), methanol (35.84 g), ethyl acetate (5.87 g), \(n\)-butanol (5.21 g), and aqueous (23.80 g) extracts. The methanolic extract (3.5 g) was submitted to droplet countercurrent chromatography (DCCC), using the aqueous layer of hexane:MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O:EtOAc (5:4:1:2) as the stationary and the organic layer as the mobile phase, in a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min. The collected fractions were monitored by TLC and grouped in 22 fractions. Fractions 20-22 were separately filtered on Florisil (70-230 mesh) using hexane:CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):MeOH (8:2:0.5). Fraction 20 was flash chromatographed on silica gel (230-400 mesh), eluting with hexane: CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):MeOH (8:2:0.5), affording wilforine

## Page 3

(330.0 mg, 9.428%) and a mixture of sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids. Fraction 22 was submitted to recycling HPLC using a GS-310P column (MeOH; 50.0x 2.15; 3 ml/min; UV 254 nm), affording euojaponine F (15.7 mg, 0.448%), wilforjine (5.9 mg, 0.168%), wilforjine (3.5 mg, 0.100%), and another mixture of alkaloids. The ethyl acetate extract (3.0 g) was also submitted to DCCC, using the aqueous layer of CHCl3: MeOH:_n_-BuOH:H2O (10:10:1:6) as the stationary and the organic layer as the mobile phase, in a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min, and after TLC was grouped in 12 fractions. Fractions 3, 4 and 5, after Florisil filtration, were individually submitted to recycling HPLC under the same conditions as the methanol extract, affording forrestine (186.8 mg, 6.226%), wilforine (50.1 mg, 1.670%), euojaponine F (0.4 mg, 0.013%), euonine (4.2 mg, 0.140%), newilforine (4.3 mg, 0.143%), euonimine (6.1 mg, 0.203%), and a mixture of sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids. The mixtures of alkaloids obtained were monitored by TLC using the Dragondorff reagent and grouped into two sets. The second set was rechromatographed on recycling HPLC using a Shim-pack column (silica 5 m; 2.0x25 cm; hexane: CH2Cl2:MeOH- (8:2:0.5); 3 ml/min; UV 254 nm), affording the alkaloid **1** (1.5 mg, 0.023%) and ebenifoline E-I (2.0 mg, 0.038%).

### Biological assays

The in vitro lethality assay against _Artemia salina_ (BST) was carried out according to procedures described in Alkofahi et al. (1989).

#### 3.4.1 4-Hydroxy-7-epi-chuchhuanine E-V (1)

This was obtained as a colorless amorphous solid: [a]D2 -37.4deg (CHCl3: 0.002), UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\text{MoH}}\) nm (log _e_): 201 (3.92), 223 (3.61), 265 (3.24) nm; IR \(\upsilon_{\max}^{\text{CC}\text{1}\text{3}}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3614, 1740, 1583, 1566, 1231 cm\({}^{-1}\); 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see text; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): \(d\) 9.3 (_q_, C-10'), 11.8 (_q_, C-9'), 18.5 (_q_, C-14), 20.5 (_q_, OCOCH3), 20.8 (_q_, OCOCH3), 21.0 (_q_, OCOCH3), 21.4 (_q_, OCOCH3), 21.6 (_q_, OCOCH3), 22.7 (_q_, C-12), 36.3 (_d_,

