# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)89084-6.pdf

## Page 1



M. Fascio,* W. B. Mors,* B. Gilbert,+ J. R. Mahajan,* M. B. Montero,++ D. Dos Santos Filho,W. Vichnewsek

* Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brasil; + Centro de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 2C-3-2, Brasil; +Departamento de Quimica, Universidade de Brasilia, Brasilia, DF Brasil; $ Faculdade de Farmacia e Gdontologia de Ribeirao Preto, Ribeirao Preto, S. Paulo, Brasil.

###### Abstract

Investigation of diterpenoids in four species of _Pterodon_ show varying oxidation patterns on the vinhaltane or vouacapane skeletons.

The genus _Pterodon_ (Leguminosae, Lotoidea) comprises 5 species native to Brazil, _P. pubescens_ Benth. (Sucupira branca), _P. amarginatus_ Vog., _P. polygaaleforus_ Benth., _P. apparicioi_ Pedersoli [1], and _P. appartius_ Benth. Chemical investigation of these species was first promoted by the discovery [2] that the fruit oil of _P. pubescens_ inhibited the penetration of the skin by schistosome cercariae, a property that was traced to 14,15-epoxy-gbergaryg

## Page 2



##.4 Experimental

The NMR spectra were determined at 60, 100 and 220 MHz (Varian instruments) and mass spectra on AEI, Atlas and Varian-Atlas low and high resolution mass spectrometers.

_Isolation of diterpenoids from_ P. apparicioi. _P. apparicioi_ fruits collected on the banks of the Rio Cipo, State of Minas Gerais, ground and percolated with hexane, to give after evaporation of the hexane a brown oil (300 g) from which 6a.7b-diacetoxyvouacapane (**5**) (4 g) crystallized directly. The oil (25 g) chromatographed over Si gel (380 g) in hexane-Me,CO gave successively 7b-acetoxyvouacapane (**4**) (0 3) g). (1 5 8) and methyl 6a-acetoxy-7b-hydroxyvouacapan-17b-oate (**14**) (0 1 g). All 3 compounds were recrystallized from Me2CO by addition of hexane.

_Isolation of diterpenoids from_ P. pubescens. A similar isolation procedure applied to _P. pubescens_ fruits (collected near Brasilia, DF) gave successively from 100 g oil, 6a.7b-diacetoxyvouacapan-14b-al (**10**) (5 8). 6a.7b-diacetoxyvouacapan-14b-o ate (**16**) (2 g), methyl 6a.7b-diacetoxy-14b-hydroxyvinthionate (**7**) (3 g) and methyl 6a.7b-diacetoxy-12.16-dihydro-12.14-dihydroxy-16-oxovinthinatoate (**8**) (0 3 g). Diterpenes (**10**) and (**15**) were recrystallized from Me2CO by hexane addition; (**7**) from Me2CO-MeOH by hexane addition; and (**8**) from _n_-POH [4,6].

_Isolation of diterpenoids from_ P. polystaleoforus. The crude oil was separated into acidic and neutral fractions by extraction with Clausen's alkali. followed by fractionation of the neutral fraction of Si gel, as described for _P. emarginatus_[8]. The following four compounds were obtained in the pure state and identified by direct comparison with authentic samples isolated earlier: [8]6a.7b-dihydoxyvouacapan-17b-oic acid (**13**) (20% of the crude oil); methyl 6a.7b-dihydoxyvouacapan-17b-oate (**12**) (06%D, methyl 6a.acetoxy-7b-hydroxyvouacapan-17b-oate (**14**) [7], and vouacapane-6a.7b,14b-triol (**6**) (25%).

_Physical data of the diterpenoid faras._ (a) Melting points (uncorr): (**4**) 147-148deg; (**5**) 167-168deg; (**6**) 218-222deg; (**7**) 100-105deg; (**8**) 184-186deg; (**9**) 157-158deg; (**10**) 220-221deg; (**11**) 279-280deg; (**12**) 204-205deg; (**13**) 273-274deg; (**14**) 187-188deg; (**15**) 210-212deg; (**16**) 202-203deg; (**18**) _

## Page 3



