# 10.1016@0031-9422(73)80714-9.pdf

## Page 1



# A New Xanthone From _Lorostemon_ Species*
Footnote *: Part XXXII in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Gutiferae”. For Part XXXI see Ref. 1.

R. Braz Filho, M. de J. Coutinho Lemos and O. R. Gottlieb

Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, Brasil

21 November 1972. _Accepted 1 December 1972_Lorostemon coelhoi; Lorostemon negrens; Guttiferae; 6,7-dihydroxy-1-methoxypyrano-(2',3':3,4)xanthone; lorostemin.

###### Abstract

The trunk wood of two Amazonian Guttiferae species, _Lorostemon coelhoi_ Paula and _L. negrensis_ Froes,2 yielded yellow crystals of a new compound, lorostemin. Preliminary scrutiny of MS and PMR spectra of the compound disclosed the formula C13H3O2(OH)2-OMe(CH=CHCMe2O) which is compatible with a xanthone structure. Two of the undefined protons must be _para_ related and both _ortho_ to hydroxyls. Their PMR singlets appear at a substantially lower field in the spectrum of the diacetate than in the spectrum of the dimethyl ether (D_H-s 0-40 ppm, D_H-s 0-48 ppm). The third singlet of the aromatic PMR region, which is not shifted upon acetylation, occurs at relatively high field (_t_ 3-43), and corresponds thus to a proton at C-2 or C-4 of a 1,3-dioxygenated ring.3 Only the former alternative can be correct, since treatment of di-_O_-methyllorostemin with cold conc. H2SO4 leads to a 1-hydroxyxanthone (AlCl3-shift of UV maxima) which gives a negative Gibbs test.4 The angular pyrano-structure I which thus emerges for lorostemin is consistent with the wavelength of the principal UV maximum (275 nm). Linear pyranoxanthones show the corresponding band at 295 nm.5

Footnote *: Part XXXII in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Gutiferae”. For Part XXXI see Ref. 1.

Present address: Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Fortaleza, Ceara.

Even diffuse daylight transforms lorostemin gradually into a sparingly soluble derivative. Both compounds are soluble in aqueous borax and show similar mass spectral fragmentation patterns. The PMR spectra of the acetates are identical with respect to the aromatic regions. The signals due to the side chain protons, however, are strikingly different, revealing the replacement of the olefinic protons of lorostemin by protons at saturated carbons in the derivative. Light induced double bond addition must thus be held responsible for its formation.



## Page 2



## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of lorostemin._ The ground wood (7-5 kg) of _Lorostemon coelhoi_ was extracted with benzene. The concentrated benzene solution gave a crystalline mass (80 g) which was separated by filtration from an oil (5 g). The crystals plus some ahering oil were recrystallized repeatedly from hot acetone, yielding in the first crops the photodimer. The mother liquors were evaporated. The residue was freed from oil by washings with light petrol. and recrystallized from hot MeOH giving lorostemin (I). The presence of lorostemin in the wood of _Lorostemon negensis_ was demonstrated by preparative TLC.

_Lorostemin_ (I). Yellow crystals, m.p. 258 259deg (Me2CO) (Found: C, 67:15; H, 4-80. C19H4090 requires: C, 67:05; H, 4-75%). \(\begin{equation*}{\mathrm{A}}{\mathrm{E}}{\mathrm{O}}_{{\mathrm{max}}}\end{equation*}\) (nm):

