# 10.1590@S0103-50532011000700021.pdf

## Page 1



[

Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, CP 676, 13565-905 Sao Carlos-SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

O extrato dicltorometano do caule de _Raputia praetermissa_ levou ao isolamento de quatro compostos novos, 4-desoxi-rapuindol C (**1**), rapuimononidol A-B (**2**, **3**) e hexadecanil 2-hidroxi-4-metoki-cinnamato (**5**), juntamente com os alcaloides 5-(4-metoki-metilfuran-2-il)-1_H_-indol (raputimoonidol C), furoquinolinos maculosidine, robustine, evolitrine e dictamnine. O estudo dextrao hexano levou ao isolamento de _N_-metil-4-metoki-quinolin-2(_1H_)-ona, skimmianina, cicolarentona, sitosterol, stigmasterol e distostenona. Os alcaloides antranilicos isolados indicam que o genero possui afinidade quimica relevante com aqueles da tribo Cusparieae, mas difere de _Neoraputia_ devido a auscencia de alcaloides prenilindois neste atilmo, cujas especies foram anteriormente includas em _Raputia_.

The dichloromethane extract from the stems of _Raputia praetermissa_ afforded four new compounds, 4-deoxyraputindole C (**1**), raputimoonidole A-B (**2**, **3**), and hexadecamyl 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-cinnamate (**5**), besides the alkaloids 5-(4-methoxymethylfuran-2-yl)-1_H_-indole (raputimoonidole C), furoquinolines maculosidine, robustine, evolitrine and dictamnine. The hexane extract yielded _N_-methyl-4-methoxyquinolin-2(_1H_)-one, skimmianine, cycloartenone, sistosterol, stigmasterol and sitostenone. The anthranilate alkaloid content indicates that the genus is strongly related to those included in Cusparieae tribe, but differs from _Neoraputia_ by the absence of preynlindoe alkaloids in the late, whose species have previously been placed in _Raputia_.

## Introduction

The _Raputia_ genus was established by Aublet in 1775,1 and based on morphological characteristics of _R. aromatica_ Aubl. Emmerich later dismembered this genus,1 placing most of the species into _Neoraputia_ Emmerich, \(Sigmatanthus\) Huber ex Emmerich, and _Raputiarana_ Emmerich. Following the research of Kallunki and Pirani,2,5 a total of eleven species have now been included in the _Raputia_ genus: _R. aromatica_ Aubl., _R. maroana_ (R. S. Cowan) Kallunki, _R. neblinensis_ (R. S. Cowan) Kallunki, _R. ulei_ (K. Krause) Kallunki, _R. brevipedunculata_ Kallunki, _R. megalandtha_ Kallunki, _R. simulans_ Kallunki, _R. amazonica_ (Huber) Kallunki (synonym: _Ravenia amazonica_ Huber), _R. szcczerbani_ (Steyerm.) Kallunki (synonym: _Lubaria sczcerbani_ Steyerm.), _R. hirsuta_ (Gereau) Kallunki and _R. praetermissa_ Pirani & Kallunki. _Raputia and Neoraputia_ are assigned to the tribe Cusparieae and are distributed from Venezuela and French Guiana to Amazonian Colombia, Peru and Brazil.5

Previous investigations of _Neoraputia_ reported the presence of eleven polymethoxylated flavonoids, six flavones, three 5,6-(2",2"-dimethylpyrano)flavones, one 6,7-(2",2"-dimethylpyrano)flavone and one flavanone from _N. alba_ (Engler) Emmerich;6,7 five polymethoxylated flavones and two flavanones, 2'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5,6'-pentamethoxychalcone, three 5',6'-(2",2"-dimethylpyrano)polypmethoxylated chalcones from _N. magnifica_ var. _magnifica_ (Engler) Emmerich;8,9 ten polymethoxylated flavonoids, six flavones, three 6,7-(2",2"-dimethylpyrano)flavones and one 6-(3"-hydroxy,3"-methyl-_trans_-but_-1"-enyl)flavone from _N. paraensis_.10,11 A reinvestigation of _N. paraensis_ searching for alkaloids afforded flindersine, skimmianine, 8-methoxyfilnoserine and dictamnine.12

## Page 2

C-glycosylflavones were also reported from _N. paraensis_,[13] which was cited as _Raputia paraensis_, but this species was transferred to _Neoraputia_ by Emmerich.[1]

The first investigation about the chemistry of _Raputia_ reported the presence of cyclopentyl bisindole alkaloids raputiindoles A-D from _R. simulans_ Kllunki.[14]

In this paper we report a phytochemical study on _R. praetermissa_ Pirani & Kallunki, and the chemosystematic significance of isolated compounds is discussed in order to clarify the relationships between _Raputia_ and _Neoraputia_.

## Results and Discussion

The dichloromethane extract from the stems of _Raputia_\(praetermissa\) afforded four premylindole alkaloids (**1**-**4**), a cinnamic acid derivative (**5**) (Figure 1), and furoquinoline alkaloids maculosidine, robutsine, evolitrine[15] and dictamine.[16] The hexane extract yielded _N_-methyl-4-methoxyquinolin-2(_1H_)-one,[17] skimimanine,[17] cycloartenone,[18] sitosterol, stigmasterol and sitostenone.

Compound **1**, C26H26N2 (HREIMS), was identified as a bisindole alkaloid. The presence of two indole nucleus was suggested by an UV absorption maximum at 328 nm, an IR band at 3426 cm-1 (NH), and 1H NMR signals for N-H protons at d 8.00 and 8.04 (brs, no correlation in the HSQC spectrum) (Table 1), which in the COSY experiments showed cross peaks with the 1H signals at d1H 7.14 (dd, 3.2, 2.5 Hz), 6.50 (ddd, 3.2, 2.5, 1.0 Hz), 7.11 (dd, 3.0, 2.5 Hz) and 6.44 (ddd, 3.0, 2.5, 1.0 Hz), respectively. These signals were then assigned to 2N-H (d 8.00 and 8.04), 2H-a (d1H 7.14 and 7.11) and 2H-b (d1H 6.50 and 6.44) of the indole rings, respectively. HMBC cross peaks (Figure 2) between the signals H-4' (d1H 7.30)/C-3' (d1C 102.3), C-6' (d1C 144.3), 7'a (d1C 135.5) and 40.7 (CH); H-7' (d1H 7.18)/C-3'a (d1C 127.3), C-5' (d1C 139.4), and d1C 48.5 (quaternary carbon) led to the assignment of a 5',6'-dialkylindole system. Moreover, the observed cross peaks between the 1H signals at d1H 4.07 (H-6), 2.43 (H-5a) and 1.81 (H-5b), and the 1C signals for C-5', C-6' and 48.5 (quaternary carbon, C-3) suggested a 3,3,6-trisubstituted cyclopentyl fused to the indole ring at C-5' and C-6'. An isobutene group was identified from the 1H NMR signals at d1H 5.22 (dsep, 9.0, 1.0), 1.82 (br s, 3H), and 1.79 (br s, 3H), assigned to olefinic proton and methyl groups, respectively. This was supported by the HMBC experiments which showed correlations from the olefinic proton at d1H 5.22 to the methyl carbons at d1H 25.9 and 18.3. The isobutene group was connected at C-6 due to coupling of H-6 to the olefinic proton at d1H 5.22. A methyl group must be connected at C-3 due to the observed HMBC cross peaks between its 1H signal at d1H 1.59 and the 1C signals for C-6' and C-3. This structural unit was corroborated by the MS base-peak at _m_/z 223.13387 (100.0%) resulting from C-3-C-2 cleavage.

The 1H NMR spectrum also showed signals for three hydrogens with _ortho_ and _meta_ coupling constants, d1H 7.50 (d, 0.7 Hz), 7.23 (dd, 8.4, 0.7 Hz) and 7.22 (d, 8.4 Hz), suggesting the second indole nucleus to be monosubstituted. In addition, the presence of a _trans_-disubstituted double bond was evidenced by two vinylic protons at d1H 6.13 (d1C 126.8) and 6.40 (d, 16.0 Hz; d136.0) with a vicinal coupling constant of 16.0 Hz. From HMBC experiments the observed cross peak between the signal with _meta_ coupling constant at d1H 7.50 and the 13C signal for C-3" (d1C 102.7), permitted the assignment of the signal at d1H 7.50 to H-4" (C-4", d1C 118.7). The _meta_ coupling constant for H-4" indicated that C-5" was substituted. The

Figure 1.: Compounds isolated from _Raputia praetermissa_.



## Page 3

attachment of the ethylenyl bridge to C-3 and C-5" was evidenced from HMBC correlations H-1 (d_h_f 6.13)/C-3, C-4" and H-2 (d_h_f 6.40)/C-3, C-6'. These spectral characteristics are in agreement with those published for raputindole C (**6**, Figure 3), isolated from _Raputia simulans_.14 The main difference observed in the 1H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2) of compound **1**, when compared to those of **6**, was the replacement of the signal for an oxymethylene by a methyl singlet (C-4, d_N_H 1.59, d_C_27.1). The relative stereochemistry of compound **1**, named as 4-deoxypartiindole C, was determined from gNOSY experiments. The nOes of H-2, H-1, and H-5a, coming from H-6, indicated that H-6 and the ethylenylindole system are on the same side of the five-membered ring, whereas nOe between H-5b and CH3-4, required the methyl group to be _anti_ (b) to H-6, and _syn_ to the isobutene chain.

Compounds **2-4** showed the spectral characteristic of a 5-substituted-1_H_-indole alkaloid (Tables 1, 2). The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) revealed resonances for C-2 to C-7a in close agreement with those for the corresponding carbons in the structural unit 5-substituted-1_H_-indole of compound **1**, except for C-5 whose chemical shift was affected by a different substituent. Elemental analysis and MS indicated the molecular formula to be C18H21NO for compound **2**, requiring the presence of an aliphatic chain of 10 carbons and one oxygen. A heterocyclic oxolane was identified from the 1H NMR spectrum, which showed a proton at d_h_f 2.73 (td, 7.0, 5.6, H-3'; d_C_51.6) coupled to a proton attached to carbon adjacent to an oxygen atom (d_H_f 4.64, d, 5.6, H-2'; d_C_86.6), and two doublet of doublets for an oxymethylene (d_h_f 4.44, 4.65, \(J\)13.1, 2.3, 2H-5'; d_C_71.5). Observed HMBC cross peaks between the 1H signals at d_h_f 2.73 (H-3') and 4.64 (H-2') with the 13C signals at d_C_132.7 (C-5) and 119.1 (C-4), respectively, as well as those of H-5'a and H-5'b (d_H_4.44 and 4.65) with C-3' (d_C_51.6), suggested the attachment of the heterocyclic oxolane to C-5 of the indole nucleus. The presence of an isoppentene group was deduced from the proton resonances at d_h_f 5.12 (tsep, 7.0, 1.2, H-8'), 1.64 (br s, 3H-10'), 1.60 (br s, 3H-11'), 2.28 (br t, 7.0, 2H-7'), and corroborated by the HMBC correlation between the methyl and methylene protons with the olefinic carbons at d_C_132.7 (C-9') and 121.7 (C-8'). This was supported by the mass spectrum which showed fragment at _m/z_ 211 [C18H21NO - C4H8]+. The 1H-1H coupling between the methylene at d_h_f 2.28 and H-3' (d_H_2.73) indicated the linkage of the isoppentene chain to C-3'. An exomethylene (d_H_4.99, 4.97, \(J\)2.3, 2H-6';

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} H & **1** & H & **2** & **3** & **4** \\
1’ & 8.00 br s \\
2’ & 7.14 dd (3.2, 2.5) \\
3’ & 6.50 ddd (3.3, 2.5, 1.0) \\
4’ & 7.30 s \\
7’ & 7.18 s & 2’ & 4.64 d (5.6) \\
1 & 6.13 d (16.0) & 3’ & 2.73 td (7.0, 5.6) & 6.88 s &

## Page 4

\(\delta_{\rm C}\)103.6) must be connected at C-4' of oxolane ring on the basis of the observed cross peaks between the 'H signals at \(\delta_{\rm 2H}\)4.99/4.97 and the \({}^{13}\)C signals for C-3' (\(\delta_{\rm c}\)51.6) and C-5' (\(\delta_{\rm c}\) 71.5). As for compound **1**, the relative stereochemistry of **2** was deduced from gNOSSY experiments. The nOes of the H-4 and H-6, coming from H-3', indicated that H-3' and the indole system must be on the same side of the oxolane ring. The above data confirmed the structure of **2**, here named as raputimonoinindole A.

As commented above compounds **2-4** showed the spectral characteristic of a 5-substituted-1_H_-indole alkaloid. Elemental analysis and MS indicated the molecular formula to be C14H11NO3 and C14H13NO2 for compounds **3** and **4**, respectively, requiring the presence of an aliphatic chain of 6 carbons (C6H3O3 and C6H7O2, respectively) and indole nucleus (C8H8N). Their 'H NMR resonances, when compared to those of **2**, showed low field shifts for the disubstituted furan ring protons. In

Figure 3: Raputindoles A (**8**), B (**7**), C (**6**) and D (**9**) isolated from _Raputia simulans_.

Figure 2: Relevant HMBC and NOESY interactions observed for compounds **1**-**3** and **5**.



## Page 5

compound **3**, the existence of a cross peak between the 1H signal at d_h_ 6.88 assigned to H-3', and the 13C signal at d_C_ 123.0 assigned to C-5, determined the position of the furan ring at C-5 of the indole nucleus. The presence of a carbomethoxy group linked at C-4' was indicated by HMBC cross peaks between the 1H signals at d_h_ 8.04 (H-5', d_C_ 146.3) and 3.87 (methyl protons) with the 13C signal at d_C_ 165.0 (C-6'). The structure of the new natural product is therefore 5-(4-carbomethoxylfuran-2-yl)-1H-indole, here named as raputimonoinodole B (**3**). However, compound **3** was purified by column chromatography on Sephadex and eluted with MeOH-CH2Cl2, hence, **3** could be an artifact.

The 1H NMR resonances for compound **4**, when compared to those of **2**, showed low field shifts for the disubstituted furan ring potons. In compound **4**, the main difference observed in the 1H NMR, when compared with **3**, was the replacement of the resonance for a carbomethoxy group by two 1H singlets at d_2H_ 4.11 (d_C_ 66.0) and d_3H_ 3.44 (d_C_ 57.6) from a methoxymethylene group. This was supported by the mass spectrum which showed a fragment at _m/z_ 197 [C14H13NO2 - H2CO]**+. These signals together with the mass and 13C NMR spectral data are consistent with **4** being 5-(4-methoxymethylfuran-2-yl)-1H-indole, which has previously been isolated from _Raputia simulans_ Kallunki.19 However, the isolation of 5-(4-methoxymethylfuran-2-yl)-1H-indole was cited without spectroscopic data in an congress whose abstracts were published in Planta Medica Proceedings.19 Thus, its spectroscopic data are cite here for the first time, and it was named raputimonoinodole C.

The cinnamic acid (**5**) derivative showed the spectral characteristic of a \(trans\)\(\alpha,\beta\)-unsaturated carboxyl functional group (d_H_9 7.61, d, \(J\) 15.9, d_C_b_ 144.5; d_H_n_6.29, d, \(J\) 15.9, d_C_ 115.7; COOR 167.3). In addition, the 1H NMR showed signals for one methoxyl group at d_h_ 3.92 (s, 3H; d_C_ 55.9), three aromatic hydrogens at d_h_ 7.07 (dd, 8.1, 1.7 Hz), 7.03 (d, 1.7 Hz) and 6.91 (d, 8.1 Hz), clearly indicating the aromatic ring to be 1,2,4-trisubstituted. From the HMBC experiments, the cross peaks observed between the signal of methoxyl group at d_3H_ 3.92 with d_C_ 146.7, and the 1H signal at d_h_ 7.61 (H-3') with d_C_ 147.9 but not with d_C_ 146.7, indicated the presence of a 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-cinnamic acid derivative. The 13C NMR spectrum revealed resonances for an aliphatic chain of sixteen carbons, one being attached to carboxylate as indicated by the HMBC cross peak between the 1H signal at d_h_ 4.18 and the 13C signal at d_d_ 167.3 (C-1'). The presence of a hexadecanyl chain was corroborated by the MS spectrum, which showed an ion at _m/z_ 279 [HC=C-COO-(CH2)14-CH2]**+. The new compound was therefore identified as hexadecanyl 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-cinnamate (**5**). The structural assignment was also supported by comparison of its 13C NMR spectrum with that of 4-hydroxy-2- methoxy-cinnamic acid.20

A number of 3,5- and 3,6-diprenylated indoles have been reported for the Annonaceae genera _Isolona_,21-23 \(Uvaria^{22}\)\(Annonidium^{24}\)\(Monodora^{25}\)\(Hexalobus\),26 \(Asteranthe\),27 \(Greenwayodendron\),28 and \(Polyalthia\).29 However, there are only a few examples of 3-, 5-, 6- and 7- and 3,7-prenylated indoles reported in the Rutaceae genera _Raputia_,14 \(Esenbeckia\),30,31 \(Murraya\),32-34 \(Merrillia\)35 and \(Glycosmis\).36,37 Four bisindoles (**6**-**9**; Figure 3) similar to compound **1** have been isolated from _Raputia simulans_.14 One bisindole, yuehchukene, which may be regarded as the product of Diels-Alder-type condensation of two 3-isopentenylindoles, occurs in \(Murraya\) species.32 While several bisindoles derived from 2-prenyltryptamine have been isolated from _Flindersia_ species (Rutaceae),38

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} C & **1** & **6**1a & C & **2** & **3** & **4** \\
2′ & 123.8 & 124.1 & & & & \\
3′ & 102.3 & 102.4 & & & & \\
3′a & 127.3 & 128.0 & & & & \\
4′ & 115.4 & 116.0 & & & & \\
5′ & 139.4 & 140.3 & & & & \\
6′ & 144.3 &

## Page 6

pyrano[3,2-b]indole skeleton (koniamborine), a novel type of alkaloid was isolated from _Boronella koniambiensis_ (Rutaceae).39

The anthranilate alkaloid content found in _R. praetermissa_ indicates that the genus is strongly related to those included in Cusparieae tribe. As mentioned in the introduction, the polimenthoxylated flavonoids form an extremely good marker for the _Neoraputia_. Their use in this context shows that _R. praetermissa_ differs substantially from _Neoraputia_ species, and reinforce its inclusion in _Raputia_ genus. Furthermore, the preynlindole alkaloids have been reported only from _Esenbeckia_ and _Raputia_ in Cusparieae, thus suggesting an affinity of this tribe with subfamily Aurantioideae, where similar preynlindoles occur in _Murraya_,33-35 _Merrillia_36 and _Glycosmis_.37,38 It is noteworthy that _Neoraputia_ shares with _Murraya_ and _Citrus_ a propensity for producing polymethoxylated flavonoids,9,12,40,41 showing also chemical affinity with Aurantioideae.

## Experimental

### General experimental procedures

Optical rotations were measured by using a Perkin Elmer 241 spectropolarimeter; NMR: Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as internal standard; high resolution EIS-MS: Fisons VG Autospec; GC-MS: low resolution on a HP-2576 instrument; IR: Bomen-FT/IR; UV: Hewlett Packard/8452A; Elemental analyses: on a EA 1108, CHNS-O (Fisons).

### Plant material

_Raputia praetermissa_ was collected in the Forest Reserve Adolpho Ducke, Amazonas, Brazil, and identified by J. R. Pirani (Department of Botany, University of Sao Paulo). A voucher specimen (189865) is deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisa da Amazonia (INPA), Manaus, AM (Brazil).

### Extraction and isolation

Ground stems (4.4 kg) were extracted 3 times at room temperature using hexane, followed by CH2Cl2 and MeOH. The concentrated hexane extract (13.3 g) was subjected to silica gel (230-400 mesh) column chromatography with successive elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOHAc and MeOH, yielding 6 fractions. Fraction 2 was flash rechromatographed twice on silica gel with successive elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOHAc and MeOH, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 9:1), yielding cycloartenone (10 mg). Fraction 3 was flash rechromatographed twice as above, and then by gel permeation column chromatography (Sephadex LH 20, CH2Cl2-MeOH 2:8) affording _N_-methyl-4-methoxyquinolin-2(1_H_)-one (30 mg). Fraction 4 was chromatographed on silica gel and Florisil (1:1) with hexane-EtOAc-MeOH gradient elution to give two fractions (A and B). Fraction A was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel and eluted with hexane-acetone gradient, yielding a mixture of sitosterol and stigmasterol. Fraction B was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 9:1), yielding sitostenone (60 mg). Fraction 5 was chromatographed on silica gel and Florisil (1:1) with hexane-EtOAc-MeOH gradient elution to give skimminaine (50 mg).

The concentrated dichloromethane extract (30.0 g) was subjected to column chromatography over silica gel (70-230 mesh) under vacuum. Elution with hexane, CH2Cl2, EtOAc and MeOH yielded 4 fractions. Fraction 1 was flash rechromatographed on silica gel with hexane-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, yielding compound **1** (700 mg) and a new fraction C. Fraction C was flash rechromatographed twice as above, and then by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 6:1), yielding compound **5**. Fraction 2 was chromatographed on silica gel and Florisil (1:1) with hexane-acetone-MeOH gradient elution to give new fractions D, E and F. Fractions D and E were rechromatographed over Sephadex LH 20 (MeOH) to give compounds **2** and **4**, respectively. Fraction F was flash rechromatographed on silica gel with hexane-acetone-MeOH gradient elution, yielding robustine (50 mg). Fraction 3 was rechromatographed as above using hexane-CH2Cl2-MeOH gradient to yield two fractions. Both fractions were rechromatographed over Sephadex LH 20 (MeOH-CH2Cl2:8) affording maculosidine (80 mg), and a new fraction containing compound **3** which was purified by preparative TLC (silica gel; hexane-acetone 5:1). Fraction 4 was rechromatographed on silica gel and Florisil (1:1) with hexane-acetone-MeOH gradient elution to give evolitrine (50 mg) and dictammine 120 mg).

### 4-Deoxyraputindole C (1)

Brown solid; [a]D23 + 94 (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.0012); UV (acetone) lmax/nm: 230; IR (KBr) vmax/cm-1: 3425.7; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 1; 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 2; HREI-MS, 366.20560 (37.5; calc. for C26H2N2), 294.11201(10.0), 223.13387 (100), 167.07123 (20), 130.06388 (30).

### Raputimonoindole A (2)

Yellow solid; [a]D25 * 41 (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.003); UV (acetone) lmax/nm: 228; IR (KBr) vmax/cm-1: 3411.5; 1H NMR

## Page 7

(400 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 1; 13C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 2. Anal. found C 80.28%, H 7.80%, N 5.20%; calc. for C18H21NO, C 80.86%, H 7.92%, N 5.24%, O 5.98 %; MS _m/z_ 267 [M]** (10), 252 (5), 211 (50), 144 (100), 107 (80), 79 (70).

#### Raputimonoindole B (3)

Yellow solid; UV (acetone) _l_max/nm: 230; IR (KBr) vmax/cm-1: 3310.2, 1770.1; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 1; 13C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 2. Anal. found C 69.76%, H 4.58%, N 5.80%; calc. for C14H1NO3, C 69.70%, H 4.60%, N 5.81%, O 19.90 %; MS _m/z_ 241 [M]** (100), 226 [C14H11NO3 - Mel]** (15), 210 [C14H1NO3 - OMe]** (10), 198 (10), 154 (30), 105 (40), 77 (50).

#### Raputimonoindole C (4)

Yellow solid; UV (acetone) _l_max/nm: 232; IR (KBr) vmax/cm-1: 3315.4; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 1; 13C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl3), see Table 2. Anal. found C 73.90%, H 5.80%, N 6.15%; calc. for C14H13NO2, C 73.99%, H 5.77%, N 6.16%, O 14.08 %; MS _m/z_ 227 [M]** (100), 197 (80), 168 (70), 98 (30).

#### Hexadecanyl 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-cimamate (5)

Amorphous white solid; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): 6 7.61 (d, \(J\) 15.9 Hz, H-3'), 7.07 (dd, \(J\) 8.1, 1.7 Hz, H-5), 7.03 (d, \(J\) 1.7 Hz, H-3), 6.91 (d, \(J\) 8.1 Hz, H-6), 6.29 (d, \(J\) 15.9, H-2'), 3.92 (s, OMe), 4.18 (t, \(J\) 6.8 Hz, H-1"), 1.69 (quint, \(J\) 6.8 Hz, H-2"), 1.25 (br s, 3"-15") and 0.88 (t, \(J\) 6.6 Hz, H-16); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): d 167.3 (C-1'), 147.9 (C-2), 146.7 (C-4), 144.5 (C-3'), 127.0 (C-1), 123.0 (C-5), 115.7 (C-2'), 114.6 (C-6), 109.3 (C-3), 64.5 (C-1"), 55.9 (OMe), 29.6-28.7 (C-3"-C-15"), 14.0 (C-16"); MS _m/z_ 418 [M]** (5), 279 (10), 207 [279 - C5H12]** (10), 167 (50), 149 (100), 71 (40), 57 (45).

#### Note from the Editor

During the edition of the present paper, the spectroscopic data of compound **4** have been published online on March 7, 2011 by _Planta Medica_, in the entitled Letter "Simple Indole Alkaloids from the Netotropical Rutaceous Tree _Raputia simulans_" by K. Vouggiannopoulou, N. Fokialakis, N.Aligiannis, C. Cantrel, A-L Skaltsounis.

## References

- Aublet, J. B. C. F.; _Histoire des Plantes de la Guiane Francoise_, Vol. 2; P. E. Didot: London and Paris, 1775; Emmerich, M.; _Rodriguesia_**1978**, _30_, 223.
- Kallunki, J. A.; _Britonia_**1990**, _42_, 175.
- Kallunki, J. A.; _Britonia_**1994**, _46_, 279.
- Kallunki, J. A.; _Britonia_**2009**, _61_, 28.
- Pirani, J. R.; _Rodriguesia_**2005**, _56_, 189.

- Arruda, A. C.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Francisco, R. H. P.; Rodrigues, A. M. G. D.; Lechat, J. R.; _Phytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 3157.

- Arruda, A. C.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**1993**, \(4\), 80.

- Passador, E. A. P.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pirani, J. R.; _Phytochemistry_**1997**, _45_, 1533.

- Tomazela, D. M.; Pupo, M. T.; Passador, E. A. P.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Oliva, G.; Pirani, J. R.; _Phytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 643.

- Souza, J. P. I.; Arruda, A. C.; Arruda, M. S. P.; _66_, 465.

- Souza, J. P. I.; Arruda, A. C.; Munoz, G. D.; Arruda, M. S. P.; Muller, A. H.; _Phytochemistry_**1999**, _52_, 1705.

- Moraes, V. R. S; Tomazela, D. M.; Ferracin, R. J.; Garcia, C. F.; Sannomiya, M.; Soriano, M. P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Rodrigues-Fo, E.; Magalhaes, E. G.; Magalhaes, A. F.; Pimenta, E. F.; de Souza, D. H. F.; Oliva, G.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2003**, _14_, 380.

- Bakhiar, A.; Gleye, J.; Moulis, C.; Fouraste, I.; _Phytochemistry_**1991**, _30_, 3840.

- Vouoggiannopoulou, K.; Fokialakis, N.; Aligiannis, N.; Cantrell, C.; Skaltsounis, A.-L.; _Org. Lett._**2010**, _12_, 1908.

- Robertson, A. V.; _Aust. J. Chem._**1963**, _16_, 451.

- Cortez, L. E. R.; Cortez, D. A. G.; Ferreira, A. G.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; _Braz. J. Pharmacogn._**2006**, _16_, 164.

- Nayar, M. N. S.; Sutar, C. V.; Bhan, M. K.; _Phytochemistry_**1971**, _10_, 2843.

- Khuong-Huu, F.; Sangare, M.; Chari, V. M.; Bekaert, A.; Devys, M.; Barbier, M.; Lukacs, G.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1975**, 1787.



## Page 8

* [19] Vougogiannopoulou, K.; Fokialakis, N.; Aligiannis, N.; Cantrell, C.; Skaltsounis, A.-L.; _Planta Med._**2008**, _74_, 189.
* [20] Chen, H.; Jiang, H.; Morgan, J. A.; _Pytochemistry_**2007**, _68_, 306.
* [21] Makangara, J. J.; Henry, L.; Jonker, S. A.; Nkunya, M. H. H.; _Pytochemistry_**2004**, _65_, 227.
* [22] Achenbach, H.; Raffelsberger, B.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1979**, _28_, 2571.
* [23] Achenbach, H.; Lowel, M.; _Pytochemistry_**1995**, _40_, 967.
* [24] Achenbach, H.; Renner, C.; _Heterocycles_**1985**, _23_, 2075.
* [25] Adeoye, A. O.; Oguntinen, B. O.; Clark, A. M.; Hufford, C. D.; _J. Nat. Prod._**1986**, _49_, 534.
* [26] Achenbach, H.; Renner, C.; Addae-Mensah, I.; _Heterocycles_**1984**, 22, 2501.
* [27] Nkunya, M. H. H.; Jonker, S. A.; Mdee, L. K.; Waibel, R.; Achenbach, H.; _Nat. Prod. Lett._**1996**, \(9\), 71.
* [28] Yoo, H-D.; Cremin, P. A.; Zeng, L.; Garo, E.; Williams, C. T.; Lee, C. M.; Goering, M. G.; O'Neil-Johnson, M.; Eldridge, G. R.; Hu, J-F.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2005**, _68_, 122.
* [29] Kunesch, N.; Cave, A.; Leboeuf, M.; Hocquemiller, R.; Dubois, G.; Guittet, E.; Lallemand, J. Y.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1985**, _26_, 4937.
* [30] Monache, F. D.; Monache, G. D.; Souza, M. A. M.; Cavalcanti, M. S.; Chiappeta, A.; _Gazz. Chim. Ital._**1989**, _119_, 435.
* [31] Monache, F. D.; Benedito R. D.; _Gazz. Chim. Ital._**1990**, _120_, 387.
* [32] Kinoshita, T.; Tatara, S.; Ho, F-G.; Sankawa, U.; _Pytochemistry_**1989**, _28_, 147.
* [33] Wu, T-S.; Liou, M-J.; Jong, T-T.; Chen, Y-J.; Lai, J-S.; _Pytochemistry_**1989**, _28_, 2873.
* [34] Wu, T-S.; Liou, M-J.; Lee, C-J.; Jong, T-T.; McPhail, A. T.; McPhail, D. R.; Lee, K-H.; _Tetrahedron Lett._**1989**, _30_, 6649.
* [35] Kong, Y-C.; But, P. P-H; NG, K-H.; Cheng, K-F; Chang, K-L.; Wong, K. M.; Gray, A. I.; Waterman, P. G.; _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1988**, _16_, 47.
* [36] Vajrodaya, S.; Bacher, M.; Greger, H.; Hofer, O.; _Pytochemistry_**1998**, _48_, 897.
* [37] Wang, J.; Zheng, Y.; Efferth, T.; Wang, R.; Shen, Y.; Hao, X.; _Pytochemistry_**2005**, _66_, 697.
* [38] Fernandez, L. S.; Buchanan, M. S.; Carroll, A. R.; Feng, Y. J.; Quinn, R. J.; Avery, V. M.; _Org. Lett._**2009**, _11_, 329.
* [39] Grougnet, R.; Magiatis, P.; Fokialakis, N.; Mitaku, S.; Skaltsounis, A-L.; Tillequin F.; Sevenet, T.; Litaudon, M.; _J. Nat. Prod._**2005**, _68_, 1083.
* [40] Ferracin, R. J.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B; Vieira, P. C.; _Pytochemistry_**1998**, _47_, 393.
* [41] Ribeiro, A. B.; Abdelnur, P. V.; Garcia, C. F.; Belini, A.; Severino, V. G. P.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; de Carvalho, S. A.; de Souza, A. A.; Machado, M. A.; _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2008**, _56_, 7815.



## Page 9

_J. Buz. Chem. Soc._, Vol. 22, No. 7, 51-522, 2011.
* 02011 Sociedade Brasileira de Quimica 0103
- 5053 56.00+0.00


## Page 10



## Page 11

Figure S3: Expanded \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of 1.



## Page 12

Figure S4: \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of \(\mathbf{1}\).



## Page 13

Figure S5: 'H NMR spectrum of **2**.



## Page 14

Figure S6. \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **2**.



## Page 15

Figure S7: 'H NMR spectrum of **3**.



## Page 16

Figure S8: Expanded \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **3**.



## Page 17

Figure S9: \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of **3**.



## Page 18

Figure S10: \({}^{\rm H}\) NMR spectrum of \(\mathbf{4}\).



## Page 19

Figure S11. Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **4**.



## Page 20

Figure S12: Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **4**.



## Page 21

Figure S13: Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **4**.



## Page 22

Figure S14: \({}^{10}\)C NMR spectrum of 4.



## Page 23

Figure S15: Expanded \({}^{1}\)C NMR spectrum of \(\mathbf{4}\).



## Page 24

Figure S16: \({}^{\rm H}\) NMR spectrum of \(\bf 5\).



## Page 25

Figure S17: Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **5**.



## Page 26

Figure S18: Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **5**.



## Page 27

Figure S19: Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **5**.



## Page 28

Figure S20. Expanded 'H NMR spectrum of **5**.



## Page 29

Figure S21. \({}^{10}\)C NMR spectrum of \(\mathbf{5}\).



## Page 30

Figure S22: Expanded \({}^{1}\)C NMR spectrum of **5**.



