# 10.1016@S0031-9422(01)00079-6.pdf

## Page 1



# Antifungal polysulphides from _Petiveria alliacea_ L.

Paulo Jose Coelho Benevides

Maria Claudia M. Young

Astrea M. Giesbrecht

Nidia F. Roque

Vanderlan da S. Bolzani

bolzani@iq.unesp.br Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, C.P. 26077, CEP 053599-970, SP, Brazil Departamento de Fisologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, CP 4005, CEP 01161-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, C.P. 355, CEP 14800-900, Aaraquara, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

Bioactivity-directed fractionation of the CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)/MeOH (2:1, v/v) extract of the roots of _Petiveria alliacea_, using mutant yeast strains of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ and fungi _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphareospermum_ led to the isolation of dippropyl disulphide (**1**), dibenzyl sulphide (**2**), dibenzyl disulphide (**3**), dibenzyl trisulphide (**4**), dibenzyl tetrasulphide (**5**), benzylhydroxymethyl sulphide (**6**) and di(benzyltrithio) methane (**7**). Of these, **5-7** are new compounds and this is the first report of the natural occurrence of **2** and **3**. (c) 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Petiveria alliacea_; Phytolacaceae; Antifungal polysulphides

## 1 Introduction

_Petiveria alliacea_ L. (Phytolacaceae) is a shrub widely distributed in South and Central America. It grows in all regions of Brazil where it is known by many popular names. Among these, "erva-guine", "guine", "pipi" and "tipi"; and the Tupi-Guarani "macuracaa" are noteworthy (Hoehne, 1939; Pio Correa, 1969). In the State of Minas Gerais the roots of this plant are used to treat rheumatism (De Sousa et al., 1987) and in other Brazilian regions, both the roots and the leaves are popularly used as stimulants and abortefacients (Da Silva, 1935). Previous work on _P. alliacea_ revealed the occurrence of coumarins, triterpenes and flavonoids (Rocha and Da Silva, 1969; Delle Monache and Suarez, 1992), amino acids and trisulphide (Adegosan, 1974). In continuing our search for biologically active compounds from the Brazilian flora (Carbonezi et al., 1999), a CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)/MeOH (2:1 v/v) extract of the roots of this plant was selected for phytochemical investigation due to its significant activity against some mutant yeast strains of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ (Gunatilaka et al., 1994) and inhibition of the growth of _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _C. sphareospermum_ (Homans and Fuchs, 1970). This study led to the isolation of five new polysulphides (**2**, **3**, **5**, **6** and **7**), together with two known compounds (**1**, **4**). Among the known compounds described in this study, only compound **4** had been previously isolated from this plant species (De Sousa et al., 1990).

## 2 Results and discussion

The CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)/MeOH (2:1) extract of roots of _P. alliacea_ L. inhibited strains of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ (RS 188N, RS 52YK and RS 321) indicating strong activity of this extract towards the mutant strains of yeast. This extract was also shown to possess potent inhibitory activity against _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ and _Cladosporium sphaerosporum_ fungi. Solvent-solvent partitioning of the bioactive crude extract afforded hexane, CHCl\({}_{3}\) and EtOAc fractions, in which the activities were concentrated. These fractions were individually subjected to silica gel column chromatography, using CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) or CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)/MeOH as eluents, to obtain six major bioactive fractions. The purification of these fractions was performed on silica gel preparative TLC, reversed-phase Sep Pak cartridge and HPLC affording seven bioactive polysulphide compounds.



## Page 2

The molecular formula of compound **1** was determined as C6H14S2, by 1H, 13C NMR, MS and elemental analysis. Three resonances at \(d\) 2.66 \(t\) (_J_ = 7.25 Hz), \(d\) 1.72 _dq_ (_J_ = 7.5, 6.5) and 0.99 \(t\) (_J_ = 7.26 Hz) in the 1H NMR spectrum were characteristic of a propyl moiety (Table 1). The 13C NMR data also supported the propyl skeleton (Table 2). The proton resonance at \(d\) 2.66, corresponding to a methylene group, was attributed to a sulfur-bearing carbon atom, which was confirmed by elemental analysis and interpretation of its mass spectrum. According to these data the structure of **1** was assigned as dippropyl disulphide, which is reported as a natural derivative in Phytolacaceae for the first time.

Compounds **2**-**5** exhibited common features in their MS, 1H and 13C NMR spectra. The presence of a significant ion peak at _m_/_z_ 91, which is characteristic of a benzyl fragment was observed in all mass spectra of these compounds. The benzyl portion appeared to bear one, two, three and four sulfur atoms, respectively, based on the elemental analyses. The 1H NMR spectra (Table 1) of **2**, **3**, **4** and **5** presented the same signal, around \(d\) 7.30, compatible with a monosubstituted aromatic ring. The major differences observed in the 1H NMR spectra of each compound was due to the chemical shift of the methylene benzylic hydrogens linked to the sulfur, which in compound **2** appeared at \(d\) 3.66; **3** at \(d\) 4.05; **4** at \(d\) 4.15 (De Souza et al., 1990) and **5** at \(d\) 4.19, respectively. The 13C NMR spectral data (Table 2) of these compounds, interpreted with the aid of DEPT spectra, indicated the presence of one quaternary C and five CH's sp2 carbons attributable to an aromatic monosubstituted ring and one sp3 CH2 assigned to a benzylic carbon. The elemental analysis and HRMS data of compounds **2**-**5** firmly established the number (and amount) of sulfur atoms in these polysulphides and confirmed their identities as dibenzyl sulphide (**2**), dibenzyl disulphide (**3**), dibenzyl trisulphide (**4**) and dibenzyl tetrasulphide (**5**), respectively. Polysulphide **4** has previously been reported from this species (De Souza et al., 1990).



## Page 3



**6** had an hydroxymethyl group linked to the sulfur in place of the second benzylic group as in compound **2**. Interpretation of some HMBC data (Fig. 1) aided elucidation of this structure. Correlations observed between the methylene protons signal at \(d\) 5.03 with the benzylic carbon at \(d\) 44.27 and the methylene protons signal at \(d\) 3.60 with the carbons at \(d\) 78.50 and 127.42 established compound **6** as benzylhydroxymethyl monosulphide.

Polysulphide **7** is closely comparable with dibenzyl trinsulphide **(4)**; comparison of the \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2) data with those of **4** showed that the only differences observed were due to chemical shift of the benzylic hydrogens, which in **7** appeared at \(d\) 4.20 (_d_C = 43.19) and the presence of an additional singlet signal at \(d\) 5.30, which was attributed to methylene protons by the analysis inferred by COSY, HMQC and DEPT spectral data. Analysis of \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectroscopic data recorded a methylene benzylic carbon at \(d\) 43.19 and a second one, extremely unshielded at \(d\) 106.32, whose chemical shift could be explained by the stereo-eletronic effects of several sulfur atoms linked to methylene carbon. In fact, no correlations were observed in the spectra of the \({}^{1}\)H-\({}^{1}\)H COSY and HMBC (Fig. 1) of the corresponding methylene protons with other protons or carbons, respectively in **7**. The elemental analysis, together with HRMS analysis established its molecular formula as C\({}_{15}\)H\({}_{16}\)S\({}_{6}\) and thus confirmed **7** to be di(benzyltrithio) methane.

Bioautography with the plant pathogenic fungi _C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_ was employed to guide fractionation and isolation of the polysulphides **1**-**7**, these being responsible for the fungicidal activity detected in the crude extract (Table 3). Similar or higher to the reference compound Nystatin, the polysulphides **1**-**4** showed potent inhibition, while compounds **5**-**7** showed marginal activity against fungal growth (10.0 > 25 and 5.0 mg, respectively), in both phytopathogenic strains tested. Furthermore, their potential anticancer activities were also tested, using a mechanism-based yeast bioassay for DNA-modifying agents (Gunatilaka et al., 1994). Compounds **1**, **3** and **5** had moderate effect on DNA, as deduced by the selective inhibition of the mutant strains RS 321 and RS 52YK, relative to the wild strain RS 188N (Table 3).

## Experimental

### Instrumentation

\({}^{1}\)H NMR (300 MHz) spectra were recorded on a Bruker DPX-300 spectrometer, using TMS as an int. standard. The \({}^{13}\)C NMR (50 or 75 MHz) spectra were recorded on Bruker AC-200 and DPX-300 spectrometer. EI-MS were measured at 70 eV on a HP 5990/5988 A spectrometer and on a VG platform II spectrometer. Elemental analysis was performed on a Perkin-Elmer CHN Elemental Analyzer 2400. IR spectra were recorded on a FT-IR 1750 Perkin Elmer and FT-IR 510 Nicolet. UV spectra were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer UV/vis Hitachi U-3000.

### Plant material

The species _Petiveria alliacea_ L. was collected in September and October (1997) in the Instituto Butanta Reserve, in the city of Sao Paulo. Whole shrubs were collected and separated in their distinct parts: leaves, stems and roots. A voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica-SMA, under the number SP112.6.84.

### Biological testing

DNA-damaging assay with mutant yeast _S. cerevisiae_: Experimental screening methods utilizing mutant strains of _S. cerevisiae_ have been described elsewhere (Gunatilaka et al., 1992). The IC\({}_{12}\) values refer to the concentration in

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l l l} \hline  & \multicolumn{3}{l}{Micro-organisms} & & \\ \cline{2-5} Compounds & RS 188N (rad +) & RS 321 & RS 52YK (rad 52Y) & _Cladosporium sphaerospermum_ & _Cladosporioides_ \\ \hline
**1** & 389 & 68 & 11 & 0.1 & 1.0 \\
**2** & 402 & 381 & 412 & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
**3** & 332 & 66 & 16 & 0.1 & 1.0 \\
**4** & 73 & 64 & 62 & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
**5** & 328 & 53 & 104 & 10.0 & 10.0 \\
**6** & 67 & 58 & 76 & \textgreater{}25 & \textgreater{}25 \\
**7** & 76 & 58 & 67 & 5.0 & 5.0 \\ Camptothecin & – & – & 0.6 & – & – \\ Streptorigin & – & 0.4 & – & – \\ Nystatin & – & 1.0 & 1.0 & 1.0 \\ \hline \end{tabular}

* Results are expressed as IC\({}_{12}\) (RS 188N, RS 321, RS 322YK) (μg/ml) or MIC (_C. cladosporioides_ and _C. sphaerospermum_) (μg) values.

\end{table}
Table 3: Bioactivity data of polysulphides **1**–**7** and three standardsa

## Page 4

\(\mu\)g/ml required to produce a inhibition zone of 12 mm in diameter around a 100 \(\mu\)l well during a 48 h incubation period at 30\({}^{\circ}\)C.

TLC bioautography assay: _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ Fresen de Vries SPC 140 and _Cladosporium sphaerosperimum_ Penzig SPC 491 were maintained at the Instituto de Botanica-SMA. Ten microliters of the solutions of crude extracts, fractions and pure compounds were prepared, in different concentrations: corresponding to 20, 10, 1, 0.1 \(\mu\)g for pure compounds and 100, 50, 30 and 20 \(\mu\)g for the crude extracts or fractions, respectively. The samples were applied to TLC plates, these being eluted with the appropriate solvent system followed by complete removal of the solvent. The chromatographic plates were sprayed with spores suspension of _C. sphaerosospermum_ and _C. cladosporioides_ in a nutritive medium and incubated for 48 h at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C. After incubation, clear inhibition zones appeared against a dark background chromatogram.

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

Roots, stems, and leaves of _P. allacea_ L. were dried at room temperature, powdered and extracted three times with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):MeOH (2:1, v/v), for two days, at room temperature. The resulting extracts were filtered and concentrated in vacuo to yield 7.0, 8.0 and 15 g of root, stem and leaf extracts, respectively. Due to the higher bioactivity noted, half of the root extract was suspended in MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O (8:2) and successively extracted with hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate and _n_-butanol. After liquid/liquid partition, the resulting residue was concentrated in vacuo and extracted with H\({}_{2}\)O. Bioactivity-guided fractionation of the hexane, CHCl\({}_{3}\), and EtoOAc solubles, using silica gel column chromatography and hexane, CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\), CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):EtOAc and CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):MeOH (with increasing polarity) as eluants, afforded several fractions, whose bioactivities were detected only in six of them. The first hexane fraction was applied to a Si gel column tilting with a hexane:CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\) gradient to afford compound **1** (22 mg). The fractions eluted with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):EtOAc were further subjected to silica gel column chromatography using a MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O gradient. The intermediary fractions of this column, purified by HPLC using a C-18 Econosil column, 5 mm, 250\(\times\)4 mm i.d., with an elution gradient of MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O (70:30) 7 min; MeOH:H\({}_{2}\)O (90:10) 15 min. and MeOH (100%) 20 min with flow rate of 1 ml/min yielded the compounds **2** (7.8 mg), **3** (4.5 mg), **4** (15.0 mg) and **5** (3.6 mg). The EtOAc soluble fraction, was subjected to Si gel column chromatography using CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):EtOAc with increasing polarity. The fractions obtained with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):EtOAc (7:3) afforded **6** (3.8 mg). Compound **7** (2.0 mg) was isolated from the hexane fraction, by further purification over column chromatography on Si gel eluted with CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\):EtOAc (8:2).

#### 3.4.1 Dipropyl disulphide (1)

Colorless volatile oil with a strong odour of garlic. C\({}_{6}\)H\({}_{14}\)S\({}_{2}\) requires 47.95% C, 9.39% H, 42.66% S; found 47.80% C, 9.40% H, 42.15% S. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR (50 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) (Tables 1 and 2). IR \(v_{\max}^{\rm film}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 2872, 1450, 1375, 720. MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): [M]\({}^{+}\); 150(38),[M + 2]\({}^{+}\) 152(2), 149(100), 108(36), 73 (37), 74(12).

#### 3.4.2 Dipbenzyl sulphide (2)

Yellow oil. C\({}_{14}\)H\({}_{14}\)S requires 78.46% C, 6.58% H, 14.96% S; found 78.28% C, 6.56% H, 15.01% S. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR (50 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) (Tables 1 and 2). UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm MeOH}\) nm (\(\varepsilon\)): 220 (8400), 265 (450). IR \(v_{\max}^{\rm film}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3085, 3060, 3030, 2930, 1600, 1495, 1455, 712. MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): [M]\({}^{+}\) 214(78), [M + 2]\({}^{+}\) 216(1), 137(57), 12

## Page 5

(rel. int.): 177(49)[M + Na]\({}^{+}\), [M + 2]\({}^{+}\) 156(3), 137(71), 124 (100), 91(57), 78(12), 77(21), 65(33), 31(48).

#### Di(benzyltrithio) methane (7)

Orange amorphous solid. C15H16S6 requires 46.36% C 4.15% H, 49.49% S; found 46.10% C, 4.09% H, 49.50% S. 1H NMR (300MHz, CDCl3) and 13C NMR (50 MHz, CDCl3) (Tables 1 and 2). UV \(\rm\nu^{2}_{max}\)nm (\(\varepsilon\)): 238 (7200), 276 (240). IR \(\rm\nu^{film}_{max}\) cm\({}^{-1}\): 3079, 3057, 3007, 1585, 1498, 1456, 731, 708. MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): [M]\({}^{+}\) 388(29), [M + 2]\({}^{+}\) 390(2), 202(71), 188(100), 124(45), 91 (61), 78(35), 77(26), 65(29).

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants from BIOTA-FAPESP (Proc. \(\#\) 98/05074-0). The authors are grateful to FAPESP for a PhD fellowship to Mr. Benevides and to CNPq for research fellowships (Drs. Bolzani and Young).

## References

* (1) Adesogan, E.K., 1974. A trithiolaniacin, novel trithiolan from _Petiveria alliacea_. J.C.S. Chemical Communication, 906-907.
* (2) Carbonezi, C.A., Young, M.C.M., Lopes, M.N., Martins, D., Bolzani, V. da S., 1999. Iridoids from _Chioccoca alba_ (Rubiaceae). Phytochemistry 51, 781-785.
* (3) Da Silva, R.A., 1935. Pipi (Plantas Medicinais do Brasil). Revista Flora Medicinal 9, 477-486.
* (4) De Sousa, J.R., Demuner, A.J., Pedersoli, J.L., Afonso, A.M.M., 1987. Guine: Erva Medicinal ou Toxica. Ciencia and Cultura 39 (7), 645-646.
* (5) De Sousa, J.R., Demuner, A.J., Pinheiro, J.A., Breitmaier, E., Cassels, B.K., 1990. Dibenzyl trisulphide and _trans-N_-methyl-4-methoxy-proline from _Petiveria alliacea_. Phytochemistry 29 (11), 3653-3655.
* (6) Delle Monache, F., Suarez, L.E.C., 1992. 6-C-Formyl and 6-C-hydroxymethyl flavonones from _Petiveria alliacea_. Phytochemistry 31 (7), 2481-2482.
* (7) Gunatilaka, A.A.L., Samaranayake, G., Kingston, D.G.I., Hoffmann, G., Johnson, R.K., 1992. Three bioactive 3b,5a-dihydroxygerost-5enes from _Pseudobersama mossambicensis_. Journal of Natural Products 5, 1548-1554.
* (8) Gunatilaka, A.A.L., Kingston, D.G.I., Johnson, R.K., 1994. Mechanism-based isolation and structures of some anticancer active natural products. Pure and Applied Chemistry 66 (10/11), 2219-2222.
* (9) Hoehne, F. C., 1939. Plantas e Substancias Vegteais Toxica s Medicinais. Departamento de Botanica do Estado de Sao Paulo, Grabiers Ed., Sao Paulo.
* (10) Homans, A.L., Fuchs, A., 1970. A direct bioautography on thin layer chromatograms as a method for detecting fungitoxic substances. Journal of Chromatography 51, 325-328.
* (11) Pio Correa, M., 1969. Dicionario das Plantas Uteis do Brasil e das Exotices Cultivadas, Ministerio da Agricultura, Rio de Janeiro.
* (12) Rocha, A.B., Da Silva, J.B., 1969. Analise coronatografica em camada delgada de alguns principios aufos de _Petiveria alliacea_. Revista de Farmacia e Odontologia Arraquara 3, 65-68.



