# 10.1016@j.tiv.2008.01.003.pdf

## Page 1

Antiproliferative activity of pristimerin isolated from _Maytenus ilicifolia_ (Celastraccea) in human HL-60 cells

Patricia Marcal da Costa

Paulo Michel Pinheiro Ferreira

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Maysa Furlan

Vania Aparecida de Freitas Formenton Macedo dos Santos

Joaquim Corsino

Manoel Odorico de Moraes

Leticia Veras Costa-Lotufo

Raquel Carvalho Montenegro

Claudia Pessoa

Departamento de Fisologia e Farmacologia, Campus do Porangabusstu, UFC, Rua Cornel Nunes de Melo, 1127 - Rodofo Teofilo, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Caixa Postal 3157, 60430-270 Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Caixa Postal 355, Campus de Aaraquara, 14801900 Aaraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal do Mata Grosso do Sul, Cidade Universitaria, 79070-900 Campo Grande, Mata Grosso do Sul, Brazil

13 September 2007332008

###### Abstract

Pristimerin has been shown to be cytotoxic to several cancer cell lines. In the present work, the cytotoxicity of pristimerin was evaluated in human tumor cell lines and in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). This work also examined the effects of pristimerin (0.4; 0.8 and 1.7 uM) in HL-60 cells, after 6, 12 and 24 h of exposure. Pristimerin reduced the number of viable cells and increased number of non-viable cells in a concentration-dependent manner by tripan blue test showing morphological changes consistent with apoptosis. Nevertheless, pristimerin was not selective to cancer cells, since it inhibited PBMC proliferation with an IC50 of 0.88 uM. DNA synthesis inhibition assessed by 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation in HL-60 cells was 70% and 83% for the concentrations of 0.4 and 0.8 uM, respectively. Pristimerin (10 and 20 uM) was not able to inhibit topoisomerase I. In AO/EB (acridine orange/ethidium bromide) staining, all tested concentrations reduced the number of HL-60 viable cells, with the occurrence of necrosis and apoptosis in a concentration-dependent manner, results in agreement with trypan blue exclusion findings. The analysis of membrane integrity and internucleosomal DNA fragmentation by flow cytometry in the presence of pristimerin indicated that treated cells underwent apoptosis. The present data point to the importance of pristimerin as representative of an emerging class of potential anticancer chemicals, exhibiting an antiproliferative effect by inhibiting DNA synthesis and triggering apoptosis.

P ristimerin; Apoptosis; Antileukemic +
Footnote †: journal: Apoptosis; Antileukemic

## 1 Introduction

Cancer is the second leading cause of death worldwide after cardiovascular diseases. Despite many therapeutic advances, mortality is still unacceptably high (Reddy et al., 2003). Most of the drugs used today in the clinic were first discovered from plants and microorganisms (Mann, 2002). Thus, natural products continue to perform an essential role in the search for new anti-cancer molecules.

Chemical studies carried out on Celastraceae species have revealed the occurrence of phenolic metabolites, such as condensed tannins (Gonzalez et al., 1982), flavonoids (Corsino et al., 2003) and quinone-methide triterpenes (Corsino et al., 2000; Buffa Filho et al., 2002a,b; Carvalho et al., 2005). The quinone-methide triterpenoids of the Celastraceae family have a variety of biological activities, such as 

## Page 2

antimicrobial (Ferreira de Santana et al., 1971), antioxidant (Jeller et al., 2004; Carvalho et al., 2005) and antimalarial (Figueiredo et al., 1998).

_Maytenus licifolia_ Martius (Celastaceae) is popularly known as "espinheira santa", being well known for alleviating stomach pain, nausea and treating ulcers and gastritis (Camparoto et al., 2002). _In vivo_ studies have proved the effectiveness of _M. licifolia_ in ethanol- and/or indomethacin-induced gastric lesion models (Bersani-Amado et al., 2000).

Pristimerin (Fig. 1) (20a-3-hydroxy-2-oxo-24-_nor_-frie-dela-1-10,3,5,7-tetraen-carboxylic acid-29-methylester) is a quinone methidte triterpenoid, which in nature is restricted to the Celastraceae and Hippocrateaceae families (Dirsch et al., 1997). Dirsch et al. (1997) demonstrated that pristimerin inhibits the induction of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) by a mechanism that involves inhibition of NFKB activation, thereby contributing to its anti-inflammatory activity.

It is also known that pristimerin exhibits cytotoxicity in several cancer cell lines (Chang et al., 2003). However, the mechanism involved in the cytotoxic effect of pristimerin has not been completely explored. In 2005, Wu et al. (2005), observed that human breast cancer cells (MDA/MB-231) treated with pristimerin showed the release of cytochrome \(c\) from mitochondria and a decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential leading to apoptosis. More recently, Yang et al. (2008) demonstrated that pristimerin induces death of human prostate cancer cells (PC-3) by its potent proteasomal inhibition.

Although this compound has a variety of reported biological activities, the effect of pristimerin on human leukemia cell lines and the underlying mechanism of action have never been investigated. In this way, the aim of the present work was to determine the antiproliferative effects of pristimerin on different human cancer cell lines and in peripheral blood monocluear cells (PBMC). Its mechanism of action was also evaluated in leukemia cancer cell line HL-60.

## Material and methods

### Extraction and isolation of pristimerin

Dried and powdered root bark of _M. licifolia_ (900.0 g) was extracted with EtOH. The resulting EtOH extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford a brown gum (606.0 g), which was submitted to liquid-liquid partitioning. The CH2Cl2 soluble part of the EtOH extract was concentrated in vacuo (121.0 g), submitted to a silica gel column chromatography (700 g, 70-230 mesh) with hexane/EtOAc gradient elution, yielding 43 fractions (A1-A43). Fraction A10-A14 (2.88 g) was submitted to flash silica gel column chromatography (230-400 mesh) with hexane/EtOAc gradient elution, resulting in 38 fractions (B1-B38). Fraction B12-B14 (0.609 g) was submitted to preparatory reverse phase HPLC [MeOH:H2O (7:3), \(\gamma = 420\,\text{nm}\), 10 mL/min] to afford pristimerin (retention time = 21.0 min; 0.310 g; MW = 464.6).

### Cytotoxicity against tumor cell lines

The cytotoxic potential of pristimerin was evaluated by the MTT assay (Mosmann, 1983), against five human tumor cell lines: HL-60 (bromylocytotic leukemia), K-562 (chronic myelocytic leukemia), SF-295 (glycolastoma), HCT-8 (colon cancer) and MDA/MB-435 (melanoma), all obtained from the National Cancer Institute (Bethesda, MD, USA). All cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin, at 37 degC with 5% CO2. Tumor cell growth was quantified by the ability of living cells to reduce the yellow dye 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetra-zolium bromide (MTT) to a purple formazan product (Mosmann, 1983). Briefly, cells were plated in 96-well plates (0.7 x 105 cells/well for adherent cells and 0.3 x 105 cells/well for suspended cells) and pristimerin (0.08-53.7 mM) dissolved in DMSO 1% was added to each well. After 69 h of incubation, the supernatant was replaced by fresh medium containing MTT (0.5 mg/mL). Three hours later, the MTT formazan product was dissolved in 150 mL DMSO, and absorbance was measured at 595 nm (DTX-880, Beckman Coulter(r)). Doxorubicin was used as positive control. The cytotoxicity of pristimerin was also evaluated after 24 h of incubation in order to establish the concentrations for the studies in HL-60 cells.

### Inhibition of PBMC proliferation - Alamar Blue assay

In order to investigate the selectivity of pristimerin toward a normal proliferating cell, the Alamar Blue assay was performed with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) after 72 h drug exposure. Heparinized blood (from healthy, non-smoker donors who had not taken any drug at least 15 days prior to sampling) was collected and

Fig. 1: Structure of pristimerin isolated from _M. licifolia_.



## Page 3

PBMC were isolated by a standard method of density-gradient centrifugation over Ficoll-Hypaque. PBMC were washed and resuspended at a concentration of 3 x 105 cells/mL in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 mg/mL streptomycin at 37 degC with 5% CO2. Phytohemagglutinin (3%) was added at the beginning of culture. After 24 h, the compound (0.08-53.7 mM) dissolved in DMSO 1% were added to each well and incubated for 72 h. Doxorubicin (0.02-8.6 mM) was used as positive control. Control groups received the same amount of DMSO. Twenty-four hours before the end of the incubation, 10 mL of stock solution (0.312 mg/mL) of the Alamar Blue (Resazurin, Sigma-Aldrich Co) was added to each well. The absorbance was measured using a multiple reader (DTX 880 Multimode Detector, Beckman Coulter(r)) and the drug effect was quantified as the percentage of control absorbance at 570 nm and 595 nm. The absorbance of Alamar Blue in culture medium is measured at a higher wavelength and a lower wavelength. The absorbance of the medium is also measured at the higher and lower wavelengths. The absorbance of the medium alone is subtracted from the absorbance of medium plus Alamar Blue at the higher wavelength. This value is called AOHW. The absorbance of the medium alone is subtracted from the absorbance of medium plus Alamar Blue at the lower wavelength. This value is called AOLW. A correction factor \(R\)0 can be calculated from AOHW and AOLW, where \(R\)0 = AOLW/AOHW. The percent Alamar Blue reduced then is expressed as follows: \(\%\) reduced = _A_LW-(_A_HW x \(R\)0) x 100.

### Study of the mechanism involved in the leukemia cell (HL-60) cytotoxicity

The following experiments were performed in order to investigate the mechanism involved in the cytotoxic effect of pristimerin against HL-60 cells using a 24 h exposure. Pristimerin dissolved in sterilized DMSO (vehicle control) was added to cell cultures of HL-60 cells (3 x 105 cells/ mL) to obtain final concentrations of 0.4, 0.8 and 1.7 mM, corresponding to IC50/2, IC50 and two times IC50 values obtained by the MTT assay after 24 h of incubation. Doxorubicin (0.6 mM) was used as a positive control.

#### Trypan blue exclusion

Cell viability was determined by the trypan blue dye exclusion test (Renzi et al., 1993) after incubation of HL-60 cells with pristimerin. Aliquots from wells were removed from cultures after 6, 12 and 24 h of incubation and cells were scored in a Neubauer chamber.

#### Inhibition of DNA synthesis

HL-60 cells were plated in 24-well tissue culture plates (2 mL/well) and treated with pristimerin. Before the end of a 24 h drug exposure, 20 mL of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU, 10 mM) was added to each well and incubated for 3 h at 37 degC. To determine the amount of BrdU incorporated into DNA (Pera et al., 1977), cells were harvested, transferred to cytospin slides, and allowed to dry for 2 h at room temperature. Cells that had incorporated BrdU were labeled by direct peroxidase immunocytochemistry, using the chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB). Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, mounted, and coverslipped. The determination of BrdU positivity was performed by light microscopy (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Two hundred cells were counted per sample to determine the percentage of BrdU-positive cells.

#### DNA relaxation assay

The inhibitory effects of pristimerin (10 and 20 mM) on human Topo I were measured using Topo I Drug Screening Kit (TopoGEN, Inc.). Supercoiled (Form I) plasmid DNA (250 ng) was incubated with human Topo I (4 units) at 37 degC for 30 min in relaxation buffer (10 mM Tris buffer pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1% BSA, 0.1 mM spermidine and 5% glycerol) in the absence or presence of 10 and 20 mM pristimerin (final 20 mL). Campothecin (0.1 mM) was used as positive control. The reaction was stopped by addition of 10% SDS (2 mL). Proteinase K (50 mg/mL) was added and incubated at 37 degC for 30 min. DNA samples were subjected to electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel for 120 min at room temperature, and visualized with ethidium bromide.

#### Analysis of morphological changes

Untreated or pristimerin-treated HL-60 cells were examined for morphological changes by light microscopy (Metr-imper Hungary/PZO-Labimex Modelo Studar lab(r)). To evaluate morphology, cells were harvested, transferred to cytospin slides, fixed with ethanol for 1 min and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H/E). Doxorubicin (0.6 mM) was used as a positive control.

#### Morphological analysis with fluorescence microscopy

Acridine orange/ethidium bromide (AO/EB) staining (McGahon et al., 1995) of HL-60 cells was performed to evaluate the cell death pattern induced by increasing concentrations of pristimerin. Doxorubicin (0.6 mM) was used as a positive control. After 6, 12 and 24 h of incubation, cells were pelleted and each sample was mixed with 1 mL of aqueous AO/EB solution (100 mg/mL of AO in PBS; 100 mg/mL EB in PBS) just prior to fluorescence microscopy and quantification (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Three hundred cells were counted per sample and scored as follows: viable cells, apoptotic cells and necrotic cells (Geng et al., 2003; Cury-Boaventura et al., 2004).

#### Flow cytometry analysis

##### Cell membrane integrity

HL-60 cell membrane integrity was evaluated by the exclusion of propidium iodide (50 mg/mL). Cell fluorescence was then determined by flow cytometry in a Guava EasyCytre Mine using Guava Express Plus software. Five thousand events were 

## Page 4

evaluated per experiment and cellular debris was omitted from the analysis.

#### 2.4.6.2 Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation

HL-60 cells were incubated at 25 degC for 30 min, in the dark, in a lysis solution containing 0.1% citrate, 0.1% Triton X-100 and 50 mg/mL propidium iodide. Cell fluorescence was then determined by flow cytometry in a Guava EasyCytre Mine using Guava Express Plus software. Five thousand events were evaluated per experiment and cellular debris was omitted from the analysis.

### Statistical analysis

For cytotoxicity assays, the IC50 values and their 95% confidence intervals were obtained by nonlinear regression using the Graphpad program (Intuitive Software for Science, San Diego, CA). In order to determine differences, data were compared by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Newman-Keuls test (_P_ < 0.01).

## Results

### Cytotoxicity assays

The MTT analysis showed that pristimerin exhibited cytotoxic activity against all five cancer cell lines. Based on data collected from two independent experiments carried out in triplicate, the IC50 values ranged from 0.55 to 3.2 mM in MDA/MB-435 and K-562, respectively, after 72 h of incubation with pristimerin (Table 1). The IC50 values obtained in PBMC for pristimerin and doxorubicin were 0.88 (0.75-1.03) and 1.66 (0.89-3.10) mM, respectively, also after 72 h of incubation.

All subsequent experiments were conducted on HL-60 cell lines to determine the mechanism of action of pristimerin in this cell line.

### Pristimerin reduces cell viability and inhibits DNA synthesis

Pristimerin produced a significant decrease (_P_ < 0.01) in cell viability and increased number of non-viable cells as soon as 6 h exposure, which occurred in a dose- and time-dependent manner (Fig. 2A and B). To further understand the antiproliferative activity, the incorporation of the nucleoside BrdU into DNA was measured by direct peroxidase immunocytochemistry assay. In Fig. 3, we can see that HL-60 cells treated by pristimerin showed about 30% and 17% of BrdU incorporation at the concentrations of 0.4 and 0.8 mM, respectively (_P_ < 0.01), while doxorubicin (0.6 mM) lead to 24% of incorporation. BrdU positive cells in control correspond to 65%. Since pristimerin was able to inhibit DNA synthesis, it could be a suitable candidate to cause inhibition of topoisomerase. However, pristimerin (10 and 20 mM) did not show any effect in the DNA relaxation assay (data not shown).

### Pristimerin alters cell morphology

Analysis by H/E of HL-60 treated and untreated cells revealed several drug-induced morphological changes. Control cells exhibited a typical non-adherent and vacuolization round morphology after 24 h in culture (Fig. 4A). The cells treated at all concentrations showed a progressive DNA fragmentation, a reduction in cell volume and destabilization of the plasma membrane, indicating an increasing progression toward cell death in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4C-E). Pyknotic nuclei were observed at higher doses as early as 6 h of treatment. Doxorubicin (0.6 mM) also induced reduction in cell volume, besides nuclear fragmentation and destabilization of the plasma membrane (Fig. 4B).

### Pristimerin induced apoptosis in HL-60 cells

To further determine whether the growth-inhibitory effect of pristimerin was related to the induction of apoptosis and/or necrosis, treated cells were analyzed using AO/EB staining by fluorescence microscopy and the numbers of viable, apoptotic and necrotic cells were determined. After treatment with the compound, a decreasing number of viable cells (Fig. 5A) and an increasing number of apoptotic cells (Fig. 5B) were observed in a dose-dependent manner. As early as 6 h of pristimerin (0.4 mM) exposure (_P_ < 0.01), apoptosis was observed. Regarding necrosis, a significant increase was seen at 0.8 mM after 6 h of treatment (Fig. 5C), while extensive cell damage indicative of necrosis occurred only at 1.7 mM after 24 h (_P_ < 0.01).

### Pristimerin disrupts cell membrane integrity

The propidium iodide intercalation test showed that pristimerin caused disruption of the cell membrane in HL-60 in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 6A). The results revealed a significant reduction in cell viability starting at 0.8 mM

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} Substance & \multicolumn{2}{c}{CI50 (μg/ml (μM))a  \\ HL-60 & K-562 & MDA/MB-435 & SF-295 & HCT-8 \\ Doxorubicin & 0.02 & 0.14 & 0.48 (0.83) & 0.23 & 0.01 \\  & (0.04) & (0.24) & (0.40) & (0.02) \\  & 0.01–02 & 0.09–23 & 0.34–0.66 & 0.19–0.25 & 0.01–0.02 \\ Pristimerin & 0.61 & 1.49 & 0.26 (0.55) & 0.57 & 0.69 \\  & (1.31) & (3.20) & (1.22) & (1.48) \\  & 0.56–1.17– & 0.20–0.34 & 0.38–0.59–0.67 & 0.67 & 0.85 & 0.82 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Cytotoxic activity of pristimerin in tumor cell lines

## Page 5

after 12 h and 24 h exposure with percent inhibition values of 18% and 25%, respectively. This activity was also shown to be dependent on time exposure (_P_ < 0.01) (Fig. 4A).

### Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation

Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation was examined by flow cytometry in HL-60 cells. All DNA that was sub-diploid in size was considered fragmented. All concentrations of pristimerin tested led to a significant increase in DNA fragmentation (_P_ < 0.01) in a time- and dose-dependent way. After 12 h of exposure, pristimerin at all concentrations produced a peak of DNA fragmentation (38.43%, 68.23% and 79% for 0.4, 0.8 and 1.7 mM, respectively) (Fig. 6B).

## 4 Discussion

Various compounds derived from plant secondary metabolites are commonly used in cancer chemotherapy, such as docetaxel, camptothecin and tenoposide. Chemotherapy has been improved over the past years, but until now, many cancer patients fail chemotherapy, mainly because of side effects or multi-drug resistance. Moreover, it is important to find new molecules with activity against cancer with more specific effects (Kamb, 2005). In this context, many researches have found bioactive metabolites in plants of the Celastraceae family with antitumor (quinon-emethole triterpens) and cytotoxic (triterpene dimers) activities (Shirota et al., 1994), which makes these compounds promising new anti-cancer drug candidates.

In this work, we investigated the effect of pristimerin isolated from _M. licifolia_ in five human tumor cell lines (HL-60, HCT-8, SF-295, MDA/MB-435 and K-562) and in normal proliferating PBMC. The underlying mechanism of

Fig. 3: BrdU (5-bromo-2′deoxyuridine) incorporation by HL-60 cells treated with pristimerin 0.4 and 0.8 mM after 24 h of incubation. Negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 μM) was used as positive control (D). Results are expressed as mean +- standard error of measurement (SEM) from three independent experiments. *_P_ < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student Newman–Keuls test.

Fig. 2: Effect of pristimerin on HL-60 cell viability determined by trypan blue staining after 6, 12 and 24 h of incubation. (A) Number of viable cells; (B) number of non-viable cells; negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 μM) was used as positive control (D). Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (SEM) from three independent experiments. *_P_ < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student Newman–Keuls test.



## Page 6

action of pristimerin was further evaluated in the promyelocitic leukemia cell line HL-60. In the first part of this study, pristimerin showed high cytotoxicity against all cell lines with IC50 values ranging from 0.55 uM (MDA/MB-435) to 3.2 uM (K-562) after 72 h. Goncalves de Lima et al. (1971) and Setzer et al. (1998) also demonstrated that quinonomethide triterpenoids isolated from the Celastracee family inhibits cell growth. Our study also corroborates the findings of Wu et al. (2005) showing that pristimerin inhibits cell growth of cancer cell lines: A-549 (lung), MCF-7 (breast), HepG2 (hepatocarcinoma) and HepG3B (liver) with IC50 values ranging from 0.42 to 0.61 uM. In the present work, we also demonstrated that pristimerin was cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimer in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimerin, we can identify the action of pristimerin in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimer in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound. When considering the chemotherapy side effects, it is very important to verify whether the drug shows a harmful effect against normal dividing cells such as proliferating lymphocytes (Zuco et al., 2002; Anazetti et al., 2003).

Mammalian cells provide an excellent tool for studying cytotoxic substances, where the HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line is one of the most often used model for this purpose (Collins, 1987; Militao et al., 2006). In trying to identify the mechanism of action involved in the action of pristimer in the presence of a drug. We also demonstrated that pristimerin is cytotoxic to PBMC in the same concentration range than to leukemia cells, suggesting a poor selectivity of this compound.



## Page 7

antiproliferative effects of pristimerin, we assessed changes in cell viability and morphology (induction of apoptosis and/or necrosis) and inhibition of DNA synthesis and topoisomerase activity.

First, the antiproliferative action was confirmed by the trypan blue exclusion assay, which is a suitable and useful test to determine effects on cell proliferation and viability (Renzi et al., 1993). At all concentrations tested, pristimerin-in reduced the number of viable cells, which was more evident at higher concentrations (0.8 and 1.7 mM). These results are consistent with the MTT findings and flow cytometry.

The antiproliferative effects were further investigated to determine the mechanism underlying pristimerin cytotoxicity. DNA synthesis was affected by treatment with pristimerin at all concentrations in a dose-dependent way, with extensive cell destruction at 1.7 mM, which made quantification difficult. Current cancer chemotherapy drugs such as intercalating agents and topoisomerase inhibitors can inhibit DNA synthesis. This inhibition can be due to several cellular processes such as DNA topology state. Moreover, topoisomerase plays an important role by altering the topological state of DNA in events such as overwinding, underwinding, and catenation, and it is involved in proliferative processes such as DNA replication, chromosome condensation, and chromosome segregation. We investigated the effect of pristimerin on topoisomerase I activity, since this enzyme can be a primordial target for the action

Fig. 5: Effect of pristimerin on HL-60 cell death pattern determined by acridine orange and ethidium bromide-staining (AO/EB) after 6, 12 and 24 h of incubation. (**A**) Number of viable cells; (**B**) number of apoptotic cells; (**C**) number of necrotic cells. Negative control (**C**) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 mM) was used as positive control (**D**). Results are expressed as mean +- standard error of measurement (SEM) from three independent experiments. *_P_ < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student Newman–Keuls test.



## Page 8

of a wide variety of anti-cancer drugs (Li and Liu, 2001). However, pristimerin was not able to inhibit human topoisomerase I activity indicating that the antiproliferative mechanism of pristimerin is probably due to alterations in another pathway.

In order to determine the mechanism of cell death, alterations in cell morphology were examined. Some authors have considered the distinction between apoptosis and necrosis difficult and controversial. According to Masquelier et al. (2004), the morphological definition is commonly based on membrane integrity. Dartsch et al. (2002) and Schultz and Harrington (2003) considered crucial points for distinguishing apoptosis from necrosis: an early occurrence of nuclear and DNA fragmentation concomitant with membrane integrity, showing apoptotic bodies, phosphatidylinositol internalization, reduction of nuclear volume and chromatin condensation. Generally, induction of apoptosis in tumor cells is a great benefit for cancer chemotherapy (Reddy et al., 2003).

In the morphological studies, appreciable DNA fragmentation was observed at the all doses, with highest one revealing signs of extensive destabilization of the plasma membrane with loss of integrity, reduction of cell volume and pyknotic nuclei typical of necrotic processes (Hannun, 1997; Desoize and Sen, 1992). As seen in cytometry analysis, pristimerin induced an increase in sub-G1 population cells, which was concentration and time-dependent, suggesting that cells underwent DNA fragmentation, an important hallmark of apoptosis. Moreover, in AO/EB fluorescence experiments, pristimerin treated cells displayed characteristics of apoptosis as fragmented and condensed nuclei and a brilliant intense green fluorescence, with exception of 24 h exposure at 1.7 uM, which revealed necrosis as probably the result of late apoptosis. These findings are in agreement with those reported by Wu et al. (2005) who showed that pristimerin causes apoptosis induction in MDA/MB-231 cells triggering a rapid and time-dependent release of cytochrome c from mitochondria within 0.5 h and activation of caspase-3, acting by the intrinsic pathway.

In conclusion, the present data point to the importance of pristimerin, a quinonemethodide triterpenoid, as representa

Fig. 6: Flow cytometry analysis of pristimerin effects on HL-60 cells determined by propidium iodide. (A) Effect of pristimerin on membrane integrity. (B) DNA fragmentation evaluation by nuclear fluorescence. Negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 μM) was used as positive control (D). Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (SEM) from three independent experiments. *_P_ < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student Newman–Keuls test.



## Page 9

tiveantiproliferative effect on HL-60 by inhibiting DNA synthesis and triggering cell death apparently by apoptosis, in addition to displaying cytotoxicity against several cancer cell lines.

## Acknowledgements

We wish to thank CNPq, CAPES, FUNCAP, FINEP, BNB/FUNDECI, FAPESP and PRONEX for the financial support in the form of grants and fellowship awards. We are grateful to Silvana Franca dos Santos and Maria de Fatima Texeira for technical assistance. We also thank Dr. A. Leyva for help with English editing of the manuscript.

## References

* Anazetti et al. (2003) Anazetti, M.C., Melo, P.S., Duran, N., Haun, M., 2003. Comparative cytotoxicity of dimethylamide-crotonin in the promyelocytic leukemia cell line (HL60) and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Toxicology 188, 261-274.
* Bersani-Amado et al. (2000) Bersani-Amado, C.A., Massao, L.L.B., Baggio, S.R., Johanson, L., Albiero, A.L.M., Kimura, E., 2000. Antiulcer effectiveness of _Marytens aquifolinn_ spray dried extract. Phytotherapy Research 14, 543-545.
* Buffa Filho et al. (2002a) Buffa Filho, W., Corsino, J., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Furlan, M., 2002a. Quantitative Determination of cytotoxic friedo-nor-oleanane from five morphological types of _Marytens lichenifolia_ (Celastracenea) by reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography. Phytochemical Analysis 13, 75-78.
* Buffa Filho et al. (2002b) Buffa Filho, W., Pereira, A.M.S., Franca, S.C., Furlan, M., 2002b. Inducao de Metabolites Bioativos em Culturas de Cclulas de _Marytens elicifolia_. Eclectica Quimica 27, 403-416.
* Camparotto et al. (2002) Camparotto, M.L., Teixeira, R.O., Mantovani, M.S., Vicentini, V.E.P., 2002. Effects of _Marytens lichenifolia_ Mart. and Bauhnia candidans Benth infusions on onion root-tip and rat bone-marrow cells. Genetics and Molecular Biology 25, 85-89.
* Carvalho et al. (2005) Carvalho, P.R.F., Silva, D.H.S., Bolzani, V.da S., Furlan, M., 2005. Antioxidant quinnomethatible triterpenes from _Salacia campestris_. Chemistry and Biodiversity 2, 367-372.
* Chang et al. (2003) Chang, F.R., Hayashi, K.I., Chen, I.H., Liaw, C.C., Bastow, K.F., Nakanishi, Y., Nozaki, H., Cragg, G.M., Wu, Y.C., Lee, K.H., 2003. Five new agarofurans, Reissantins A-E and cytotoxic principles from _Reissantin buchannit_. Journal of Natural Products 66, 1416-1420.
* Collins (1987) Collins, S.J., 1987. The HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line: proliferation, differentiation, and cellular oncogene expression. Blood 70, 1233-1244.
* Corsino et al. (2000) Corsino, J., Carvalho, P.R.F., Kato, M.J., Oliveira, O.M.M.F., Araujo, A.R., Bolzani, V.das, S., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Furlan, M., 2000. Biosynthesis of friedelane and quinonemethide triterpenoids is compartmentalized in _Marytens aquifolinn_ and _Salacia campestris_. Phytochemistry 55, 741-748.
* Corsino et al. (2003) Corsino, J., Silva, D.H., Zanoni, M.V.B., Bolzani, V.da S., Franca, S.C., Pereira, A.M.S., Furlan, M., 2003. Antioxidant flavan-3-ols and flavonol glycosides from _Marytens aquifolinn_. Phytotherapy Research 17, 913-916.
* Cury-Boasentura et al. (2004) Cury-Boasentura, M.F., Pompeia, C., Curi, R., 2004. Comparative toxicity of oleic acid and linoleic acid on Jurkat cells. Clinical Nutrition 23, 721-732.
* Dartsch et al. (2002) Dartsch, D.C., Schaefer, A., Boldt, S., Kolch, W., Marquardt, H., 2002. Comparison of anthracycline-induced death of human leukemia cells: programmed cell death versus necrosis. Apoptosis 7, 537-548.
* Desoize (1992) Desoize, B., Sen, S., 1992. L'apoptose ou mort cellulaire programmee: concepts, mchanismes et aports en cancerologie. Bulletin Cancer 79, 413-425.
* Dirsch et al. (1997) Dirsch, V.M., Kiemer, A.K., Wagner, H., Vollmar, A.M., 1997. The triterpenoid quinonemethide tristemerin inhibits induction of inducible nitric oxide synthase in murine macrophages. European Journal of Pharmacology 336, 211-217.
* Ferreira de Santana et al. (1971) Ferreira de Santana, C., Cortias, C.T., Pinto, K.de V., Satiro, M.W., Satiro, A.L., Laceda, A.L., Moreira, I.C., 1971. Primeiras observacoes sobre e emprego de maintenina em pacentes canceross. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos Recife 11, 37-49.
* Figueiredo et al. (1998) Figueiredo, J.N., Raz, B., Sequin, U., 1998. Novel quinonemethides from _Salacia ransuil_ with in vitro antimalarial activity. Journal of Natural Products 61, 718-723.
* Geng et al. (2003) Geng, C.X., Zeng, Z.C., Wang, J.Y., 2003. Docetaxel inhibits SMMC-7721 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells growth and induces apoptosis. World Journal of Gastroenterology 9, 696-700.
* Goncalves de Lima et al. (1971) Goncalves de Lima, O., D'Albuquerque, I.L., Maciel, G.M., 1971. Substancias antimicrobianas de plantas superiores. Comunicacao XXIX. Primeiras observacoes sobre a atividade antimicrobiala de celastrol. Revista do Instituto de Antibioticos (Recife) 9, 75-77.
* a drug used in folk medicine in the Amazonian and Andean areas. A chemical study of _Marytens leavis_. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 5, 73-77.
* Hannun (1997) Hannun, Y.A., 1997. Apoptosis and the dilemma of cancer chemotherapy. Blood 89, 1845-1853.
* Jeller et al. (2004) Jeller, A.H., Silva, D.H.S., Liao, L.M., Bolzani, V.S., Furlan, M., 2004. Antioxidant phenolic and quinonemethide triterpenes from Cheiloclinium cognatum. Phytochemistry 65, 1977-1982.
* Kamb (2005) Kamb, A., 2005. What's wrong with our cancer models? Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 4, 161-165.
* Li et al. (2001) Li, T.K., Liu, L.F., 2001. Tumor cell death induced by topoisomerase targeting drugs. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 41, 53-77.
* Mann (2002) Mann, J., 2002. Natural products in cancer chemotherapy: past, present and future. Nature Reviews Cancer 2, 143-148.
* Masquelier et al. (2004) Masquelier, M., Zhou, Q.F., Gruber, A., Vitols, S., 2004. Relationship between daunorubicin concentration and apoptosis induction in leukemic cells. Biochemical Pharmacology 67, 1047-1056.
* McGahon et al. (1995) McGahon, A.J., Martin, S.M., Bissonnette, R.P., Mahboubi, A., Shi, Y., Mogil, R.J., Nishioka, W.K., Green, D.R., 1995. The end of the (cell) line: methods for the study of apoptosis in vitro. Methods in Cell Biology 46, 153-185.
* Militao et al. (2006) Militao, G.C.G., Dantas, I.N.F., Pessoa, C., Falcao, M.J.C., Silveira, E.R., Lima, M.A.S., Curi, R., Lima, T., Moraes, M.O., Costa-Lotufo, L.V., 2006. Induction of apoptosis by pterocarpans from _Plastymiscium frolinandum_ in HL-60 human leukemia cells. Life Science 78, 2409-2417.
* Mosmann (1983) Mosmann, T., 1983. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. Journal of Immunological Methods 16, 55-63.
* Pera et al. (1977) Pera, F., Mattias, P., Detzer, K., 1977. Methods for determining the proliferation kinetics of cells by means of 5-bromodeoxyuridine. Cell Tissue Kinetics 10, 255-264.
* Reddy et al. (2003) Reddy, L., Odhav, B., Bhoola, K.D., 2003. Natural products for cancer prevention: a global perspective. Pharmacology and Therapeutics 99, 1-13.
* Renzi et al. (1993) Renzi, D., Valtolina, M., Foster, R., 1993. The evaluation of a multi-endpoint cytotoxicity assay system. Alternatives to Laboratory Animals 21, 89-96.
* Schultz and Harrington (2003) Schultz, D.R., Harrington, W.J., 2003. Apoptosis: programmed cell death at a molecular level. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism 32, 345-369.
* Setzer et al. (1998) Setzer, W.N., Setzer, M.C., Hopper, A.L., Moriarity, D.M., Lehrman, G.K., Niekamp, K.L., Morcomb, S.M., Bates, R.B., McClure, K.J., Stessman, C.C., Haber, W.A., 1998. The cytotoxic activity of a _Salacia_ Liana species from Monteverde, Costa Rica, is due to a high concentration of tingonoma. Planta Medica 64, 583.



## Page 10

* [Shirota et al.1994] Shirota, O., Morita, H., Takeya, K., Itokawa, H., 1994. Cytotoxic aromatic triterpenes from _Mayetins tilicofila and Maytenus chuchunhusaca_. Journal of Natural Products 51, 1675-1681.
* [Wu et al.2005] Wu, C.C., Chan, M.L., Chen, W.Y., Tsai, C.Y., Chang, F.R., Wu, Y.C., 2005. Pristimerin induces caspase-dependent apoptosis in MDA/MB-231 cells via direct effects on mitochondria. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics **4**, 1277-1285.
* [Yang et al.2008] Yang, H., Landis-Piowwar, K.R., Lu, D., Yuan, P., Li, L., Redd, G.P., Dou, Q.P., 2008. Pristimerin induces apoptosis by targeting the proteasome in prostate cancer cells. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry 103 (1), 234-244.
* [Zuco et al.2002] Zuco, V., Supino, R., Righetti, S.C., Cleris, L., Marchesi, E., Passerine-Gambacorti, C., Formelli, F., 2002. Selective cytotoxicity of betulina acid on tumor cell lines, but not on normal cells. Cancer Letters 175, 17-25.



