# 10.1016@S0031-9422(03)00006-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Alkaloids from _Dictyoloma vandellianum_:

their chemosystematic significance

Claudenice F. Providelo Sartor

M. Fatima das G.F. da Silva

Joao B. Fernandes

Paulo C. Vieira

Edson Rodrigues Fo

Diogenes A. Garcia Cortez

dms@power.ufscar.br Departamento de Quimica, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Caixa Postal 676, 13565-905, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil Departamento de Farmacia e Farmacologia, Universidade Estadual de Maringa, Maringa - PR, Brazil

Received 12 September 2002; received in revised form 13 December 2002

###### Abstract

The dichloromethane extract from leaves of _Dictyoloma vandellianum_ afforded five alkaloids 2-(14'-hydroxy-14',15'-dimethyl-hexadecenyl)-4-quinolone, 2-(12'-hydroxy-12'-methyltridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone, 2-(12'-hydroxy-12'-methyltridecanyl)-4-quinolone, 2-(14'-hydroxy-14',15'-dimethylhexadecenyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone, 6-methoxydictylomide A, besides the known alkaloid 8-methoxyflindersine and b-sitosterol. The presence of 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones in _D. vandellianum_ shows strong similarities with the Zanthoxyleae, which contains several 2-alkyl-4-quinolones. Thus, the Dictyolomatotideae apparently occupies a position between the proto-Rutaceae genera and the Spathelioideae, but close to the Zanthoxyleae.

keywords: Rutaceae; _Dictyoloma vandellianum_; 2-Alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones; Chemosystematics +
Footnote †: journal: Advances in Molecular Biology

## 1 Introduction

_Dictyoloma_ Juss. contains only two species, _D. vandellianum_ Adr. Juss. (syn. _D. incanescens_ DC), which occurs in Brazil, and _D. peruvianum_ from Peru (Engler, 1874, 1931; Macbride, 1949). The taxonomy of this genus has been doubtful since its initial description in 1825, when Jussieu classified it in the Rutaceae, assigning it to the tribe Zanthoxyleae. According to the concept of Bentham and Hooker (1862), _Dictyoloma_ belongs to the Simaroubaceae "ordo". Engler (1874) first included this genus in the Simaroubaceae, but later removed it to the Rutaceae, classifying _Dictyoloma_ as the single genus in the subfamily Dictyolomatoidoe (von Engler, 1931).

_D. vandellianum_ is known to contain indole alkaloids, 2-quinolinoe alkaloids, prenylated chromones, and limonoids (Vieira et al., 1988, 1990; Campos et al., 1987). The occurrence of these compounds was important for systematic classification of the genus in the Rutaceae family. In this paper the isolation and identification of five 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones from the leaves of _D. vandellianum_ are described. The chemosystematic significance of the presence of limonoids, alkaloids, and chromones in _Dictyoloma_ in providing a better understanding of the phylogenetic relationships in the Rutales is also discussed.

## 2 Results and discussion

The dichloromethane extract from the leaves of _D. vandellianum_ afforded five alkaloids **1**-**5**, besides the known alkaloid 8-methoxyflindersine (Auzi et al., 1997) and b-sitosterol.

Compound **1** showed the spectral characteristics of a 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone (Tang et al., 1996). Elemental analysis and ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula to be C27H43NO2. The IR spectrum showed a weak a,b-unsaturated carbonyl band at 1634 cm-1, which can be explained by the carbonyl group being partially eno-ilized. The UV absorption maximum at 236, 314 and 325 nm suggested that N in the 4(1_H_)-quinolone system was unsubstituted, when compared with 2-tridecyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone (**6**) and 1-methyl-2-dodecyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone (Tang et al., 1996). The 1H NMR spectrum (Table 1), in

## Page 2

addition to signals typical of a 4(1_H_)-quinolone (d 6.22, \(s\), H-3; four aromatic protons at \(d\) 8.35, \(d\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5; 7.32, _dt_, \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.8 Hz, H-6; 7.56, _dt_, \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.5 Hz, H-7; 7.60, _dd_, \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.8 Hz, H-8; thus an unsubstituted A ring), revealed a methyl singlet at \(d\) 1.40 and two methyl doublets at \(d\) 1.20 and 1.12 (_J_ = 7.0 Hz). The two methyl doublets were coupled to the 1H signal at \(d\) 2.45 (_sept_, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz), thus placing an isopropyl group at the end of the side chain. The 13C NMR spectrum (Table 2) revealed resonances for C-2-C-8 in close agreement with those for 2-tricdcyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone (**6**) (Tang et al., 1996), with an aliphatic chain of 16 carbon atoms. The two methyl doublets at \(d\) 1.20 and 1.12 and the 1H signal at \(d\) 2.45 showed one-bond correlations (HSQC) with the 13C signals at \(d\) 19.0 and \(d\) 35.0, permitting the assignment of these signals to isopropyl group as Me-16/Me-17 and CH-15, respectively. HSQC experiments also showed a correlation from methyl singlet at \(d\) 1.40 to the 13C signal at \(d\) 26.1. Hydroxyl and methyl groups must be connected at the same carbon in the side chain, considering the observed signal for a hydroxytertiary carbon at \(d\) 82.2. This was supported by the ESI-MS data which showed fragments at _m/z_ 326 [C27H43NO2 + H-C5H12O]+ (40%) due to fission of the side chain between C-13' and C-14', thus indicating the hydroxyl and methyl groups to be located a (at C-14') to the isopropyl group. The signals at \(d\) 26.1 and \(d\) 82.2 were then assigned to C-18' and C-14', respectively. The downfield signal at \(d\) 2.64 (_t_, \(J\) = 7.8 Hz) from the methylene H2-1' was consistent with its situation being a to the 4(1_H_)-quinolone system. The observed correlation between this signal and the 13C signal at \(d\) 34.3 led to its assignment to C-1'. Moreover, the 13C NMR spectrum also showed a downfield signal at \(d\) 40.1, which was consistent for a methylene group with an electronegative element nearby; thus it was 

## Page 3

assigned to C-13'. The slightly negative \(\gamma\) effect of the hydroxyl group permitted the assignment of C-11' at \(\delta\) 23.3. However, the signals at 28.8-29.6 for 10 methylenes (C-2'-C-10' and C-12') were less readily assignable; indeed, the assignments may be interchanged with each other. In addition, HSQC experiments showed correlation from the signal in the olefinic region at \(\delta\) 6.22 (\(s\)) to the \({}^{13}\)C signal at \(\delta\) 108.5, suggesting a methine proton adjacent to double bond of the 4(1\(H\))-quinolone system, which were assigned to H-3 and C-3, respectively, since C-2 is more deshielded than C-3 because of the deshielding effect of the electronegative nitrogen. This evidence determined the position of the aliphatic chain at C-2. The new alkaloid was therefore identified as 2-(14'-hydroxy-14',15'-dimethylhexadecanyl)-4-quinolone (**1**).

Compound **2** gave rise to UV (239, 330 and 348 nm) and IR (a weak carbonyl band at 1658 cm\({}^{-1}\)) spectra which indicated the presence of an 2-alkyl-4(1\(H\))-quinolone nucleus. Elemental analysis and ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula to be C\({}_{24}\)H\({}_{37}\)NO\({}_{3}\), requiring the presence of an aliphatic chain shorter than C\({}_{16}\), when compared with **1**. In the NMR spectrum of **2**, four aromatic protons at \(\delta\) 8.40 (\(bd\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-5), 7.31 (\(dt\), \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.5 Hz, H-6), 7.51 (\(dt\), \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.2 Hz, H-7) and 7.59 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.5 Hz, H-8) (Table 1), clearly indicated an A ring similar to **1**. The spectrum also revealed a singlet at \(\delta\) 3.92 corresponding to one methoxyl group. Furthermore, it did not show the signal for the conjugated olefinic proton ca \(\delta\) 6.22 (H-3), thereby locating the methoxyl group at C-3. These data resulted in the construction of a 3-methoxy-4(1\(H\))-quinolone (C\({}_{10}\)H\({}_{8}\)NO\({}_{2}\)). Hydroxyl and two methyl groups must be connected at the same carbon in the side chain, since signals for a hydroxytertiary carbon at \(\delta\) 71.3 and two methyl singlets at \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 1.20 (\(s\), 6H) and \(\delta_{\rm C}\) 29.2 in the \({}^{13}\)C (Table 2) and \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectra, respectively. The ESI-MS showed an ion at \(m/z\) 328 [C\({}_{24}\)H\({}_{37}\)NO\({}_{3}\) + H\(-\)C\({}_{3}\)H\({}_{8}\)O]\({}^{+}\), confirming the presence of an 12'-hydroxy-12'-methyltridecanyl chain (C\({}_{24}\)H\({}_{37}\)NO\({}_{3}\)-C\({}_{10}\)H\({}_{8}\)NO\({}_{2}\) = C\({}_{14}\)H\({}_{29}\)O). \({}^{13}\)C NMR assignments for **2** were made using **1** as model. The downfield signals at \(\delta\) 43.7 (CH\({}_{2}\), DEPT) and 29.2 (CH\({}_{3}\), DEPT), which were appropriate for a methylene and methyl groups with an electronegative element nearby, were thus assigned to C-11' and C-13'/C-14', respectively. Moreover, the slightly negative \(\gamma\) effect of the hydroxyl group permitted the assignment of C-9' at \(\delta\) 24.3. Thus, the structure of the new alkaloid was characterized as 2-(12'-hydroxy-12'-methyltridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**2**).

Resonances were confirmed by \({}^{1}\)H\({}^{/}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C/\({}^{1}\)H shift-correlated two-dimensional spectra. Coupling constants (Hz) in parentheses. Spectra of **1-5** run at 400 MHz in CDCl\({}_{3}\).



## Page 4

Compound **3** had NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2) similar to **2**, except for the absence of a signal for a methoxyl group, and the signal for H-3 was visible as a singlet at d 6.17. Elemental analysis and ESI-MS indicated the molecular formula to be C23H35NO2, confirming that the difference between **3** and **2** is the absence of one methoxyl group at C-3. The presence of a 4(1_H_)-quinolone nucleus was also suggested by its UV (238, 325 and 335 nm) and IR (1657 cm-1) spectra. The observed signals for a hydroxytertiary carbon at d 71.2 and two methyl singlets at dH 1.20 (s, 6H) and dC 29.1 in the 13C (Table 2) and 1H NMR spectra, together with the ion at _m_/_z_ 298 [C23H35NO2 + H-C3H8O]+ in the ESI-MS, confirmed the presence of an 12'-hydroxy-12'-methyltridecanyl chain. The complete assignment of chemical shifts for all carbons are given in Table 2. Using compounds **1** and **2** as models, the structure of **3** was elucidated as 2-(12'-hydroxy-12'-methyltridecanyl)-4-quinolone.

Compound **4**, C28H45NO3 (EA/ESI-MS), also showed the UV (237, 288 and 335 nm) and IR ( 1636 cm-1) spectral characteristics of an 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolone. The 1H and 13C NMR spectra showed signals typical of a 3-methoxy-4-quinolone (dH 8.40, _dd_, \(J\) = 8.0 and 1.0 Hz, H-5; 7.28, \(t\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-6; 7.55, \(t\), \(J\) = 8.0 Hz, H-7; 7.78, \(d\), 8.0 Hz, H-8; 3.90, \(s\), OMe; d_c_ = 147.6; C-3) very close related to those in **2**, and of a 14'-hydroxy-14',15'-dimethylhexadecanyl side chain (dH 2.86, \(t\), \(J\) = 7.2 Hz, H-1'; 1.68-1.72, \(m\), H-2'-H-13'; 2.44, _sept_, \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, H-15; 1.10, \(d\), \(J\) = 7.0 Hz, Me-16'/Me-17'; 1.40, \(s\), Me-18'; _d_c 82.1, C-14'); as in **1**. This was supported by the mass spectrum, which showed fragments at _m_/_z_ 356 [C28H45NO3 + H-C3H12O]+ (80%) due to fission of the side chain between C-13' and C-14'. The structure of this alkaloid was thus established as 2-(14'-hydroxy-14',15'-dimethylhexadecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (**4**).

Compound **5**, C20H25NO2 (EA/ESI-MS), belonged to the same class of molecules as **1**-**4**. The 4-quinolone skeleton was recognized on the basis of UV (240, 331 and 347 nm) and IR (1648 cm-1) spectra. In the 1H and 13C NMR spectra the absence of signals for N-H ca. d 10-12 and N-Me ca. dC 34, suggested the presence of a third ring. Compound **5** exhibited similar NMR spectra to dictyolomide A (**7**) (Lavaud et al., 1995). The 1H NMR revealed the presence of a methoxyl group (dH 3.93) and of three aromatic protons (dH 7.87, \(d\), \(J\) = 3.3 Hz; 7.26, _dd_, \(J\) = 10.0 and 3.3 Hz; 7.52, \(d\), \(J\) = 10.0 Hz). From HMBC experiments (see Experimental), the observed correlation between the 1H signal at d 7.87 (_d_, \(J\) = 3.3 Hz) and the 13C signal at d 176.5 (3_J_) led to their assignment as H-5 and C-4, respectively, thus indicating the methoxyl group to be located at C-6 and permitting the assignments of the signals at d 7.26 (_dd_, \(J\) = 10.0 and 3.3 Hz) and 7.52 (_d_, \(J\) = 10.0 Hz) to H-7 and H-8, respectively. Moreover, the existence of a correlation between the 1H signal at d 6.20, assigned to H-3, and the 13C signal at d 29.7 suggested a methylene substituent at C-2. This correlation, COSY experiments and the chemical shift of a methylene at dC 51.5 indicated the presence of a structural unit, -CH2-CH2-CH2-CH-Zn-N- in ring B (dH 2.97, _dt_, \(J\) = 10.0 and 5.0 Hz, H-1'a, 2.94, _dt_, \(J\) = 10.0 and 5.0 Hz, H-1'b, dC1' 29.7; 2.07, \(m\), H-2'a, 1.48, \(m\), H-2'b, dC2' 25.3; 2.07, \(m\), H-3', dC3' 33.7; _d_H 3.55, _dd_, \(J\) = 12.0 and 10.2 Hz, H-4'a, 4.26, _dd_, \(J\) = 12.0 and 6.3 Hz, H-4'b, dC4' 51.5), confirming a third ring as a piperidine substituent. The methylene signal at d 3.55 showed a long-range correlation (3_J_) with the methylene signal at d 34.1, suggesting the presence of a methylene at C-3' of piperidine ring. This methylene signal was coupled to another methylene signal at d 2.21, which was coupled to the olefinic proton signal at d 5.33. The latter resonance was coupled to the 1H signal at d 5.45, which showed a one-bond correlation with the 13C signal at d 133.0. The methyl proton at d 0.98 showed cross peaks with the 13C signals at d 133.0 (3_J_) and 20.8 (2\(J\); CH2 by HSQC and DEPT). These correlations resulted in the construction of a C6H11 linear chain containing a disubstituted double bond between the third (C-3'') and fourth (C-4'') carbons. The _cis_-configuration of the double bond was deduced from the small coupling

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c} \hline \hline
**C** & **1** & **2** & **3** & **4** & **6** & **C** & **5** & **7** \\ \hline
2 & 154.3 & 138.4 & 155.2 & 138.8 & 156.9 & 2 & 150.7 & 152.1 \\
3 & 108.5 & 146.2 & 108.2 & 147.6 & 107.1 & 3 & 108.9 & 109.7 \\
4 & 179.1 & 173.2 & 179.0 & 71.0 & – & 4 & 176.5 & 176.7 \\
4a & 125.1 & 125.9 & 124.9 & 125.9 & 124.6 & 4a & 128.2 & 126.5 \\
5 & 125.7 & 125.8 & 125.4 & 125.4 & 124.9 & 5 & 106.9 & 126.8 \\
6 & 123.6 & 122.9 & 123.6 & 122.8 & 123.5 & 6 & 156.3 & 124.0 \\

## Page 5

constant [_J_ = 10.6 Hz; \(J\) (_cis_) = 7-11 Hz], and the chemical shift of the terminal methylene (d 20.6) shielded as in the _cis_-hex-3-ene at d 20.8 (Lavaud et al., 1995). The ESI-MS showed ions at _m/z_ 228 [C20H25NO2 + H-C6H12 (alkenyl chain)]+ (30%) and 189 [C20H25NO2 + H-C9H15]+ (100%), confirming the presence of a piperidine ring and a alkenyl chain at C-3'. These data were consistent with the structure of 6-methoxydictyolomide A (**5**).

A model shows that in the piperidine moiety, H-3' is not rigidly antiperiplanar with respect to one of the protons 2H-4'. In the isomer in which H-3'b is antiperiplanar to H-4'a (_J_ is large), the alkenyl chain is in a pseudoequatorial conformation (a). However, the large coupling constant of the C-4' methylene protons to H-3' is also consistent with their situation in a second isomer in which H-3'a is antiperiplanar to H-4'b (_J_ is large), requiring the alkenyl chain to be in a pseudoequatorial conformation (b). The NOESY experiments showed correlations of H-4' at d 3.55 (_J_4'-3' = 10.2) with H-2'b at \(d\) 1.48. However, a spatial proximity of one H2-4' to H2-2 is possible for each of the isomers discussed above. When one of the H-4'a and H-2'a protons are in spatial proximity on the b-side, H-3' is on the a-side of the molecule, then the alkenyl chain is also on the b-side, but in a pseudoequatorial conformation. If it is presumed that H-3' is on the b-side in a pseudoaxial conformation, the other H-4'ba and H-2'b are also in a spatial proximity. Therefore, these observations do not allow determination of the C-3' stereochemistry. However, compound **5** was presumed to be 3'-(_S_)-6-methoxdictyolomide A based on the chemical shift of C-3' (d\({}_{\rm{C}}\) 33.7) and its comparison with those of oblonginine (**8**, 25a-Me, d\({}_{\rm{C}}\) 32.8), and shinonomenine (**9**, 25b-Me, d\({}_{\rm{C}}\) 28.0) (Kadota et al., 1995). As a further confirmation of the assignments, the synthesis of **5**, under chiral control at C-3', is in progress.

The results provide firm support for including the genus _Dictyoloma_ in the Rutaceae. An examination of the systematic distribution of alkaloids, coumarins, limonoids, flavonoids and chromones in the Rutales led Waterman (1983) to propose the biochemical evolution of the order. Limonoids and quassinoids, two bio-synthetically related compounds, are found in the Simaroubaceae, Meliaceae, Rutaceae, and Cheoraceae (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987). There are fairly consistent differences between the limonoids of the Rutaceae and those of the Meliaceae, the quassinoids being restricted to the Simaroubaceae. According to Waterman (1983), a consideration of other classes of secondary metabolites leads to the conclusion that Meliaceae, Cheoraceae, and Simaroubaceae have all evolved from proto-rutaceous stock. Furthermore, the enormous variety of alkaloids and coumarins in the Rutaceae, not found in the other families, is taken to suggest that substantial chemical evolution must have occurred in the diversification of this large family after Cheoraceae, Meliaceae, and Simaroubaceae lines split off. In the Simaroubaceae, _Harrisonia_ is exceptional (da Silva et al., 1984, 1987), since no quassinoids have so far been isolated from it. Its limonoid types, however, suggest strong affinity with rutaceous genera such as _Spathelia_. Besides, both _Harrisonia_ and _Spathelia_ contain chromosomes which have not been found in other Simaroubaceae or Rutaceae, but do occur in the Ptaeroxylaceae and Cheoraceae (Waterman, 1983). These deductions were incorporated by Waterman (1983) into a phylogenetic diagram (Fig. 1). In 1983, the only phytochemical knowledge of _Dictyoloma_ was the record of a simple indole (_N_,_N_-dimethyl-5-methoxy-tryptamine; Mester, 1983), of little value for the purpose of a taxonomic position of Dictyolomatoideae into Waterman's phylogenetic diagram.

The 2-quinolone alkaloids, limonoids, and chromones that have recently been isolated from _Dictyoloma__vandellianum_ provide firm support for including the subfamily Dictyolomatoideae near the allied taxa Spathelioideae, Ptaeroxylaceae, Cheoraceae, and _Harrisonia_ (Vieira et al., 1988, 1990). Now, the finding of 2-alkyl-4(1_H_)-quinolones in _D. vandellianum_ showed strong similarities with Zanthoxyleae (_Platydesma_ and _Tretradium_ (_T. ruticarpum = Euodia rutacearpa_), Ruteae (_Haplophyllum_ and _Ruta_), Boroniae (_Boronia_), Cusparieae (_Raulinoa_), and Toddalieae (_Acronychia_,_Vepris_ and_Ptelea_), which contain several 2-alkyl-4-quinolones (Mester, 1983; Biavatti et al., 2002). _Dictyoloma_,_Tretradium_, _Raulinoa_, and _Vepris_ also produce limonoids (Vieira et al., 1988, 1990; Ng et al., 1987; Biavatti et al., 2001; daSilva et al., 1984, 1987), suggesting a relative advance. These phytochemical data are in line with the view of Waterman (1987) who consider genera of the Rutaceae, which produce the full range of advanced rutalean metabolites (furoquinoline alkaloids, coumarins and limonoids), as arising from a progenitor with the metabolic profile of _Tetradium_. Interestingly, the Jussieu (1825) classified the genus _Dictyoloma_ in the same tribe of _Tetradium_, Zanthoxyleae. Thus, in Waterman's phylogenetic diagram (Fig. 1), Dictyolomatoideae apparently occupies a position between the proto-Rutaceae genera and the Spathelioideae, but close to Zanthoxyleae.

This interpretation of chemical data is consistent with available DNA sequences. The analysis of DNA sequence data from members of the Cheoraceae, Meliaceae, Ptaeroxylaceae, Rutaceae, and Simaroubaceae, showed that the Rutaceae are paraphyletic, with _Spathelia_ and _Dictyoloma_ (Rutaceae), _Harrisonia_ (Simaroubaceae), _Cneorum_ (Cheoraceae), and _Ptaeroxylon_ (Ptaeroxylaceae) forming a clade sister to all other Rutaceae. Circumscription of Rutaceae to include all of these taxa was recommended. This analysis also indicated that the Simaroubaceae and Meliaceae are the outgroups closest to Rutaceae (Chase et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2000).



## Page 6



## 3 Experimental

### General

NMR: on a Bruker DRX 400, with TMS as int. standard; ESI-MSMS: low resolution on a triple quadrupole Micromass Quattro LC instrument, equipped with a "Z-spray" ion source; IR: Bomen-Ft/IR; UV: Perkin-Elmer; Elemental analysis: on a EA 1108, CHNS-O (Fisons); [a]D: Perkin-Elmer 241 instrument.

### Plant material

_D. vandellianum_ was collected in Campinas, SP, Brazil, and identified by J.R. Pirani (Universidade de Sao Paulo). A voucher (SPF 81-317) is deposited in the Herbarium of Instituto de Biociencias, USP, Sao Paulo.

### Isolation of compounds

Ground leaves (300 g) were extracted with hexane, then CH2Cl2 and finally with MeOH. The conc. CH2Cl2 extract was subjected to CC over silica gel. Elution with hexane, followed by a CH2Cl2-EtOAc-Me2CO-MeOH gradient yielded eight frs. Fr. 2 was subjected to cellulose chromatography eluting with a hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc gradient to afford 8-methoxyflindersine (3 mg) and additional frs. Fr. 2.1 was applied twice (Sephadex LH-20, EtOAc; then silica gel, hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc gradient) to give b-sitosterol (13 mg). Fr. 5 was subjected twice to Sephadex LH-20 (CHCl3-MeOH, 1:1) yielding new frs., with Fr. 5.2, following flash chromatography on silica gel eluting with a CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, affording new frs. Fr. 5.2.1 was applied to Sephadex LH-20 (EtOAc) to give **1** (8 mg) and a new fr containing **2**. The latter was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel, CH2Cl2-EtOAc, 6:4) to give 20 mg of **2**. Fr. 5.3 was subjected three times to Sephadex LH-20 (CHCl3-MeOH, 1:1; MeOH; EtOAc) to afford a new fr., which was purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; CH2Cl2-MeOH, 1:1) to yield **3** (5 mg) and **4** (5 mg). Fr. 6 was applied to Sephadex LH-20 eluting with MeOH, affording a fr. containing **5**. It was then purified by prep. TLC (silica gel; CHCl3-MeOH, 95:5) to give 12 mg of **5**.

#### 3.3.1 2-(14'-Hydroxy-14',15'-dimethylhexadecanyl)-4-quinolone (1)

Yellow gum; [a]D+3deg (CHCl3; \(c\) 0.2); UV _l_max (MeOH) nm: 236, 314, 325; IR _v_max (CHCl3) cm-1: A weak carbonyl band at 1634 cm-1 can be explained by the carbonyl group being present partially enolized; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 1; 13C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl3): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl3); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl3). EA: Found: C, 78.38; H, 10.50, N, 3.40. Calc. for C27H43NO2: C, 78.40, H, 10.48, N, 3.39, O, 7.74%; ESI-MSMS, _m/z_ (rel. int.): 414 [M + H]+ (25), 386 (98), 326 (40), 298 (100).

Fig. 1: Waterman’s phylogenetic diagram of the Rutales, based on the distribution of secondary metabolites, is used herein to place the Dictyolaotoideae subfamily, which was previously not included by Waterman due to limited phytochemical data. A = Aurantioideae, Ba = Balsamocitrinae, Bo = Boroniaeae, Ci = Citrinae, Cl = Clauseninae, Cn = Cneoraceae, Cu = Cusparieae, Di = Diosmeae, Fl = Findersioideae, Ha = _Harrisona_ (Simarobaceae), Me = Meliaceae, Mi = Micromelinae, prR = proto-Rutaceae genera, Pt = Ptaeroxylaceae, Rt = Rutinae, Ru = Rutotiideae, Si = Simarobaceae, Sp = Spathelioideae, To-1 = (coumarin containing) Toddalioideae, To-2 = (acridone containing) Toddalioideae, Tr = Triphasinase, Za = Zanthoxyleae (Waterman, 1983); Dy = Dictyolomatotideae. • Distribution of chromosomes, • distribution of 2-alkyl-4(1H)-quinolones.



## Page 7



#### 3.3.2 2-(12\({}^{\prime}\)-Hydroxy-12\({}^{\prime}\)-methyltridecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (2)

Yellow gum; UV \(\lambda_{\max}\) (MeOH) nm: 239, 330, 348; IR v\({}_{\max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): A weak carbonyl band at 1658 cm\({}^{-1}\) can be explained by the carbonyl group being present partially enolized; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)). EA: Found: C, 74.40; H, 9.64, N, 3.60. Calc. for C\({}_{24}\)H\({}_{37}\)NO\({}_{3}\): C, 74.38, H, 9.62, N, 3.61, O, 12.38%; ESI-MSMS, \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 388 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (20), 357 (100), 328 (50).

#### 3.3.3 2-(12\({}^{\prime}\)-Hydroxy-12\({}^{\prime}\)-methyltridecanyl)-4-quinolone (3)

Yellow gum; UV \(\lambda_{\max}\) (MeOH) nm: 238, 325, 335; IRv\({}_{\max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): A weak carbonyl band at 1657 cm\({}^{-1}\) can be explained by the carbonyl group being present partially enolized; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)). EA: Found: C, 77.26; H, 9.88, N, 3.90. Calc. for C\({}_{23}\)H\({}_{35}\)NO\({}_{2}\): C, 77.27, H, 9.87, N, 3.92, O, 8.95%; ESI-MSMS, \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 358 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (60), 357 (100), 298 (20).

3.4 2-(14\({}^{\prime}\)-Hydroxy-14\({}^{\prime}\),15\({}^{\prime}\)-dimethylhexadecanyl)-3-methoxy-4-quinolone (4)

Yellow gum; [a]D + 4\({}^{\circ}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\); \(c\) 0.3); UV \(\lambda_{\max}\) (MeOH) nm: 237, 288, 335; IRv\({}_{\max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): A weak carbonyl band at 1636 can be explained by the carbonyl group being present partially enolized; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)). EA: Found: C, 75.79; H, 10.23, N, 3.17. Calc. for C\({}_{28}\)H\({}_{45}\)NO\({}_{3}\): C, 75.80, H, 10.22, N, 3.16, O, 10.82%; ESI-MSMS, \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 444 [M + H]\({}^{+}\) (20), 416 (70), 356 (80), 328 (100).

#### 3.3.5 6-Methoxydictylomolate A (5)

Yellow powder; [a]D + 22.0\({}^{\circ}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\); \(c\) 0.7); UV \(\lambda_{\max}\) (MeOH) nm: 240, 331, 347; IRv\({}_{\max}\) (CHCl\({}_{3}\)) cm\({}^{-1}\): 2951, 2841, 1648, 1444, 1403, 1017, 782; \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 1; \({}^{13}\)C NMR/DEPT (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): see Table 2; HSQC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)); COSY (400 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)), HMBC (400/100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)): \(\delta\) 7.87 (H-5) \(\rightarrow\) 176.5 (C-4, CO), 136.0 (C-8a), 122.4 (C-7); 7.52 (H-8) \(\rightarrow\) 156.3 (C-6), 128.2 (C-4a), 7.26 (H-7) \(\rightarrow\) 156.3 (C-6), 136.0 (C-8a); 6.20 (H-3) \(\rightarrow\) 150.7 (C-2), 128.2 (C-4a),

## Page 8

* (1987) da Silva, M.F. das G.F., Gottlieb, O.R., 1987. Evolution of quasi-noids and limonoids in the Rutales. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 15, 85-103.
* (1996) Tang, Y.-Q., Feng, X.-Z., Huang, L., 1996. Quinolone alkaloids from _Evadia rutacarpa_. Phytochemistry 43, 719-722.
* (1988) Vieira, P.C., Lazaro, A.R., Fernandes, J.B., da Silva, M.F. das G.F., 1988. The chemosystematics of _Dictyoloma_. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 16, 541-544.
* (1990) Vieira, P.C., Lazaro, A.R., Fernandes, J.B., da Silva, M.F. das G.F., 1990. Limonoids, alkaloids and chromones from _Dictyoloma rundellium_, and their chemosystematic significance. Quimica Nova 13, 287-288.
* (1983) Waterman, P.G., 1983. Phylogenetic implications of the distribution of secondary metabolites within the Rutales. In: Waterman, P.G., Grundon, M.F. (Eds.), Chemistry and Chemical Taxonomy of the Rutales. Academic Press, London, pp. 377-400.



