# 10.1016@0040-4020(72)80138-8.pdf

## Page 1



## Page 2

The main component of the fruits of _Cabralea polytricha_ is cabraleadiol (IIa), yield 0-25%, m.p. 175-176deg, [a]Dp + 18deg. IR absorption at 3600 cm-1 and 1030-1070 cm-1 indicates the presence of OH and ether groups. The NMR spectrum (Table I) shows 8 peaks for quarternary C-Me groups and signals for an equatorial proton (\(J\) = 3, 3 Hz) under an OH group, and a further proton under an oxygen function, presumably an ether. The mass spectrum presents a molecular ion peak at _m/e_ 460 (C30H52O3) with base peak at _m/e_ 143 (C8H15O2), presumably derived from the side chain which could thus include either an hydroxylated tetrahydropyran ring or a tetrahydrofurysiopropanol, similar to that of occtillol (III).9 The chemistry of IIa (below) suggests an occtillol side chain, although cabraleadiol is not identical to that triterpene.

Cabraleadiol is inert to alkali, acid and LAH, and yields upon acetylation at room temp a monoacetate (IIb) m.p. 148-149deg, and under vigorous conditions (reflux for several hr) a diacetate, m.p. 129-132deg (IIc). The monoacetate shows NMR signals

## Page 3

(Table I) for eight quarternary C-Me groups, an acetyl Me, a proton under an AcO group, and the additional proton under the ether, as in carbaleadiol. The diacetate shows corresponding signals (Table I) for 8 quarternary C-Me groups, with two much more deshielded than in the monoacetate, supoorting the presence of a substituted isopropanol group in the sidechain : and for two acetyl Me's, one proton under an AcO group, and the proton under the ether, also somewhat deshielded by the second acetate.

The monoacetate cannot be oxidised with CrO3 in pyridine (Sarett's reagent); under the same conditions carbaleadiol yields carbaleone (see following paragraph). Jones' reagent (CrO3/acetone) smoothly oxidises carbaleadiol to Mills' keto-trisnrolactone (VII), strongly supporting structure IIa for the natural diol.

Cabraleone (IVa), m.p. 160-161deg, [a]D + 54deg, is a lesser component of the fruits (yield 0*09%). It forms a crystalline oxime and dinitrophenylhydrazone. IR absorption at 3600 cm-1 indicates the presence of an OH group, at 1680 cm-1 a ketone and at 1050-1100 cm-1 an ether linkage. The same eight quarternary C-Me groups as in carbaleadiol appear in the NMR spectrum. along with the multiplet for the proton under the ether.

In the mass spectrum the highest detectable peak is at _m/e_ 443, evidently resulting from the loss of 15 units (Me) from _m/e_ 458, the presumed molecular ion (C30H50O3). The base peak, as in carbaleadiol is at _m/e_ 143 (now formulated as _a_). These data indicate the identity of the sidechain in IIa and IVa. with a 3a (axial)-alcohol in IIa and a 3-keto function in IVa.

Cabraleone. like carbaleadiol monoacetate (IIb). is not oxidised by Sarett's reagent. Jones oxidation yields. in like manner, Mills' lactone (VII). Carbaleone may be monoacetylated under forcing conditions.

Reduction of carbaleone by LAH gives an isomer (Va) of carbaleadiol which upon acetylation gives a monoacetate (Vb). m.p. 171-173deg, with IR bands at 3550 cm-1 (OH) and 1730 cm-1 (OAc). The NMR spectrum shows signals for 8 quarternary C-Me groups and one acetyl Me. The multiplet under the ether is present and unchanged, but the proton under the OH group is now axial (_J_ = 6,10 Hz). Thiscompound was shown to be identical to the monoacetate of the C-24 epimer of occuillol-II, prepared by Biellmann4 during oxidation of 3-acetyl-dammarenediol (IX) with _p_-nitroperbenzoic acid. The comparison was made through m.m.p., IR and NMR spectra.

By this interrelation, the structure of carbaleadiol is established as the C-3. C-24 epimer of occuillol-II; carbaleone is the C-24 epimer of occuillone-II. Recent work5 has proven through chemical interrelations and X-ray crystallography that the stereochemistry at C-24 of occuillol-II is \(R\), with the hydroxyisopropyl at C-24 _trans_ to the Me at C-20. The same work reports a C-24 epimer, the structure of which was established as 24S, that is, with the substituents at C-24 and C-20 in a _cis_ configuration. Cabraleadiol and carbaleone should have the latter stereochemistry.

A third component of the fruits is carbaleahydroxlactone (VIa), yield 0*03%. m.p. 240-242deg, [a]D + 24deg. with IR absorption at 3550 cm-1 (OH) and 1760 cm-1 (g-lactone). The NMR spectrum (Table I) shows signals for 6 quarternary C-Me groups, with only one downfield of 1 ppm. An additional signal at 3*0 ppm is identical to that corresponding to the 3*0-proton in the spectrum of carbaleadiol (IIa). The mass spectrum shows a molecular ion at _m/e_ 416, corresponding to a trisnor-triterpene. C27H44O3. The base peak. at _m/e_ 189, is derived from separation of rings A and B (_b_).

Under mild acetylation conditions, carbaleahydroxlactone forms a monoacetate,

## Page 4



[MISSING_PAGE_POST]



## Page 5



## Page 6

m.p. 125-127deg, with IR bands at 1720 cm-1 (OAc) and 1760 cm-1 (g-lactone). The NMR spectrum (Table I) shows one acetyl Me and 6 quarternary C-Me signals; the signal for the 3b-proton is moved downfield to 464 ppm.

Reduction of VIa with LAH yields a compound melting at 210-211deg, with no IR absorption in the carbonyl region. Jones oxidation of VIa, as with IIa and IVa, forms the lactone VII.

Cabralealactone(VII), yield 0-07%, m.p. 181-183deg, [a]D + 70deg, shows IR absorption at 1700 cm-1 (ketone) and 1760 cm-1 (g-lactone). The NMR spectrum (Table I) shows six signals for quarternary C-Me groups, and no signals downfield of 2*8 ppm. The mass spectrum indicates a molecular weight of 414, corresponding to C2.7H42O3; the base peak is at _m/e_ 99 (c). These spectral data suggest that cabralealactone is a trisnor-triterpene ketone-g-lactone.

As mentioned, the other triterpenes isolated from the fruits of _C. polytricha_ all yield VII upon Jones oxidation, thus interrelating these four compounds. The product, cabralealactone, has spectral characteristics identical to those reported for the ketotransor-lactone, first prepared by the CrO3 oxidation of dipterocarpol by Mills.6 Comparison by m.m.ps, IR and NMR spectra showed the two compounds to be identical.

For further confirmation, mild NaBH4 reduction of VII and subsequent acetylation yielded a compound identical to the 3b-acetoxy-dammar-g-lactone VIII, prepared by Bielimann4 through CrO3 oxidation of 3-acetyl-dammarenediol (IX).

Compounds IIa, IVa, VIa, and VII have not been previously isolated from natural sources, though VII has been prepared in the laboratory by different oxidation reactions of dipterocarpol and dammarenediol.4, 6 They apparently represent oxidative degradation products of a normal triterpenoid precursor, which may be the 3-epimer of dammarenediol (unknown to date). Cabraleadiol and cabralcone would be intermediates in the pathway to the further oxidation products, cabraleakhydroxylactone and cabralealactone. A model experiment along this lines was performed _in vitro_ by E. H. Warnhoff,7 who demonstrated the formation of occotillol-II (III) as well as its C24 epimer from acetyl-dammarenediol (IX), by treatment with perphthalic acid. These two epimers are also formed when _p_-nitroperbenzoic acid is employed instead.4

The occurrence in _C. polytricha_ of dammarane triterpenes, instead of the euphol degradation products normally encountered in the Meliaceae, may be explained by the relatively close chemical relationship of the two groups. For example, it is well known that euphenol and tirucallenol, upon acid treatment _in vitro_, are rearranged to iso-euphenol and isotirucallenol, with the dammarane carbon skeleton and stereochemistry, a fact which was used by Ruzicka, Jeger and Arigoni8 and D. H. R. Barton9 to elucidate the euphol structure. A. Eschenmoser, L. Ruzicka, O. Jeger e D. Arigoni10 assumed that euphol and tirucallol should have a common precursor _in vivo_ (which would also be the precursor of dammarenediol), formed by a _trans-anti-trans_ cyclization of squalene (epoxide) in a chair, chair, chair boat conformation. This cationic tetracyclic triterpenec precursor (X), either by a series of concerted or ethylenic intermediate migrations, could attain the euphol or tirucallol structure, differing only in configuration at C-20. Euphol and tirucallol possess a chair-boat conformation in rings B and C9 while dammarenediol, which could arise from direct reaction of the precursor (X) with water at C-20, has the more stable chair conformation in rings A, B and C.



## Page 7



## EXPERIMENTAL

M.ps were determined on a Kofler block and are uncorrected. IR spectra were taken as KBr pellets on a Perkin-Elmer Model 12C. NMR spectra were recorded at 60 MHz on Varian T-60 or A-60A instruments or at 100 MHz on a Varian HA-100 instrument, using CDCl3 or CCl4 as solvents. The line positions or centers of multiplets are given as parts per million (d) downfield from TMS as internal standard. The multiplicity, integrated area and types of protons are indicated in Table I. The mass spectra were measured on an Atlas CH-2, direct insertion at 70 ev. Optical rotations were measured in CHCl3, unless otherwise stated.

TLC plates were prepared with Merck silica gel G. As developing solvents, petroleum ether-ether or petroleum ether-EtOAc were used; spots were located by exposure to 12. For column chromatography, Merck silica gel (70-325 mesh ASTM) was employed.

### Isolation procedure

_C. polytricha_ was collected near Sete Lagoas, State of Minas Gerais, Brazil, in typical "cerrado" country (woody savanna).

Fresh fruits (1500 g) were expressed and extracted consecutively, with cold petroleum ether (extract Il) hot petroleum ether (extract IIl) hot benzene (extract IIIl) and hot alcohol (extract IVl).

_Extract_ 1. This extract concentrated was chromatographed on a column of silica gel (300 g). Cabraleadiol (IIa) was eluted with petroleum ether-ether 7:3.

_Extract II._ The concentrate of this extract was chromatographed on a 300 g column, elution with petro ileum ether-ethyl ether mixtures. Cabraleone (IV) was eluted by a mixture of these solvents in the ratio 8:2, cabraleadiol (IIa) by 7:3, cabraleadactone (VII) by 6:4 and cabraleadhydroxylactone (VIII) by a 1:1 mixture of the two.

_Extract_ III. This extract, chromatographed as above, gave no crystalline compounds.

_Extract_ IV. The concentrate of this extract was chromatographed on a 500 g column. Small amounts of the above products were obtained together with a crystalline glycoside mixture, eluted by AcOEt-EtOH 9:1, which was not further investigated.

_Cabraleadiol_ (IIa). The crude chromatography fractions were united and crystallized several times from EtOH and then EtOAc to give 3:72 g (0:25%) of needles, m.p. 175-176deg; [a]D + 18deg (c 1:0); _v_max3600 cm-1 (s) multiple bands at 1030-1070 cm-1 (s); no selective UV absorption above 220 nm. The mass spectrum showed significant peaks at _m/e_ 143 (_a_, 100%), 460 (the molecular ion, 0.2%), 445 (M-15. 03%), 427 (M-15-18, 0.4%), 203 (_c_. 1:5%) and 125 (143-18, 12%). NMR spectrum, see Table I. (Found, C, 78-09: H, 11:26. Calc. for C30H52O3: C, 78:20; H. 11:38%).

_Cabraleadiol monoacetate_ (IIb). Cabraleadiol (IIa, 100 mg) was treated with 2 ml of Ac2O and 2 ml pyridine, at room temp, overnight. To the mixture was added MeOH; after 30 min. the solvent was removed. _in vacuo_, with the aid of successive additions of CHCl3-EtOH 99:1. Crystallization of the residue from petroleum ether gave 85 mg of needles, m.p. 148-149deg. [a]D + 12deg (c 1:0): _v_max 3600 (s), 1735(s) cm-1; NMR spectrum, see Table I. (Found : C, 76:34; H, 10:53. Calc. for C32H54O4: C, 76:44; H, 10:83%).

_Cabraleadiol diacetate_ (IIc). Cabraleadiol monoacetate (IIb, 200 mg) was refluxed with 3 ml Ac2O and 1 ml pyridine for 6 hr. The anhydride and pyridine were removed as above; the residue was chromatographed on a 10 g column of silica gel, the diacetate being eluted with petroleum ether (b,p. 30-60)-EtOAc 95:5. Recrystallization from petroleum ether gave needles (170 mg), m.p. 129-132deg, [a]D + 2deg (c 1:0). The IR spectrum showed no OH absorption, and strong peaks at 1735 and 1250 cm-1 (AcO); NMR spectrum, see Table I. (Found : C, 74:53; H, 10:22. Calc. for C34H56O5: C, 74-96; H. 10:36%).

_Sarett oxidation of Cabraleadiol._ Cabraleadiol (IIa, 79 mg) in pyridine (1 ml) was oxidized with 120 mg CrO3 in 1:5 ml pyridine at room temp for 45 min. Water was added and the product extracted with benzene-ether 1:1. The residue from evaporation of the extracts was chromatographed on a 5 g silica gel column; elution with benzene--10% ether gave carbaleone, crystallized from petroleum ether to give 58 mg, m.p. 159-161deg, with IR spectrum identical to that of natural material (below). Cabraleadiol was recovered (21 mg) from the column with benzene-20% ether.

_Jones oxidation of Cabraleadiol._ A solution of IIa (50 mg) in acetone (5 ml) was treated with the Jones reagent (8N H2CrO4), drop by drop, until a permanent orange color persisted for 3 min. The solution was separated from the inorganic precipitate, water was added, the acetone was removed and the product extracted with CHCl3. The CHCl3 solution was washed with water, evaporated, boiled with benzene (drying), and crystallized from petroleum ether to give needles (44 mg), m.p. 180-183deg. This product was identical to cabralealactone (below), by IR and m.m.p.



## Page 8

_Cabraleone_ (IVa). The chromatography fractions were united and crystallized 5 times from petroleum ether (b.p. 30-60deg) to give 1*33 g (00%) of needles, m.p. 160-161deg; [a]D + 54deg (c 1*0); _v_max3600 (s), 1680 (s). 1050-1100 (s) cm-1; the UV spectrum showed no absorption above 220 nm. The mass spectrum showed peaks at _m/e_ 143 (_a_. 100%), 443 (M-15. 1*5%), 440 (M-18. 1*5%), 399 (10%), 205 (_e_, 5%) and 125 (143-18, 11%); NMR spectrum, see Table I. (Found : C, 78*54; H, 1073. Calc. for C30H50O3; C, 78*55; H, 109*9%).

_Cabraleone acetate_ (IVb). Cabraleone (IVa, 80 mg) was refluxed with 2 ml of Ac2O and 2 ml pyridine, for 4 hr. Ac2O and pyridine were eliminated as described above and the acetate was purified on a column of 8 g silica gel, eluting with petroleum ether (b.p. 30-60deg)-ether 85*15. The acetate, homogeneous on TLC, crystallized poorly from ether to give needles, m.p. 115-120deg; _v_max1680 (s), 1730 (s) cm-1, no hydroxyl absorption evident. For NMR spectrum, see Table I.

_Reduction of carbaleone with lithium aluminium hydride._ Cabraleone (IVa, 100 mg), in dry ether, was refluxed with LAH (100 mg) for 38 hr. Excess reagent was destroyed with water-saturated EtOAc. The reduction product (Va) was purified on a 4 g silica gel column and eluted with petroleum ether-ether 8*2. Crystallization from petroleum ether gave a microcrystalline powder (71 mg), m.p. 161-164deg; [a]D + 32deg (_c_ 0*57). For NMR spectrum, see Table I.

_Acetate of the reduction product_ (Vb). The diol (Va, 50 mg) was acetylated, at room temp, as above. The product was purified by elution from a column of 5 g silica gel with petroleum ether-EtOAc 9*1. When crystallized three times from MeOH it melted at 171-173deg. The m.m.p. with the acetate of the 24-epimer of occtillo-II, (prepared by Biellmann, m.p. 180-181deg) was 178-180deg; [a]D + 34deg (c = 0*57); _v_max3550 (m), 1730 (s) cm-1 (spectrum identical to Biellmann's product). For NMR data see Table I; the NMR spectrum was likewise identical to that of Biellmann's product. (Found : C, 74*10; H, 1068. Calc. for C32H54O4H2O : C. 73-91; H, 10*86%).

_Cabraleone oxime._ A solution of IVa (100 mg), in 1 ml of EtOH, was treated with NH2OH-HCl (50 mg), in 0*5 ml of water and 160 mg of powdered KOH. The mixture was refluxed for 10 min., dilute HCl was added and the oxime extracted with CHCl3. The product (one spot on TLC, with EtOAc), precipitated from EtOAc as an amorphous solid (55 mg), m.p. 200-201deg, _v_max3500 (s), 1600-1690 (s) cm-1.

_Cabraleone dinitrophenylhydrazone._ An ethanolic solution of IVa (50 mg in 2 ml) was added to 10 ml of DNPH reagent. The precipitate which formed immediately was filtered and washed with cold EtOH. Recrystallization from EtOH gave yellowish-red needles, m.p. 198-201deg, _v_max234 and 367 nm (e 14,400, 24,000); _v_max3550, 3400, 1700, 1500 cm-1. (Found : C, 65*94; H, 8*28; N, 9*08. Calc. for C36H54O6N4H2O : C, 65*91; H. 8*60; N. 8*54%).

_Jones oxidation of carbaleone._ A solution of IVa (50 mg) in 5 ml of acetone was oxidized as usual. The oxidation product was in all respects identical to carbaleolactone (below), by m.m.p. and IR.

_Cabraleahydroxylactone_ (VIa). The chromatography fractions were united and crystallized three times from EtOH and finally from EtOAc to give 0*45 g (003%) of needles, m.p. 240-242deg; [a]D + 24deg (_c_ 0*57); _v_max3550 (s), 1760 (s) cm-1. The mass spectrum showed peaks at _m/e_ 189 (_b_, 100%), 416 (the molecular ion, 10%). 398 (M-18, 33%), 383 (M-18-15, 9%). 203 (_d_, 8%). For NMR spectrum, see Table I. (Found : C, 78*10; H, 10*45. Calc. for C27H44O3 : C, 77*83; H, 10*65%).

_Cabraleahydroxylactone acetate_ (VIb). The hydroxy-lactone VIa (100 mg) was acetylated at room temp, as usual. The acetate was crystallized from petroleum ether to give 84 mg of needles, m.p. 125-127deg; [a]D + 17deg (_c_ 0*23); _v_max1720, 1760 cm-1. For NMR spectrum, see Table I. (Found : C, 76*29; H, 9*97. Calc. for C29H44O4 : C, 75*94: H, 10*11%).

_Reduction of carbaleahydroxylactone with lithium aluminium hydride._ A solution of VIa (80 mg) in THF was refluxed with LAH (80 mg) for 24 hr. The crude product (64 mg) was recovered as above. Crystallization from MeOH gave a microcrystalline powder, m.p. 210-211deg, [a]D + 27deg (_c_ 0*43 in dioxan); _v_max3450 cm-1, no absorption in the carbonyl region. The mass spectrum showed a base peak at _m/e_ 103 (_f_) and a strong peak at _m/e_ 189 (_b_). (Found : C, 74*52; H, 11*26. Calc. for C27H44O3 : C, 73*92; H, 11*49%).

_Jones oxidation of carbaleahydroxylactone._ An acetone solution of VIa (50 mg) was oxidised as above. The oxidation product (45 mg) was in all respects identical to carbaleolactone (see below).

_Cabralealactone_ (VII). The united chromatography fractions crystallized from EtOH to give needles (1*06 g, 0*07%), m.p. 181-183deg; [a]D + 70deg (_c_ 0*57) [lit. + 69deg (_c_ 1*06)]; _v_max1760 (s), 1700 (s) cm-1. The mass spectrum showed significant peaks at _m/e_ 99 (_c_, 100%), 414 (the molecular ion, 75%), 399 (414-15, 10%), and 205 (_e_, 78%). For NMR data, see Table I. (Found : C, 78*16; H, 10*01. Calc. for C27H44O3 : C, 78*21; H. 10*21%).

_Reduction of carbalealactone with sodium borohydride_ (I). A solution of VII (100 mg) in abs EtOH was left overnight, in the ice box, with 50 mg of NaBH4. Excess reagent was destroyed with dilute HCl; addition 

## Page 9

of water precipitated the product (VII), which was filtered _in vacuo_ and taken up in CHCl3; the solution showed one spot on TLC (petroleum ether-ether 1:1). Crystallization from EtOAc, and then MeOH gave a microcrystalline powder (88 mg), m.p. 205-208\({}^{\circ}\) (lit. 205-206\({}^{\circ}\)); \(v_{\max}\) 1760 (s), 3450 (s) cm ~ 1, no ketone absorption.

_Acetate of the reduction product_ (VIII). The above reduction product (50 mg) was acetylated, at room temp, as usual. The acetate was crystallized twice from petroleum ether to give needles (45 mg), m.p. 244-246\({}^{\circ}\) (lit. 245-248\({}^{\circ}\)); m.m.p. with an authentic sample _ex_ J. F. Biellmann (m.p. 241-244\({}^{\circ}\)), 241-245\({}^{\circ}\); \(v_{\max}\)1720 (s), 1760 (s) cm ~ 1.

_Reduction of cabralealactone with sodium borohydride_ (2). A solution of VII (100 mg) in EtOH was refluxed for 20 hr with excess NaBH4. The mixture was treated as above. The crude product (90 mg) was crystallized 3 times from EtOH to give plates, m.p. 216-219\({}^{\circ}\) (lit. 217-219\({}^{\circ}\)); \(v_{\max}\)3600 (s) cm ~ 1, no carbonyl absorption.

_Reduction of cabralealactone with lithium aluminium hydride._ A solution of VII (100 mg) in THF was refluxed with excess LAH (100 mg) for 18 hr. The crude product, recovered as above, was crystallized twice from EtOH to give platelets, m.p. 216-219\({}^{\circ}\). This product was identical to the one obtained by drastic reduction with NaBH4. The mass spectrum showed significant peaks at _m/e_ 103 (_f_, 100%), 405 (M-Me. 1%), 402 (M-He2O, 2%), 387, 384, 369, 366, 361 (M-C3H7O, 3%), 343 (361-H2O, 5%). 300 (M-102-H2O, 7%). 285 (300-Me. 6%). 257. 247. 207 (189 + H2O, 38%), and 189 (_b_, 27%). (Found : C, 76:81 ; H, 11-22. Calc. for C17H48O3: C, 77:13; H, 11-45%).

_Acknowledgements--_We are indebted to Joao Batista da Silva, of the Instituto de Pesquisas e Experimentacao Agropecuaria do Centro-Oeste, at Sete Lagdas, Minas Gerais, for the collection and identification of the plant material. We are grateful to Prof. J. F. Biellmann, Institut de Chimie, Universite de Strasbourg, for samples of the acetate of the C-24 eimer of occtillol-II, of the 3b-acetyl-trisnor-lactone (VIII), and of the two 24-epimers of 3b-acetyl, 24-hydroxy-dammar-20,25-oxide: and to Prof. Guy Ourisson, Institut de Chimie, Universite de Strasbourg, for an authentic sample of the trisnor-ketolactone of Mills (VII).

We wish to thank Dr. Alan Duffield, Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, for mass spectra and Mr. Bramwell, for the same Department, for NMR spectra at 100 MHz. We also thank Prof. Paul Baker of the Centro de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais, and Profa. Adelina Costa Netto, of the Instituto de Quimica of the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, for NMR spectra at 60 MHz.

Theauthors are grateful to Dr. Walter B. Mors, Director of the Instituto de Tecnologia Agricola e Alimentar, Ministerio da Agricultura, for valuable advice and orientation.

Both authors wish to express their recognition to the Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Brasil, for continued financial assistance; the Banco Nacional do Desenvolvimento Economico, and the National Science Foundation (Grants GB 5389X and 5389XI) also participated in the support of the CPPN.

## References

* [1] L. Dreyer, _Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products_, L. Zechmeister, ed., vol. XXVI, pp 190-244 (1968)
* [2] G. Ourisson, P. Crabbe and O. Rodig, _Tetracyclic Triterpenes_, Holden-Day, San Francisco (1964)
* [3] D. Shigenthong, A. Verasarn, P. NaNonggai-Suwanrath and E. W. Warnhoff, _Tetrahedron_**21**, 917 (1965)
* [4] J. F. Biellmann, _Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr._ 3459 (1967)
* [5] M. Nagai, N. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and O. Tanaka, _Tetrahedron Letters_ 4239 (1968); O. Tanaka, N. Tanaka, T. Ohsawa, Y. Iitaka and S. Shibata, _Ibid._ 4235 (1968)
* [6] J. S. Mills, _J. Chem. Soc._ 2196 (1956): J. S. Mills and A. E. A. Werner, _Ibid._ 3132 (1955)
* [7] E. W. Warnhoff and C. M. M. Halls, _Canad. J. Chem._**43**, 3311 (1965)
* [8] D. Arigoni, R. Viterbo, M. Dunnenberger, O. Jeger and L  Ruzicka, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**37**, 2306 (1954)
* [9] D. H. Barton, J. F. McGhie, M. K. Pradhan and S. A. Knight, _J. Chem. Soc._ 876 (1955)
* [10] A. Eschenmoser, L. Ruzicka, O. Jeger and D. Arigoni, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**38**, 1890 (1955)

