# 10.1016@j.tetasy.2009.11.001.pdf

## Page 1

Asymmetric microbial reduction of ketones: absolute configuration of _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol

Cristina Pinedo-Rivilla, Mariana Carrara Cafeu, Josefina Aleu Casatejada, Angela Regina Araujo, Isidro G. Collado

# Abstract

A set of five fungal species, _Botrytis cinerea, Trichoderma viride_ and _Eutypa lata_, and the endophytic fungi Colletotrichum crassipes_ and _Xylaria sp._, was used in screening for microbial biocatalysts to detect monooxygenase and alcohol dehydrogenase activities (for the stereoselective reduction of carbonyl compounds). 4-Ethylcyclohexanone and acetophenone were biotransformed by the fungal set. The main reaction pathways involved reduction and hydroxylation at several positions including tertiary carbons. _B. cinerea_ was very effective in the bioreduction of both substrates leading to the chiral alcohol (5)-1-phenylethanol in up to 90x enantiomeric excess, and the _cis_-_trans_ ratio for 4-ethylcyclohexanol was 0:100. _trans_-4-Ethyl-1-(15-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol, obtained from biotransformation by means of an acyloin-type reaction, is reported here for the first time. The absolute configurations of the compounds trans-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol and 4-(15- and 4-(1R-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanone were determined by NMR analysis of the corresponding Mosher's esters.

## Introduction

Interest in integrating traditional organic chemistry and biocatalysis has increased dramatically over the past decade.1 Biocatalytic reactions that employ either enzymes or whole cells are well suited for green chemistry because mild conditions are applied in these reactions by lowering the energy requirements; fewer by-products are formed as they are highly chemo-, regio- and stereoselective, and multi-step chemical syntheses can be achieved in just a few steps via biocatalysis.2 As a result, biocatalytic processes are often cheaper and more direct than their chemical counterparts.3

The use of microorganisms is advantageous because of the growth and easy formation of the multienzymatic system.4 One crucial aspect to be considered for a successful microbial biotransformation is the selection of the natural source to be studied. In this work, whole cells from three filamentous fungi and two endo-phytic fungi were tested as biocatalysts. Endophytic fungi are an unexplored or at least under-explored source for microbial biotransformations.5

Therefore, as a part of our research program focusing on the study of the biocatalytic potential of filamentous fungi, we herein report the biotransformation of 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1** and acetophenone **2**, two well-known pro-chiral ketones, by the filamentous fungi _Botrytis cinerea, Trichoderma viride_ and _Eutypa lata_, and the endophytic microorganisms _Colletotrichum crassipes_ and _Xylaria_ sp., in order to detect monooxygenase and alcohol dehydrogenase activities.6,7

## Results and discussion

The selected set of five fungal species mentioned above was used in the screening of microbial biocatalysts to detect monooxygenase and alcohol dehydrogenase activities. The reduction of 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1** to 4-ethylcyclohexanol **1a** was used as the first reaction in the screening.

### Biotransformation of 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1**

4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was subjected to the action of whole cells of five filamentous fungi, _B. cinerea, E. lata, T. viride, C. crassipes_ and _Xylaria_ sp. to verify the biocatalytic potential of these fungi in the biotransformation of ketones. The results of the biotransformations are presented in Tables 1 (static cultures) and 2 (shaken cultures) in terms of isolated yields and the predominant configurations of the products obtained. Shaken cultures were included in order to observe differences resulting from the degree of oxidation.



## Page 2

Following a period of incubation for each fungus, several bio-transformation products **1a-1e** were detected. Product structure assignment was done by NMR analysis as described in Section 4.

4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was reduced to the corresponding _cis_- and _trans_-alcohol8 (Scheme 1). As shown in Tables 1 and 2, _B. cinea rea_ and _C. crassipes_ gave the _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** with a _cis_-_trans_ ratio of 0:100, and _E. lata_ with a _cis_-_trans_ ratio of 3:97 and a yield of ~47%. _cis_-alcohol **1a** was produced by _T. viride_ with a _cis_-_trans_ ratio of 65:35. Most of the biotransformations occurred with low conversion because several products were formed.

In addition to the bioreduction of 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1**, _B. cinea_ and _C. crassipes_ produced 4-(1-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol **1b**.9 _B. cinea_

_C. ransi_


## Page 3

The formation of **1c** can be explained assuming the formation of a C-C bond by means of an enzyme-type pyruvate decarboxylase leading to a chiral a-hydroxy ketone. The two-carbon unit originating from the decarboxylation of pyruvate is transferred to the ketone substrate. Presumably, an alcohol dehydrogenase present in the whole cell stereoselectively reduces the ketone of the acyloin and an _erythro_ diol is formed instead. This is the first time that an acyloin-type enzymatic reaction with a ketone as substrate is reported. We propose the mechanism showed in Scheme 2.

Another interesting transformation of **1** was oxidation at tertiary carbon C-4 by the endophytic fungus _Xylaria_ sp. which is unusual for fungal biotransformations. 4-Ethyl-4-hydroxycyclohexanone **1d** had been previously prepared [13] but it is reported here for the first time as a biotransformation product.

The biotransformation of 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1** by the endophytic fungi _Xylaria_ sp. and _C. crassipes_ also produced another compound, **1c**, whose 13C NMR spectrum was consistent with the molecular formula C8H14O2, exhibiting signals for one methyl, four methylene, two methylene and one quaternary carbon. The 'H NMR spectrum was close to that of 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1**, but the presence of a signal at 70.7 ppm in the 13C NMR spectrum (C-7) and two signals at 3.73 ppm (q, 1H) and 1.25 ppm (d, 3H) in the 'H NMR spectrum suggest that this compound was hydroxylated at C-7. The stereochemistry of this product was confirmed by means of the corresponding Mosher esters. [11] According to this method, we analysed the 'H NMR spectra of the MPA esters of compound **1e** resulting from the biotransformation by _Xylaria_ sp. on surface cultures at 10 days. The positive value of D_d_d_d_d_d for H-8 (+0.15) and the negative value of 

## Page 4



## 3 Conclusions

In summary, the studies described above demonstrate the bio-catalytic potential of the filamentous fungi _B. cinerea_, _T. viride_, _E. lacta_, _C. crassipes_ and _Xylaria_ sp. in obtaining biotransformation compounds with high enantiomeric purity from prochiral ketones. The main reaction paths involved reduction and hydroxylations at several positions including tertiary carbons. The latter case is not very typical in fungal biotransformations. Thus, 4-ethyl-4-hydroxycyclohexanone **1d** is obtained by the endophytic fungus _Xylaria_ sp.

4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was reduced to the corresponding cis and _trans_-alcohols by all the fungi with medium to high enantiomeric purity, except by _Xylaria_ sp. _B. cinerea_ was very effective in the bioreduction of both substrates leading to the chiral alcohol (_S_)-1-phenyl-ethanol (_S_)-**2a** with up to 90% enantiomeric excess and the ratio of cis- and _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol **1a** was shown to be 0:100.

Moreover, the absolute configurations of the compounds _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(1S-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol **1c** and 4-(1R-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanone **1e** were determined by NMR analysis of the corresponding Mosher's esters. The first one, **1c**, reported here for the first time, was obtained through biotransformation by _T. viride_ and _E. lacta_ by means of an atypical acyloin-type reaction.

The high yields observed for _Europa_ and its ability to carry out an unreported acyloin-type reaction seem to indicate that this fungus could be a potential biocatalyst.

## 4 Experimental

### General experimental procedures

Optical rotations were determined using a Perkin-Elmer 241 polarimeter. IR spectra were recorded on a Mattson Genesis spectrophotometer, series FTIR. 1H and 13C NMR measurements were obtained on Varian Gemini 300 and Varian Unity 400 NMR spectrometers with SiMe4 as the internal reference. Mass spectra were recorded on a GC-MS Thermoquest spectrometer (model: Voyager) and a VG Autospec-Q spectrometer. HPLC was performed with a Hitachi/Merck L-6270 apparatus equipped with a UV-vis detector (L 6200) and a differential refractometer detector (RI-71). TLC was performed on Merck Kiesegel 60 F254, 0.2 mm thick. Silica gel (Merck) was used for column chromatography. Purification by means of HPLC was accomplished with a silica gel column (Hilbar 60, 7 m, 1 cm wide, 25 cm long). Chemicals were products of Fluka or Aldrich. All solvents used were freshly distilled.

### Microorganism cultures

The _B. cinerea_ culture employed in this work, _B. cinerea_ (UCA 992), was obtained from grapes from the Domecq vineyard, Jerez de la Frontera, Cadiz, Spain. This culture of _B. cinerea_ is deposited in the Universidad de Cadiz, Facultad de Ciencias, Mycological Herbarium Collection (UCA). The _E. lacta_ and _T. viride_ cultures used were obtained from the 'Coleccion Espanola de Cultivos Tipo' (CECT), Facultad de Biologia, Universidad de Valencia, Spain, where cultures of these strains are deposited. _C. crassipes_ and _Xylaria_ sp. were isolated as endophytes from the plant _Casera sylvestris_ (Flacourtiaceae) from Cerrado do Estado de Sao Paulo (Brazil),17 These strains are deposited in the Herbario do Instituto de Botancia de Sao Paulo (Brazil).

### Determination of enantiomeric purity

The enantiomeric and diastereoisomeric excesses of **1b** were determined by chiral GC analyses on a Cyclosil-B, 30 m x 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm column using a Perkin-Elmer, Clarus 400 gas chromatograph; split at 50 mL/min, flow rate 1.1 mL/min, hydrogen as a gas carrier; _trans_-(_major_)-**1b**f**a = 4.76 min, _trans_-(_minor_)-**1b**f**a = 5.87 min; _cis_-(_minor_)-**1b**f**a = 4.54 min, _cis_-(_major_)-**1b**f**a = 4.75 min.

The enantiomeric purity of **2a** and **2b** was determined by means of HPLC analyses on a chiral column (Chiralcel OD, Daicel, Japan): 254 nm, 0.8 mL/min, hexane/isopropanol (9:1); (_R_)-**2a**f**a = 7.4 min, (_S_)-**2a**f**a = 8.6 min, (_R_)-**2b**f**a = 20.6 min, (_S_)-**2b**f**a = 22.0 min. The absolute configurations were attributed by comparison with those from the literature.15,16

### General procedure for biotransformation

Fungi were grown at 25 degC on a Czapeck-Dox medium (_B. cinerea_ UCA 992) or on a PDB medium (_T. viride_, _E. lacta_, _C. crassipes_ and _Xylaria_ sp.) (150 mL per bottle and 200 mL per flask). The shaken cultures were incubated in an orbital shaker at 140 rpm. The substrates were dissolved in ethanol and then distributed over Roux bottles or flasks (150 ppm per flask) and the fermentation continued for a further period, after which the mycelium was filtered and then washed with brine and ethyl acetate. The broth was extracted three times with ethyl acetate and the extract was dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate. The solvent was then evaporated and the residue was chromatographed first on a silica gel column and then with HPLC with an increasing gradient of ethyl acetate to petroleum ether.

### Biotransformation of 4-ethylcyclohexanone 1

#### 4.5.1 Biotransformation by _B. cinerea_

(a) _Static culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed over 12 Roux bottles after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for five more days in six of the bottles and 10 more days in the other six bottles. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave 4-eth

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c} Microorg. & Time (days) & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Phenylylethanol **2a**} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Phenylethane-1,2-diol **2b**} \\ \cline{3-7}  & Yield (\%) & ee\({}^{\dagger}\) (\%) & Config.b & Yield (\%) & ee\({}^{\dagger}\) (\%) & Config.c \\ _B. cinerea_ & 2 & 36.0 & 65 & (_S_) & – & – & – \\  & 5 & 23.0 & 92 & (_S_) & – & – & – \\ _T. viride_ & 5 & 58.2 & 79 & (_R_) & – & – & – \\  & 10 & 65.5 & 73 & (_R_) & – & – & – \\ _E. lacta_ & 8 & 29.1 & 22 & (_S_) & – & – & – \\  & 15 & 27.0 & 15 & (_S_) & – & – & – \\ _C. crassipes_ & 5 & 14.5 & 31 & (_R_) & – & – & – \\  & 10 & – & – & – & 4.6 & 90 & (_S_) \\ _Xylaria_ sp. & 5 & – & – & – & – & – & – \\  & 10 & 0.9 & 62 & (_S_) & – & – & – \\ \end{tabular}

* ee: enantiomeric excess was determined by means of HPLC analyses.
* Lit.15,
* Lit.16 config.: absolute configuration.

\end{table}
Table 4: Biotransformation of acetophenone **2** on shaken cultures

## Page 5

ylcyclohexanone **1** (1.5 mg) and _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (28.6 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (11.2 mg) and _trans_-4-(1-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol _trans_-**1b** (5.0 mg). (b) _Shaken culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone (**1**) was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 10 flasks (500 mL) in an orbital shaker after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for five more days in five of the flasks and 10 more days in the other five flasks. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (38.0 mg) and _trans_-4-(1-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (6.1 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (9.7 mg) and _trans_-4-(1-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol _trans_-**1b** (1.7 mg).

#### 4.5.2 Bitotransformation by _T. viride_

(a) _Static culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 18 Roux bottles after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for two more days in six of the bottles and for five more days in the other twelve bottles. Chromatography of the extract fermented for two days gave 6-pentyl-a-pyrene18 (15.9 mg), _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (22.1 mg), _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (3.6 mg) and _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol **1c** (\(|\alpha_{\rm D}^{25}=-1.6\) (_c_ 0.05, CHCl3)) (1.7 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave 6-pentyl-a-pyrene (100.0 mg), _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (100.0 mg), _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (41.9 mg) and tricohiridine19 (30.0 mg). (b) _Shaken culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 10 flasks (500 mL) in an orbital shaker on a PDB medium after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for two more days in five of the flasks and for five more days in the other five flasks. Chromatography of the extract fermented for two days gave 6-pentyl-a-pyrene (82.0 mg), tricohiridine (30.8 mg), _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (10.0 mg) and _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (5.8 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave 6-pentyl-a-pyrene (78 mg), tricohiridine (30.0 mg), _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (26.0 mg) and _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (15.8 mg).

#### 4.5.3 Biotransformation by _E. lata_

(a) _Static culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 24 Roux bottles after seven days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue on surface culture for eight more days in six of the bottles, for 15 more days in the rest of the bottles. Chromatography of the extract fermented for eight days gave 4-ethylcyclohexanone **1** (16.1 mg), _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (13.0 mg), _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (19.0 mg), _2-phenyl-ethanol20 (3 mg), tyrosol21 (1.0 mg), _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol **1c** (\(|\alpha_{\rm D}^{25}=-0.1\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (13.0 mg) and _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid22 (1.0 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 15 days gave _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (40.9 mg), _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol **1c** (\(|\alpha_{\rm D}^{25}=-0.4\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (10.2 mg), tyrosol (12.2 mg), _p_-hydroxybenzoic acid (20.8 mg) and (_k_(-)-(-omethyl)methionine23 (6.2 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 20 days gave _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (10.3 mg), _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (52.0 mg), _2-phenyl-ethanol (16.0 mg), _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol **1c** (\(|\alpha_{\rm D}^{25}=-6.1\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (23.0 mg) and cytosol (7.0 mg). (b) _Shaken culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 10 flasks (500 mL) in an orbital shaker on a PDB medium after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for eight more days in five of the flasks and for 15 more days in the other five flasks. Chromatography of the extract fermented for eight days gave _cis_-**4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (2.0 mg), _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol (_trans_-**1a** (61.7 mg), _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol (**1c** (\(|\alpha_{\rm D}^{25}=-2.5\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (8.2 mg) and (_R_)-(-)-O-methylcemic (11.0 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 15 days gave _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (17.4 mg), _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (33.6 mg), _trans_-4-ethyl-1-(15-hydroxycyclohexyl) (**1c** cyclohexanol (**1c** (\(|\alpha_{\rm D}^{25}=-4.0\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (11.0 mg) and (_R_)-(-)-O-methylcemic (10.4 mg).

#### 4.5.4 Biotransformation by _C. crassipes_

(a) _Static culture_: 4-Ethylcyclohexanone **1** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 12 Roux bottles after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue on surface culture for five more days in six of the bottles and for 10 more days in six bottles. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (3.0 mg) and _cis_-4-(1-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol _cis_-**1b** (7.0 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (0.4 mg), cis_-4-(1-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol _cis_-**1b** (14.0 mg) and _(14.0 mg) and _(14.0 mg)_-_4-(15-hydroxymethyl)cyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (5.8 mg), _cis_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _trans_-**1a** (26.0 mg) and _trans_-4-ethylcyclohexanol _cis_-**1a** (26.



## Page 6

1.70 (4H, dd), 3.90 (1H, m). \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) \(\delta\) (ppm): 11.7, 26.8, 32.5, 38.2, 67.4.

#### 4.5.8 4-(1-Hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol 1b9

Obtained as a colourless oil. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) \(\delta\) (ppm): 1.16 (3H, d, \(J\) = 6.4 Hz, H-8), 1.71 (2H, m, H-3), 1.76 (2H, m, H-5), 1.97 (4H, m, H-2, H-6), 3.55 (1H, m, H-7), 3.67 (1H, t, \(J\) = 6.7 Hz, H-1). \({}^{13}\)C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) \(\delta\) (ppm): 20.8 (c, C-8), 26.3 (t, C-3), 26.8 (t, C-5), 35.2 (t, C-2), 35.3 (t, C-6), 44.0 (d, C-4), 70.9 (d, C-1), 71.6 (d, C-7).

#### 4.5.9 _trans_-4-Ethyl-1-(15-hydroxyethyl)cyclohexanol 1c

Obtained as a colourless oil. \({}^{1}\)H NMR (400MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\)) \(\delta\) (ppm): 1.24 (3H, d, \(J\) = 6 Hz, H-8), 1.71 (1H, m, H-4), 2.07 (2H, m, H-3), 2.14 (2H, m, H-2), 2.26 (3H, m, H 

## Page 7

eight more days in five of the flasks and for 15 more days in the other five flasks. Chromatography of the extract fermented for eight days gave (_S_)-1-phenylethanol (_S_)-**2a** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=-12.0\) (_c_ 0.2, CHCl3)) (40.0 mg), 2-phenylethanol (5.0 mg) and (_R_)-(-)-O-methylmellein (11.1 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 15 days gave (_S_)-1-phenylethanol (_S_)-**2a** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=-8.0\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (37.0 mg) and (_R_)-(-)-O-methylmellein (8.7 mg).

#### 4.7.4 Bitotransformation by _C. cassipses_

(a) _Static culture_: Acetophenone **2** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 12 Roux bottles after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue on surface culture for five more days in six of the bottles and for 10 more days in the other six bottles. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave (_R_)-1-phenylethanol (_R_)-**2a** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=+4.3\) (_c_ 0.5, CHCl3)) (3.0 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave (_S_)-1-phenylethane-1,2-diol (_S_)-**2b** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=+26.0\) (_c_ 0.7, CHCl3)) (2.3 mg). (_b_) _Shaken culture_: Acetophenone **2** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 10 flasks (500 mL) in an orbital shaker on a PDB medium after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for five more days in five of the flasks and for 10 more days in the other five flasks. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days gave (_R_)-1-phenylethanol (_R_)-**2a** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=+16.8\) (_c_ 1.7, CHCl3)) (20.0 mg). Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave (_S_)-1-phenylethane-1,2-diol (_S_)-**2b** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=+30.6\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (7.2 mg).

#### 4.7.5 Biotransformation by _Xylaria_ sp.

(a) _Static culture_: Acetophenone **2** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 12 Roux bottles after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue on surface culture for five more days in six of the bottles and for 10 more days in the other six bottles. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days did not produce any biotransformation product. Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave (_S_)-1-phenylethanol (_S_)-**2a** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=-5.4\) (_c_ 0.8, CHCl3)) (6.0 mg). (b) _Shaken culture_: Acetophenone **2** was dissolved in ethanol and then distributed in 10 flasks (500 mL) in an orbital shaker on a PDB medium after two days' growth. The fermentation was allowed to continue for five more days in five of the flasks and for 10 more days in the other five flasks. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days did not produce any biotransformation product. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days did not produce any biotransformation product. Chromatography of the extract fermented for five days did not produce any biotransformation product. Chromatography of the extract fermented for 10 days gave (_S_)-1-phenylethanol (_S_)-**2a** (\(\langle\alpha|_{\rm D}^{25}\rangle=-33.7\) (_c_ 0.1, CHCl3)) (1.3 mg).

## References

* (1) (a) Schmid, A; Dorfick, J S.; Hauer, B.; Kiener, A.; Wubbots, M.; Wittholt, B. _Nature_**2001**, 409, 258; (b) Roehl, J. D. _Biog. Med. Chem._**1999**, 7, 2253.
* (2) Alcalde, M.; Ferrer, M.; Piou, F. J.; Ballesteros, A. _Trends Biotechnol._**2006**, 24, 281.
* (3) Alcalde, J.; Busttillo, A.; Hernandez-Galan, R.; Collado, I. G. _Curr. Org. Chem._**2006**, 10, 2037.
* (4) Borges, K. B.; Borges, W. S.; Pupo, M. T.; Bonato, P. S. _Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol._**2007**, 7, 669.
* (5) Schulz, B.; Boyle, C. _Mycol. Res._**2005**, 109, 661.
* (6) Milwolovic, M. O.; Muller, B.; Stancher, P. _Curr. J. Org. Chem._**2002**, 3711.
* (7) Nakamura, K.; Yamanaka, R.; Matsuda, T.; Harada, T. _Teratheroin: Asymmetry_**2003**, 14, 2659.
* (8) Miyazawa, M.; Okamura, Sh.; Yamaguchi, M.; Kameoka, H. _J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol._**2000**, 75, 143.
* (9) Ungaude, H. E.; McLaren, A. D. J. _Ann. Chem. Soc._**1994**, 66, 118.
* (10) Demir, A.; S.; Ayhan, P.; Sopaci, S. _B. Chem. Solr. Atr._**2007**, 35, 406.
* (11) Seco, J. M; Quinko, E.; Rigau, T. _Teratheroin: Asymmetry_**2001**, 12, 915.
* (12) Prelog, V. _Curr. Appl. Chem._**1964**, 9, 119.
* (13) Milwolovic, M. O.; Chen, G.; Wang, S.; Kytre, B.; Rochon, F.; Kayser, M. M.; Stewart, J. D. _J. Org. Chem._**2001**, 66, 733.
* (14) Wulff, W. D.; Xu, Y.-C. _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**1998**, 110, 2312.
* (15) Nashima, Y.; Akalabe, Y. _Phytochemistry_**1991**, 30, 3595.
* (16) Kim, H. S.; Lee, O. K.; Hwang, S.; Kim, B. J.; Lee, E. Y. _Biotechnol. Lett._**2008**, 30, 127.
* (17) Maier, W.; Hammer, K.; Dammann, U.; Schulz, B.; Strack, D. _Planta_**1997**, 202, 36.
* (18) Collins, R. P.; Halim, A. F. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**1972**, 20, 437.
* (19) Ollis, W. D.; Rey, M. _Teratheroh_**1980**, 36, 515.
* (20) Masa, A.; Vilanova, M. Food Chem._**2007**, 107, 273.
* (21) Khatrib, A.; Vilison, E. G.; Kim, R.; Lefebere, A. W. M.; Erkelens, C.; Choi, Y. H.; Verpoorte, R. _Anal. Chem. Acta_**2006**, 559, 264.
* (22) Sang, S.; Lapaley, K.; Jeong, W.-S.; Lachance, P. A.; Ho, C.-T.; Rosen, R. T. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2002**, 50, 2459.
* (23) Dimitridakis, C.; Gill, M.; Harte, M. _Teratheroh: Asymmetry_**1997**, 8, 2153.
* (24) Collado, I. G.; Aleu, J.; Hernandez-Galan, R.; Duran-Patron, R. _Curr. Org. Chem._**2000**, 4, 1261.



