# 10.1016@0031-9422(81)85097-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Isoflavone evolution in _Monopteryx_

Fabio B. Albuquerque, Raimundo Braz F., Otto R. Gottlieb, Mauro T. Magalhaes, J. Guilherme S. Maia, Aalde B. de Oliveira, Geyoane G. de Oliveira, Vikto C. Wilberg

# Abstract

_Monopteryx impae_ contains six 5,7-dihydroxyisofluxones, three of which, such as the novel 5,7-dihydroxy-8,3',4'-trimethoxy derivative, have additionally methoxls on ring A. All three isoflavones of _M. nuucu_ are, by contrast, 7-hydroxy-8-methoxy derivatives. From the chemical standpoint, the former species thus appears to be more primitive than the latter.

## 1 Introduction

The genus _Monopteryx_ Spr. ex Benth. (tribe Sophoreae, Leguminosae-Papilloniodae) was thought to comprise in Brazil _M. nuucu_ Spr. ex Benth. and _M. angustifolia_ Spr. ex Benth. [2] and in Venezuela _M. jahini_ Pititier [3]. Recently, however, an additional species, _M. impae_ W. Rodr., was described [3] and it became desirable to examine the chemical affinity of the new species with at least _M. nuucu_, by far the more common and widespread of the two formerly known Brazilian species.

_M. impae_ and _M. nuucu_ are trees which may attain considerable proportions. Their freshly cut trunk woods are reported to possess respectively coumarin [3] and balsamic [2] odour. The C\({}_{\text{e}}\)H\({}_{\text{e}}\) extracts of wood samples from both species contain elemicin, accompanied in the latter species by methyleugenol, methylchavicol and anethole, besides flavonoids (Table 1). The identification of the flavanone **1** and of the isoflavones **2a**-**2h** relied on spectral analyses and comparisons of data obtained for the compounds, as well as for their methyl ethers and acetates, with the pertinent published data. The presence of a methoxyl flanked by two _ortho_ substituents in **2f** was confirmed by 13C NMR: one of the methyl peaks appeared at lower field (OMe-8, d 61.1) than the other (OMe-4', d 55.2) [11]. The location of the lone aromatic A-ring proton of the previously unknown **2e** was deduced by its NMR chemical shift (d 6.36) which is compatible with d 6.32 for H-6 in the known **2d**, as compared to d 6.53 for H-8 in the equally known **2c** [all measurements in

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c}  & & Ring substitution at & & / on trunk wood \\ Flavonoid & 5 & 6 & 7 & 8 & 3’ & 4’ & Ref. & _M. impae_ & _M. nuucu_ \\
**1** & Naringenin & OH & & OH & & OH & [4] & 0.680 & & \\
**2a** & Biochanin A & OH & & OH & & OMe & [5] & 0.015 & 0.120 \\
**2b** & Pratensein & OH & & OH & OH & OMe & [6] & 0.595 & & \\
**2c** & OH & OMe & OH & OH & OMe & [7] & 0.015 & & \\
**2d** & OH & & OH & OMe & OH & OMe & [7] & 0.002 & & \\
**2e** & OH & & OH & OMe & OMe & OMe & & 0.002 & & \\
**2f** & 8-O-Methylretusin & & & OH & OMe & OMe & [8] & & 30 \\
**2g** & & & OH & OMe & OH & OMe & [9] & & 0.012 \\
**2h** & & & OH & OMe & OMe & OMe & [10] & & 0.004 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Substitution pattern and yield of flavanone **(1)** and isoflavones **(2)** from _Monopteryx_ species

## Page 2

(CD3)2CO]. Indeed, the methyl ethers of **2d** and **2e** are identical, a situation which holds also for **2g** and **2h**.

Although the flavonoid profiles of _M. inpare_ and _M. inuca_ are thus apparently diverse (Table 1), both species are seen to be related by the common 7-hydroxy-8-methoxy and 3'-hydroxy-4'-methoxy substitution patterns of their isoflavones. The differences are best understood in evolutionary terms. Clearly, from the biogenetic standpoint, _M. inpare_ accumulates simpler compounds, in the sense that all show the full oxygenation of the triacetate derived A-ring and that quantitatively naringenin **(1)**, which in the form of the corresponding chalcone may be considered the precursor of isoflavonoids, and pratensein **(2b)**, which lacks additional oxygen functions on ring A, vastly predominate over other metabolites. _M. inuca_, on the other hand, contains 5-deoxyisolavones which all sustain an additional hydroxyl at C-8 and show higher OMe:OH ratios [12].

## Experimental

_Isolation of the constituents from_ Monopteryx impact. Plant material was collected at km 55 of the Manaus Caracarai road, Amazonas State, and classified by Dr. W. A. Rodrigues (voucher herbarium INPA, Manaus, 45830). A ground trunk wood sample (12 kg) was extracted with C4H6. The extract (124 g) was chromatographed on Si gel (755 g) yielding the following useful fractions with the indicated eluants: A1 A3 (CHCl31A4 (CHCl31C3C3CO, 19:11) and A5 (CHCl3-Me2CO; 7:3); A1 A3 was purified by distillation giving elemicin (11.6 g). A2 was purified by crystallization from EtOH giving **2a** (180 mg) and **2e** (12 mg). A3 was chromatographed on a Sephadex LH-20 column, MeOH eluting in order **2d** (156 mg) and **2c** (22 mg). A4 was chromatographed on a Sephadex LH-20 column, MeOH eluting in order **2b** (2.96 g) and **1** (8.18 g). A5 was chromatographed on a Sephadex LH-20 column, MeOH eluting **2b** (4.15 g).

_Isolation of the constituents from_ Monopteryx vacuu. Plant material was collected at Luapes, Amazonas State, and classified by Dr. J. M. Pires (voucher herbarium IPEAN, Belem, 1465161. A ground trunk wood sample (13 kg) was extracted with C6H6. The extract (293 g) was separated by filtration into a crude solid **2f** (83 g) and an oil. Recrystallization of the solid from C6H6.4 AcOEt gave **2f**. Part of the oil (85 g) was chromatographed on Si gel (1 kg) yielding the following useful fractions with the indicated eluants: B1(C6H6.4 C6H6.4 4:1). B2 (C6H6.4 C6H6.1:3). B3, B4 (C6H6.4). B8 (C6H6.4 AcOEt 99:1). B6 (C6H6. AcOEt 499:1). B6 (C6H6. AcOEt 499:1). B6 (C6H6. AcOEt 199:1). B6 (C6H6. AcOEt 44:1). B1 gave methylchavicol (17.9 g). B2 gave fatty oil (12.5 g). B3 gave methyleugenol (2.5 g). B4 gave methyleugenol and elemicin (14.9 g). B8 gave elemicin and stistored (2.7 g). B6 gave **2a** (1.4 g). B8 gave an additional quantity of **2f** (3 g). B8 gave two types of crystals which were separated by hand into **2g** (140 mg) and **2h** (450 mg). Another ground trunk wood sample was submitted to steam distillation. The entrained essential oil (0.5'',) was analysed by gas liquid chromatography: 80 ml H2/min, stationary phase 15'', carbons 80 M on chromosorb W, column (6'.0,25'') temp. 180, detector (thermal conductivity term). 216, injection port temp. 240. Result: methylchavicol 14'', anthelugenol 39'', elemicin 29'', monoterpened 13'', sesquiterpenes 4'',

5.7-_Phylhydroxy_-8.3'_A-trimethoxysisulfonate_ **(2e)**, yellow crystals, mp 168-169, (Found: M (HRMSL), 344.0993, C18H6.0-requires: M, 344.0896, _c

