# 10.1590@S0103-50532005000400031.pdf

## Page 1



# Inhibition of the Symbiotic Fungus of Leaf-Cutting Ants by Coumarins

Marizete F. P. Godoy, Sandra R. Victor, Adriana M. Bellini, Gisleine Guerreiro, Waldireny C. Rocha, Odair C. Bueno, Maria J. A. Hebling, Mauricio Bacci Jr, M. Fatima G. F. da Silva, Paulo C. Vieira, Joao B. Fernandes, Fernando C. Pagnocca

###### Abstract

Formigas cortadoras de folhas sao consideradas pragas para a agricultura devido a grande quantidade de material vegetal utilizado por elas para cultivar um fungo simbionte que lhes serve de alimento e enzimas. O mutualismo entre o fungo e as formigas e um ponto a ser explorado quando se considera sua possibel aplicacao em metodo alternativos para o controle desses instos. Sabendo-se que algunas plantas sao naturalmente resistentes nos inestos fitofagos, algunas produtos naturais (metabolitos secundarios) devem ser avaliados em relacao as suas propriedades insecticides e/ou fungicidas. Neste trabalho foram isoladas oito cumarinas de quatro especies de plantas e o cefito no desenvolvimento do fungo simbionte das formigas cortadeiras _Atta sexdens_ foi determinado. Com excepcao da clausarina, todas as outras cumarinas foram inibitorias de 64 \(\mu\)g mL-\({}^{1}\) a 80 \(\mu\)g mL-\({}^{1}\) sendo que a xantieitan inibiu of fungo na concentracao de 25 \(\mu\)g mL-\({}^{1}\).

Leaf-cutting ants are known to be a serious pest for agriculture due to the high amounts of vegetal matter from crops used by them in order to cultivate a symbiotic fungus on which they rely for food and enzymes. The mutualism between the fungus and the ants is a point to be explored when alternative methods of control are being thought of. Considering that some plants are naturally resistant to phytophagous insects, some natural products (secondary metabolites) should be evaluated with respect to their insecticide and/or fungicide properties. In this paper we isolated eight coumarins from four different plant species and we determined their effect on the development of the symbiotic fungus of the leaf-cutting ant _Atta sexdens_. With the exception of clausarin, all the other coumarins were inhibitory from 64 \(\mu\)g mL-\({}^{1}\) through 80 \(\mu\)g mL-\({}^{1}\) and xanthyletin inhibited the fungus at 25 \(\mu\)g mL-\({}^{1}\)

## Introduction

Leaf-cutting ants, the dominant herbivores in the tropics, can be found from the Southern United States to Northern Argentina.[1] They cultivate a symbiotic fungus for feeding using leaf fragments as substrate, thus damaging agriculture.[2]

It is known that plants have several mechanisms to avoid herbivores, including a set of toxic chemicals.[3] The presence of secondary plant metabolites toxic to the ants and/or to their symbiotic fungi may play an important role in whether the ants will cut such plants or not.[4]

Many of the most important crops cultivated in our country are exotic species, which have not had the possibility of co-evolution with predators and as such are preferentially attacked.[5]

Different methods have been proposed for the control of these ants (organophosphorus, pyrethroids and sulfuramid insecticides). However, problems with non-target animals, high chemical stability and environmental contamination are common and it is necessary to continue looking for new strategies to control these insects.[6] The search for specific compounds directed against these ants and their microbial partners has been the focus of our studies during the past years and natural chemicals isolated from a variety of plant species were effective against the ants and inhibited the growth of their symbiotic fungus or both.[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]

Among the several biological properties of coumarins we can find dermal photosensitising, estrogenic, antimicrobial, vasodilator, molluscicidal, antihelmintic,

## Page 2

sedative and hypnotic, analgesic and hypothermic activities,16,17 but they have been associated mainly with anticoagulant activity.18 Indeed, they are widely found in several botanical families such as Rutaceae, Apiaceae, Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Oleaceae, Moraceae and Thymeleaceae and it seems to correlate with their action as phytoalexins. Repellent action to beetles and other terrestrial invertebrates and the inhibition of both sporulation and the growth of some fungal plant pathogens by some coumarins were described by Weinmann.19

The aim of this study was to analyze the activity of eight coumarins isolated from different plant species on the development of the symbiotic fungus of the leaf-cutting ant _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_.

## Experimental

### Preparation and fractioning of crude extracts

Different parts of plants were ground to powder, dried at 40 degC and percolated with a set of organic solvents (hexane, dichloromethane and methanol) during 72 hours three times each at room temperature for three days, followed by the evaporation of the solvent under reduced pressure at 40 degC. The crude extracts were fractionated through flash chromatography under vacuum with silica gel and eluted with solvents of increasing polarity (hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and methanol). They were then purified through different techniques including column chromatography, preparative TLC and HPLC.

### Coumarins

Angelicin (**1**), suberosin (**2**), xanthoxyletin (**3**) and clausarin (**4**) were isolated from the methanol extract of the roots of _Citrus limonia_. Isopimpinellin (**5**) was isolated from the dichloromethane extract of the roots of _Adiscanthus fusciflorus_ Ducke. Umbelliferone (**6**) was isolated from the hydroalcoholic extract of the banks of _Picramnia taepensis_, xanthyletin (**7**) and 7-hydroxy-3-(1'1'-dimethylallyl)-8-methoxycoumarin (**8**) were isolated from the dichloromethane extract of the stems of _Pilocarpus riedelianus_.

All the coumarins were identified through spectrometric techniques such as 'H NMR, 13C NMR, MS and IR and compared to literature data for (**1**); 20 (**2**); 21-23 (**3**); 22,24 (**4**); 22 (**5**); 22,23,25-27 (**6**); 28 (**7**); 28,29 (**8**).30

### Fungus

The fungus _Leucoagaricus gongylophorus_ (Singer) Moller (syn _Rozites gongylophorus_) was isolated from a laboratory nest of _Atta sexdens_ L.

The medium for fungus maintenance and methods for the bioassays were previously described.10 One mL of dichloromethane solution of each coumarin was added to 9.0 mL of culture medium composed of (g L-1): glucose, 10.0; sodium chloride, 5.0; peptone, 5.0; malt extract, 10.0 and agar, 15.0. Control tubes received 1.0 mL of dichloromethane and 9.0 mL of medium. After the addition, the tubes were autoclaved at 121 degC by 15 min and then slanted. The final concentration of each coumarin in _m_g mL-1 was: **1**=72; **2**=64; **3**= 70; **4**=75; **5**=80; **6**=65; **7**=25 and **8**=75. The fungal suspension was prepared by transferring aseptically pieces of the mycelia (obtained from 1-month-old culture growing in slant culture) to an all-glass tissue grinder containing sterile peptone (1 g L-1) and gently fragmented. One mL of this suspension was spread onto the surface of the agar slant and incubated at 25(+-1) degC for 30 days. The assays were run twice (two sets of five tubes each). Controls with and without solvent as well as with PBO (**9**) (commercial piperonil butoxide - Pirisa Piretro Industrial, 97LO106IO) were run simultaneously. Fungal growth was estimated macroscopically on the basis of the mycelial surface and density using the modal value.

## Results and Discussion

Figure 1 shows the molecular structure of the isolated coumarins and on Table 1 we can see the effects of the coumarins on the fungal growth. Except for clausarin (**4**), which had no effect on the fungal development at a concentration of 75 _m_g mL-1, all the others inhibited the fungus at different degrees. Thus, at 72 _m_g mL-1, angelicin (**1**) was responsible for a moderate (40%) inhibition of fungal growth whereas an inhibition of 60% was achieved with umbelliferone (**6**) at 65 _m_g mL-1. Strong inhibition (80% at 75 _m_g mL-1) was observed with 7-hydroxy-3-(1',1'-dimethylallyl)-8-methoxycoumarin (**8**) and total inhibition of fungal growth was observed with suberosin (**2**), xanthoxyletin (**3**) and isopimpinellin (**5**) at concentrations ranging from 64 to 80 _m_g mL-1. Unfortunately, we did not have enough material to determine whether suberosin, xanthoxyletin and isopimpinellin could be inhibitory at a lower concentration. Victor31 had shown total inhibition of the fungus in the presence of xanthyletin (**7**) at concentrations of 100 and 50 _m_g mL-1. The same effect was now observed at 25 _m_g mL-1 showing that this compound should be better evaluated in respect to its potential in the control of these insects.



## Page 3

Five out of the eight coumarins assayed were isolated from the roots of \(Citrus\)\(limonia\) and \(Adiscanthus\)\(fusciflorus\). Natural coumarins are synthesized by plants as a response to injury during the wilting process, diseases or drying and accumulate on the surface of leaves, fruits and seeds. According to Ojala32 their presence in the roots may provide a tool against microbial invasion.

Attempts to correlate structure and antimicrobial activity of coumarins were made by some authors. Kayser and Kolodziej33 reported that highly oxygenated coumarins and the positions of the polar hydroxyls and of the less polar methoxy groups on the aromatic nucleus are important for antibacterial activity. Yet, according to Dini _et al._ (apud Sardari _et al._34) the occurrence of the aromatic hydroxy group and/or ether or ester groups at positions 6 or 7 of the basic structure are important for antifungal action. For them, alkylated derivatives of 7-hydroxycoumarins can have both antifungal and antibacterial properties. On the other hand, Sardari _et al._34 did not find antifungal activity of coumarins with a hydroxy group at position 7, as observed with umbelliferone, which showed low activity against _Candida albicans_, _Cryptococcus neoformans_ and _Aspergillus niger_ but they found a relationship between antifungal activity and the presence of free 6-OH and 6-OMe. The results of Sardari _et al._34 were confirmed by Ojala _et al._35 with _C. albicans_, _A. niger_ and _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ but not for the phytopathogenic fungus _Fusarium culmorum_ to which umbelliferone was highly inhibitory. So, if some structure-activity relationship can be made, the hypothesis about a possible species-specific activity cannot be discarded.

Except for clausarin (**4**) our results showed that the seven linear coumarins assayed inhibited the symbiotic fungus of _A. sexdens_ at low concentrations whereas a low inhibition was achieved with angelicin. Since angelicin was the only angular coumarin assayed in this work it was not possible to establish at this moment any relationship between antifungal activity and linearity. Also the occurrence of prenyl and MeO groups linked to the basic structure of coumarins should be better studied in order to determine if they are important or not for the antifungal activity described here.

## References

* [1] Mariconi, F. A. M.; _As Sauvas_, Ares: Sao Paulo, 1970.
* [2] Weber, N. A.; _Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society_**1972**, 92, 17.
* [3] Ishaaya, I. In _Insect Plant Interaction_; Miller, J.R.; Miller, T. A, eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, 1990.
* [4] Hubbell, S. P.; Wiemer, D. F. In _Social Insects in the Tropics_; Jaisson, P., ed., University of Paris Press: Paris, 1983.
* [5] Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Castro, S. L. R.; Silva, O. A.; Pagnocca, F. C; _Anais do Encontro de Mirmecologia_, Vicosa, Brazil, 1989, 24.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c} Compounds & Concentration (\(\mu\)g mL\({}^{- 1}\)) & Inhibition of fungal growth (\%)a \\
**1** & 72 & 40 \\
**2** & 64 & 100 \\
**3** & 70 & 100 \\
**4** & 75 & 0 \\
**5** & 80 & 100 \\
**6** & 65 & 60 \\
**7** & 25 & 100 \\
**8** & 75 & 80 \\
**PBO** & 50 & \(\geq\) 80 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Inhibitory effect of natural coumarins on symbiotic fungus of leaf-cutting ant _Atta sexdens rubropilosa_

Figure 1: Molecular structures of coumarins and commercial piperonyl butoxide.



## Page 4

* [6] Hebling, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Maroti, P. S.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Silva, O. A.; _J. Applied Ent._**2000**, _124_, 249.
* [7] Acacio-Bigi, M. F. M.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Pagnocca, F. C., da Silva, O. A.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira P. C.; _Rev. Bras. Entom._**1998**, _41_, 239.
* [8] Hebling, M. J. A.; Maroti, P.S; Bueno, O. C.; Silva, O.A.; Pagnocca, F.C.; _Bull. Entom. Res_, **1996**, _86_, 253.
* [9] Bueno, O. C; Hebling, M. J. A.; Silva, O. A.; Matenhauer, A. M. C.; _J. Appl. Entom._**1995**, _119_, 341.
* [10] Pagnocca, F. C.; Silva, O. A.; Hebling, M. J. A; Bueno, O. C.; _Bull. Entomol. Res._**1990**, _80_, 349.
* [11] Pagnocca, F. C.; Ribeiro, S. B.; Torkomian, V. L. V.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bueno, O. C.; Silva, O. A.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G.F.; Ferreira, A. G.; _J. Chem. Ecol._**1996**, _22_, 1325.
* [12] Victor, S. R.; Crisostomo, F. R.; Bueno, F. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Correa, A. G.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bacci Jr, M.; Vieira, P. C.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; _Pest. Manag. Sci._**2001**, _57_, 603.
* [13] Rodriguez-Gamboa, T.; Victor, S. R.; Fernandes, J. B.; Rodrigues-Filho, E.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Castro, C. O.; _Phytochemistry_**2000**, _55_, 837.
* [14] Rodriguez-Gamboa, T.; Fernandes, J. B.; Rodrigues-Filho, E.; da Silva, M. F. G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Barrios Ch., M.; Castro, C. O.; Victor, S. R.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; _J. Braz. Chem. Soc._**2001**, _12_, 386.
* [15] Godoy, M. F. P.; Souza, R. C.; Zancul, M. S.; Pagnocca, F. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Bueno, O. C.; Hebling, M. J. A.; Bacci Jr., M.; da Silva, M. F.G. F.; Vieira, P. C.; _Arq. Inst. Biol._**2002**, _69_, supl., 192.
* [16] Soine, T.O.; _J. Pharm. Sci._**1964**, _53_, 231.
* Biology, Applications and Mode of Action_, John Wiley & Sons Ltda: Chichester, 1997.
* [18] Simoes, C. M. O.; Schenkel, E. P.; Gosmann, G.; Mello, J. C. P.; Mentz, L. A.; Petrovick, P. R.; eds.; _Farmacognosia: Da Planta ao Medicamento_, 4\({}^{\text{\text{\tiny th}}}\) ed., Editora da UFSC: Florianopolis, SC; Editora da UFRS: Porto Alegre, RS, 2002.
* Biology, Applications and Mode of Action_, O'Kennedy, R.; Thornes, R. D., eds., John Wiley & Sons Ltda: Chichester, 1997, p. 1-22.
* [20] Kulkarni, G. H.; Haribal, M. M.; Sabata, B. K.; _Indian J. Chem._**1980**_19B_, 424, (_CA 93_: 66153d).
* [21] Bhide, K. S.; Mujumdar, R. D.; Rao, A. V. R.; _Indian J. Chem._**1977**, _15B_, 440 (_CA 87: 180653d_)
* [22] Gray, A. I.; Waterman, P. G.; _Phytochemistry_**1978**, _17_, 845.
* [23] Prakash, D.; Roy, K.; Kapil, R. J.; Popli, S. P.; _Phytochemistry_**1978**, _17_, 1194.
* [24] Martinez, E. A.; Reyes, R. E.; Gonzalez, A. G.; Rodriguez-Luis, F.; _An. Acad, Soc. Espan. Fis. Quim., Ser. B._**1967**, _63_, 197 (_CA 67, 47086f_)
* [25] Sharma, P. N.; Shoeb, A.; Kapil, R. S.; Popli, S. P.; _Indian J. Chem._**1981**_20B_, 936 (_CA 96, 65684c_, 1982)
* [26] Wang, C. T.; Chang, H. J.; _Shan-his Hsiu I Yao_**1981**_10_, 51 (_CA. 95, 175631v_)
* [27] Dreyer, D. L.; Lee, A.; _Phytochemistry_**1972**, _11_, 763.
* [28] Razdan, T. K.; Qadri, B.; Harkar, S.; Waight, E. S.; _Phytochemistry_**1987**, _26_, 2063.
* [29] Joshi, B. S.; Gawad, D. H.; Ravindranath, K. R.; _Proc. Indian Acad. Sci._**1978**_87A_, 173 (_CA 89, 215258p_)
* [30] Del Castillo, J. B.; Luis, F. R.; Secundino, M.; _Phytochemistry_**1984**, _23_, 2095.
* [31] Victor, S. R.; _Ph.D. Thesis_, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, Brazil, 2001.
* [32] Ojala, T.; _Biological Screening of Plant Counarins_. Academic Dissertation, Faculty of Science of the University of Helsinki, 2001.
* [33] Kayser, O.; Kolodziej, H.; _Z. Naturforsch_**1999**, _54_, 169.
* [34] Sardari, S.; Mori, Y.; Horita, K.; Micetich, R. G.; Nishibe, S.; Daneshtalab, M.; _Biopg. Med. Chem._**1999**, \(7\), 1933.
* [35] Ojala,T.; Remes, S.; Haensuu, P.; Vuorela, H.; Hiltunem, R.; Haahtela, K.; Vuorela, P. _J. Ethnopharmacol._**2000**, _73_, 299.



