# 10.1016@0031-9422(74)85041-7.pdf

## Page 1



# The Neoligans of _Licaria Canella_*

Astraa M. Giesbrecht, Nidia C. Franca and Otto R. Gottlieb

Laboratorio de Produtos Naturais da Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil

Arnaldo I. Da Rocha

Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas, Manaus, Brasil

Pert 26 in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Lauraceae". For Part 25 see Ref. 1. Taken in part from the doctorate thesis submitted by A.M.G. to Universidade de Sao Paulo (1973). Sponsored by Ministerio do Planejamento (Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos S.A.) and Associação Brasileira da Industria Farmaceutica through Academia Brasileira de Ciência. # Present address: Departamento de Quimica, Universidade do Amazonas, Manaus. # Present address: Departamento de Quimica, Universidade do Amazonas, Manaus.



## Page 2

between two quaternary carbons. The other proton is represented by a doublet (_t_ 5:97) whose coupling constant (_J_ 6:5 Hz) reveals its axial-axial interaction with a neighbouring proton. This could, _a priori_, belong either to the CHOMe or to the CH2 units. The oxy-methine hydrogen, however, is represented by a triplet (_t_ 6:38, \(J\) 6:5 Hz) and is thus subject to two axial interactions, while the axial methylene hydrogen is represented by a doublet (_t_ 8:46, \(J\) 15:8 and _6:5 Hz) and thus vicinal to only one axial proton. This 3-carbon system must, consequently, be formulated as shown in **3,** a sequence which agrees with the observation that only the CHOMe signal (D ~ 0:3 ppm), but not the CH2 signals, is shifted on acetylation.

Both the remaining methoxyl and allyl groups, must be attached to non-protonated carbons. The PMR spectrum contains only the cther methine proton signal assigned above, and the allylic methylene protons (_t_ 7:50-7:62, m; \(t\) 7:95, _dd. J_ 9:2 and 13:5 Hz) are non-equivalent and coupled only to each other and the adjacent olefinic hydrogen.

The units of partial structure **3** can be assembled in four ways (**4**a, b:**5a, b). The allylicpzenes, which are presumed biogenetic precursors of canellin-A, are uniformly oxygenated at the _para_-position so that the pair of alternatives **4**b and **5a** are highly improbable. By contrast, the biosynthesis of **4**a and **5b** involve reasonable metabolites, such as **6**a or **7**a, derived by oxidation of an elemicin precursor, or **6**b or **7**b, derived by oxidation of a dilila-piol precursor. Radicals of type **6** are certainly formed in Lauraceae, as documented in the structures of guianan (**1**),2 porosin (**8**)3 and burchellin (**9**).4 In addition, since _para_-sub

## Page 3

stitution is favoured over _ortho_-substitution,5 canellin-A is probably formed by coupling of **6a** or b with a radical derived from isoeugenol6 leading to **10** or **11,** both of which would yield **4a**, rather than **5b**.

The MS fragmentation (Scheme), is, of course, consistent with either alternative. A tentative decision in favour of **4a**, with the relative stereochemistry **13a**, was reached by the following set of experiments. Treatment of canellin-A with the Jones reagent led to a mixture of ketones with carbonyls in 5-(_v_max1745 cm-1) and 6-(_v_max1720 cm-1) membered cycles. Since oxidation of dihydrocanellin-A failed to give a pure product, a partially protected substrate was prepared. Selective acetylation of canellin-A at the C-4 hydroxyl, diagnosed by the shift of the carbonic proton _doublet_ (D -1*04 ppm), led to a monoacetate. This was oxidized to give a pure ketone (**12**), which, as well as its hydrolysis product, has the carbonyl in a five-membered ring (_v_max1760 cm-1). Oxidation of dihydrocanellin-A monoacetate also afforded a pure ketone (dihydro-**12,**_v_max1750 cm-1). The acetate carbonyls of the mono- and di-acetates show bands at lower frequency (1735 cm-1).

Transformation of the secondary alcohol at C-8 into a carbonyl (dihydro-**13b** - dihydro-**12**) was accompanied by two PMR phenomena. Thus, there are diamagnetic shifts of the ArH (D -2' 0*54, H-5' 0*25, H-6' 0*23 ppm) and the H-7 (D 0*50 ppm) signals, which contrasts with the virtual constancy of the H-6 (D -0*05 ppm) and Me-7 (D -0*04 ppm) signals. The _exo-endo_ arrangement, which thus becomes obvious for the aryl-methyl substituents, imposes the _trans_ configuration on the 6,7-bond, a fact which is consistent with the relatively large coupling \(J\)6, 9*0 Hz [porousin (**8**), burchellin (**9**) and guianin (**1**), admittedly imperfect analogies, \(J\) resp. 5*4, 9*5 and 7*0 Hz] and the normal chemical shift of the Me-7 protons (_τ_9*13). The _cis_ configuration would place these protons into the positively shielded region above the aromatic plane [see porosin (**8**) _τ_9*48]. The second PMR feature 

## Page 4

is the large paramagnetic shift of the high field (D 0.10 ppm), which contrasts with the low field (D 0.02 ppm) methoxy signal. The former signal must thus be correlated with the bridgehead methoxyl situated in the plane of the introduced carbonyl. The high field but not the low field signal is sensitive to change of solvent. Thus, on changing from CDCl3 to CCl4 solutions of canellin-A and its derivatives this signal is shifted to even higher field (**4**a: D 0.14 ppm, dihydro-**13**b: D 0.06 ppm). Formation of a D-bridge between the basic aryl group and the solvent molecule is possible, evidently, only in CDCl3. The fact that the heightened magnetic anisotropy of the aryl group in CCl4 produces additional shielding of methoxyl is taken as an indication that these groups are vicinal and excludes structure **5**b as a viable alternative.

\(\bullet\)


## Page 5

The bisarypropanol nature of canellin-B was inferred by the formula C21H24O6, determined by high resolution MS, and expanded to C18H1\(t\),O2.O2CH2.2OMe after inspection of the PMR spectrum. This showed additionally that canellin-B (_v_max1660 cm-1) is of the porosin (_v_max1667 cm-1.**8**)3 type (Table 1). With the exception that the two aromatic methoxy signal in porosin are replaced by a O2CH2 signal, and that its H-4 singlet is replaced by a signal due to an enolic methoxyl, all spectral features are duplicated, and must, consequently be interpreted in an analogous manner, leading to structure **14** for canellin-B. In contrast to the situation in porosin where the multiplicity of the pertinent PMR signals indicate the relative locations of the functions on the aliphatic 6-membered ring, in the case of canellin-B structure **15** has to be considered as a valid, albeit less probable, alternative. The stereochemistry of the 2,3-bond constitutes an additional difference between the two neolignans. Clearly _cis_ in porosin (_J_H-2,H-3 5:4 Hz), where the Me group (_t_ 9:48) falls into the shielded region above the aryl group, it is _trans_ in canellin-B (_J_H-2,H-3 10:0 Hz, _t_Me 8:96). The MS is compatible with the proposed structures, revealing the expected facile loss of an allyl radical ([M-C3H5]+ 100deg

## Page 6



**16b**) result upon treatment of the two cancellins with Ac3O/C4H4N at room temp. Attack of the hydroxyl at C-8 seems to be hindered by the proximity of the aryl group, the _exo_-attachment of this group being evident, additionally, by the non-equivalence of the methylenedioxy protons. The benzylic hydrogens at C-6 are thus _endo_ oriented in the cancellins A and C, the diamagnetic shift of the respective signal upon passing from A to C being due to shielding by the carbonyl of the latter cmpd.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Isolation of the constituents of_ Licaria canella. A tree at the Ducke Forest Reserve, Manaus, identified by the botanist William Rodrigues (Herbarium sample INPA, Manaus, 21,230) gave a trunk wood sample (5 kg) which was dried, powdered, and extracted successively with C6H4, and with EtOH. The C4H4 soln., after conc. and standing at room temp., pptd. a solid (6 g) which was separated by filtration, washed with E1O and recrystallized from C6H4 to give canellin-A (**5a**, 9-2 g). The filtrate was evaporated to give an oily residue (13 g), which was chromatographed on silica. The following fractions were eluted, in order, with the indicated solvents: A1 and A2 (C6H4b), A3 (C6H4-CHCl3 19:11 A4 (C6H4-CHCl3 1:4), A5 (CHCl3), A4 and A7 (CHCl3-MeOH 99:1), A1 (0.55 g) oily aliphatic esters. A2 (2.5 g) was purified by vacuum distillation to give dilapiol (b,p,16-161 ). A3 (0.22 g) was a mixture present also in previous and subsequent for. A4 (0.92 g) was fractionated in part (0.10 g) by preparative TLC (SiO2, C6H4-AcOEt 4:1) into picamycin (59 mg) and stosterol (30 mg). A5 and A6 (1:56 g) was a complex mixture containing elemicin, stosterol and canellin-A from which the latter cmpd. were separated by preparative TLC (SiO2, CHCl3-MeOH 19:1). A2 (54 g) was crystallized repeatedly from C6H4 to give a total of 2.5 g of canellin-A. The mother liquors were evaporated and part (0.7 g) of the oily residue was chromatographed on forisil. The following products were eluted, in order, with light petrol-Et2O mixtures of indicated composition: aliphatic esters (17:3), canellin-A (0.3 g, 4:1, canellin-C (40 mg, 4:1), canellin-B (0.12 g, 1:1), aliphatic material (0:100). Only a small fraction of the EtOH extract of the wood was eluted from a silica column by C6H4, cig. up to 25deg EtOH. This was shown, by TLC. to be composed chiefly of the compounds already isolated from the C6H4 extract.

_Dillapiol_ (1-allyl-2.3-dimethoxy-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene). Bp.,8 IR9 and PMR9 spectra as required by lit. MS (_m/e_) 222 (100%) M, 207 (20), 177 (59), 175 (12), 149 (47), 134 (13), 133 (15), 121 (41), 119 (11), 117 (11), 107 (14), 106 (47), 105 (21), 103 (11).



## Page 7

_Elemicin_ (5-allyl-1,2,3-trimethoxybenzene). B.p. as required by lit.8 IR \(\kappa_{\max}^{\min}\)(cm-1): 1640, 1590, 1460, 1420, 1330, 1240, 1180, 1125, 1010, 980, 915, 825. PMR (CDCl3, \(c\)1): 358 (s, two ArH); 377-433 (_m_, CH=CH2), 47-5:10 (_m_, CH=CH2), 617 (_s_, 3 OMe), 667 (_d_, \(J\) 6_0 Hz, ArCH2). PMR (CC1a, _t_): 623 (s, 2 OMe), 633 (_s_, OMe). PMR (C6H6, _t_): 620 (s, OMe), 6-50 (s, 2 OMe). MS (_m_/_e_): 208 (100%) M, 193 (69), 177 (19), 165 (15), 150 (15), 135 (11), 134 (11), 133

## Page 8

(CCI4, 60 MHz, t1: 3:17 (s, ArH-2), 3:33 (_d_, J indet., ArH-6), 3:40 (_d_, J indet., ArH-5), 4:17 (s, O2CH2), 4:00-4:30 (_m_, CH-CH2), 4:80-4:96 (_m_, CH-CH2-1, 5:08 (_d_, J 6:5 Hz, CHOACl, 6:17 (_l_, J 6:5 Hz, CHOACl, 6:38 (_d_, J indet., ArCH, 6:48 (s, CHOACl, 6:72 (s, OMe), 6:08 (s, OMe), 7:98 (_m_, CHMe, CH2-CH2 and CHa,Ha), 7:87 (s, CHOACl, 8:20-8:42 (_m_, CHa,Ha), 9:10 (_d_, J 7:0 Hz, CHCH2),

Oxidation of canellin-A monosaccharide with Jones reagent and purification of the reaction product in C6H6-Me2CO 95:5 by passage through silica gave **12** as oil. M found 416*1829, C23H2,O- requires 416*1835, IR \(\times^{\text{chr}}_{\text{max}}\) (cm-1): 1750, 1730 inf., 1510, 1490, 1450, 1380, 1240, 1105, 940, PMR (CDCl3, 60 MHz, t1): 3:45 3:58 (_m_, 3 ArH1 412 (s, O2CH2, 4:05-4:30 (_m_, CH=CH2), 4:87 (_d_, J indet., CHOACl, 4:85 5:20 (_m_, CH-CH2), 6:20 (_m_, \(J\) 6:5 Hz, CHOACl, 6:32 (_d_, J 9:0 Hz, CHCH2), 6:67 (s, OMe), 7:82 (_d_, J indet., CHa,Ha), 7:87 (_s_, OMe), 7:75 805 (_m_, CHMe and CH2-CH2), 8:40 (_d_, J 160 and 6:5 Hz, CHa,Ha), 8:97 (_d_, J 7:0 Hz, CHa,Ha),

Hydrolysis of **12** (30 mg) in EtOH (2 ml) was performed with 5''u,aq, NaOH (10 ml),(50, 20 min.). The mixture was acidified and extd, with CHCl3. The CHCl3 soln. was dried and evaporated. The residue was separated by preparative TLC (SiO2, C6H6-Me2CO 1:11 into starting material and a more polar chromatography) pure amorphous solid (10 mg). IR \(\times^{\text{chr}}_{\text{max}}\) (cm-1): 13450, 1500, 1500, 1490, 1445, 1375, 1205, 1095, 1045, 930, 860, PMR (CCI4, 60 MHz, t1): 3:40 -3:52 (_m_, 3 ArH1 408 (s, O5H6),

## Page 9



