# 10.1002@ps.478.pdf

## Page 1

Biological activity of astilbin from _Dimorphandra mollis_ against _Anticarsia gemmatalis_ and _Spodoptera frugiperda_

Luciane G Batista Pereira, Fernando Petacci, Joao B Fernandes, Arlene G Correa, Paulo C Vieira, M Fatima GF da Silva and Osmar Malaspina

# Abstract

Astilbin was isolated in high yield from _Dimorphandra mollis_, and its insecticidal and growth inhibiting activity by stomach ingestion were evaluated against _Anticarsia gemmatalis_ and _Spodoptera frugiperda_. The insecticidal activity of astilbin, the weight reduction of the larval phase and the prolongation of the larval and pupal phases were verified for both species. Astilbin was identified on the base of its NMR, MS and physical data.

## Introduction

The velvetbaan caterpillar, _Anticarsia gemmatalis_ Hubner (Lepidoptera: Nocutiidae), is a permanent inhabitant of tropical America and it is considered the major pest of soybean crops in Brazil. If not managed, infestations of caterpillar can cause serious damage to soybean and other legume crops. The caterpillar is able to strip fields of soybean foliage in five to seven days.1

The fall armyworm, _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (Smith) (Lepidoptera: Nocutiidae), is a major pest of many crops in the Americas and one of the most important pests of tropical maize, causing up to 34% reduction in the overall productivity of this crop in Brazil.2

Management of the velvetbean caterpillar can be achieved using natural enemies, insecticides and various cultural practices. A nuclear polyhedrosis virus (NPV) of the velvetbean caterpillar has been applied as a microbial insecticide in Brazil to approximately 1 000 000 ha of soybean,3,4 and has provided successful control for this insect.

Fall armyworm in maize is usually controlled using agrochemicals, employed when the defoliation is noticed in the crops. However, due to the problems associated with the use of pesticides, specially the possibility of insecticidal resistance and reduction of predator and parasitoid insects, emphasis is being shifted to natural control.5

In recent decades, the screening of natural insecticides has become a promising route for the discovery of new compounds that could be used in crop protection. Insecticides of plant origin may offer a source of compounds for pest control.6-9 However, some of these compounds are very toxic to mammals. There is now a search for compounds that have other forms of biological activity such as antidefendant, repellent and insect growth regulatory action which could be used as crop-protection agents.10 Plants phenolics, such as flavonoids, influence the food preference and the behaviour of many different herbivores, including insects.11,12

A crude extract of _Lonchocarpus speciosus_ containing mixture of astilbin with other flavonoids showed insecticidal effects against _Drosophila melanogaster_ Meig flies.13 Astilbin has been isolated from several sources including _L specious_,13_ Astilbe thunbergin_,14_ Engelhardria chrysolepis_,15-19_ Vitis vinifera_,20_ Hynanaea martiana_,21_ H pareifolia_,22_ Walffia baccata_,22_ Hypericum perforatum_,23 and _Smilax glabra_.24 It exhibits a variety of biological activities such as reducing total liver cholesterol concentration,19 protecting against oxidative damage to liver mitochondria and haemo

## Page 2

lysis erythrocytes,15 inhibiting lens aldose reductase to prevent cataract formation in diabetes,16 enhancement of the vanadate-stimulated release of lipoprotein lipase activity,17 and a hepatoprotective effect25 in rats26 and mice.27 It also facilitates apoptosis of interleukin-2-dependent phytohaemaglutinin-activated Jurkat cells,28 shows antinociceptive and anti-oedematogenic,29,30 antidepressant23 and enzyme inhibitory properties.17,22

The aim of the present work was to evaluate the effect of astilbin [(2\(R\)3_R_5),7,3',4'-tetrahydrox-2,3-dihydroflavonol-3-b-O-thamnoside], isolated for the first time from _Dimorphandra mollis_, when administered in an artificial diet to _A gemmatalis_ and _S frugiperda_.

## 2 Materials and Methods

### 2.1 Analysis

#### 2.1.1 NMR analysis

1H NMR (200 MHz) and 13C NMR (50 MHz) spectra, using tetramethylsilane as internal standard, were recorded on a Bruker ARX-200 model.

#### 2.1.2 MS analysis

Mass spectra (Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Ionization (APCI) +/MS) were recorded on a Micromass QuattroLC.

### 2.2 Plant extracts

#### 2.2.1 Plant material

The flower peduncles (161 g) and flowers (450 g) of _Dimorphandra mollis_ Benth (Fabaceae, Caesalpinio-deae) were collected in Rio Claro, Sao Paulo State, Brazil, in February, 1999. These parts were dried separately in a stove with air circulation (40 degC) and milled in a Willey-type mill. A voucher was deposited at the herbarium of the Botanic Department of Universidade Estadual Paulista UNESP (number 5464).

#### 2.2.2 Extraction, isolation and physical data of astilbin (Fig 1; 1)

The plant material was extracted with dichloromethane (3 x 1 litre) followed by methanol (2 x 1 litre). The extracts were dried under reduced pressure (20 torr; 2.67 kPa) using a rotatory evaporator.

The methanolic extracts of peduncles and flowers afforded astilbin (99.9% and 99.0% respectively, equivalent to 10.1% and 7.6% [w/w] of the dry starting material) by crystallization from aqueous methanol. The purity of astilbin was determined by recycled HPLC (polymeric packing column, Shimadzu, Asahipak GS-310 P, 21.5 cm ID x 50.0 cm length, eluted with methanol, flow rate 7 ml min-1, UV detector at 290 nm), as well as by its melting point.

#### 2.3 Astilbin.

White crystals obtained from methanol + water (8 + 2 by volume), mp. 190-191 degC [literature 189-190 degC];14 APCI+/MS _m_/_z_ = 451 [M + H]+; 1H and 13C NMR spectra were in agreement with the literature,31[m]25 = -12.8deg (c 1.0, methanol); literature -12.7deg (c 1.02, methanol).14

### 2.3 Biological activity

Larvae of _A gemmatalis_ and _S frugiperda_ were obtained from the Insect Bioassay Laboratory of Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Brazil, and reared on artificial diets.32,33 They were maintained in an incubation chamber with a photophase of 12:12 h L:D, 70 (+-5)% relative humidity and 25 (+-1) degC.

For each treatment and control, 30 neonate larvae of _S frugiperda or _A gemmatalis_ were used. A solution of astilbin in water + dimethyl sulfoxide (99.9 +- 0.1 by volume; 3 ml) was added to ascorbic acid (1.8 g; an ingredient of the diet) and, after evaporation of the solvent under vacuum at 40 degC in a rotary evaporator, the mixture was incorporated to the artificial diet32,33 at final concentrations of 0.1, 1.0 and 10.0 mg kg-1. Diet for the control was prepared similarly but without the astilbin. The diets were placed in previously sterilized glass tubes (8.5 cm x 2.5 cm), into which larvae of _S frugiperda_ and _A gemmatalis_ were introduced individually. Daily observations were made and the following parameters were evaluated: (1) duration of larval and pupal phases; (2) duration of the life cycle (larva to emergence of adult); (3) weight of pupae and (4) percentage of living insects (viability) at the end of each phase.

### 2.4 Statistics

Data were submitted to an analysis of variance (ANOVA)34 and the averages were compared applying the Tukey test (_P_ <= 0.05). Each tube containing one insect, independent of the development phase, was considered as one replicate, therefore the number of replicates was different for each treatment. For evaluation of the viability of the larval phase, pupal phase and total cycle, the experimental unit was constituted by the mean of five tubes with one larva each, with six replications by treatment.

## 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The experiment with _S frugiperda_ larval and pupal phases did not show any statistical differences between the treatments and the control (Table 1). However,

Figure 1: Astilbin.



## Page 3

when the astilbin concentration in the diet was increased, non-significant extensions of 1.2 days in the larval phase and 0.7 days in the pupal phase were observed when compared to the control. For _A gemmatalis_, a slower larval (0.5 days) and pupal (1.3 days) development was observed, but this difference was not statistically significant (Table 2). A small prolongation of the larval and pupal phases of the insect produced statistically significant increases in the total cycle duration time (from larva to the emergence of the adult) of 1.53 days for _S frugiperda_ and 2.27 days for _A gemmatalis_, in comparison with their respective controls. This alteration in the insect development and the prolongation of the cycle suggest that astilbin has a toxic effect on the insect which could be responsible for the characteristic antibiosis effect of _D mollis_ to insects. Astilbin effectively debilitates the insect larvae, retards their growth or delays their pupation. As a consequence, the insect could be more vulnerable to the action of entomopathogens, entomophagous agents and environmental variations.35

A small but significant reduction (264-240 mg) in the pupal weight of _S frugiperda_ treated with astilbin was observed compared with the control (Fig 2). However, no statistical difference was found for the pupal weight of _A gemmatalis_ (Fig 2), a similar result obtained to those by Gazzoni _et al_36 for quercetin.

Significant differences were observed for viability (total survival rates) of larvae, pupae and total life cycle for _S frugiperda_ and _A gemmatalis_ by increasing the concentration of astilbin in the diet (Figs 3 and 4). The viability varied from 100.0% (control) to 93.3% (0.1, 1.0 and 10.0 mg kg-1) for the _S frugiperda_ larval phase (Fig 3) and for _A gemmatalis_ a greater reduction was found, from 90.0% (control) to 76.7% (1.0 and 10.0 mg kg-1) (Fig 4). In the pupal phase, the viability decreased significantly, changing from 80.0% (con

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c}  & \multicolumn{3}{c}{_Duration (days) (± SD)a_} \\ _Concentration_ & \multicolumn{3}{c}{_Total cycle_} \\ _(mg kg−1)_ & _Larvae_ & _Pupae_ & _(larvae-adult)_ \\ Control & 21.0 (±2.0) a & 10.2 (±0.9) a & 30.7 (±1.4) a \\
0.1 & 21.6 (±1.7) a & 10.0 (±1.9) a & 32.6 (±1.7) b \\
1.0 & 22.2 (±3.1) a & 10.0 (±1.7) a & 32.1 (±2.9) ab \\
10.0 & 22.0 (±2.3) a & 10.9 (±2.5) a & 32

## Page 4

trol) to 33.3% (10.0 mg kg-1) for _S frugiperda_ and from 96.7% (control) to 53.36% (10.0 mg kg-1) for _A gemmatalis_. These variations interfered significantly with the total cycle viability, the observed average viability varying from 80.0% (control) to 26.2% (10.0 mg kg-1) for _S frugiperda_ and from 86.7% (control) to 33.3% (10.0 mg kg-1) for the _A gemmatalis_. These results indicate that the insects are more sensitive to astilbin during the pupal phase. In the pupal phase, the morphological and physiological changes demand an intense biochemical activity, which could be harmed by the action of astilbin in the larval phase, resulting in weight reduction of the pupa.37,38

The mode of action of astilbin was not investigated in this work. However, Appel39 reported that the toxic effect of phenolic compounds can be related to oxygen radical species formation during oxidation. These radicals disrupt membrane integrity and the metabolism in the gut epithelium. Digestion inhibition can also result from the formation of covalent bonds with dietary proteins or digestive enzymes. Therefore, phenolic compounds may have direct negative effects on herbivores as feeding deterrents, digestion inhibitors and generators of oxygen radicals. Feeding deterrence is positively correlated with chemical astringency, the ability of phenolics to precipitate protein. The alkaline conditions in the insect gut could promote enzymes to hydrolyze of the flavonoid yielding the free aglycon, which could intervene in the larval and/or pupal phases.40,41 Adults emerging from low-weight pupae could be more debilitated and would have lower capacity of competition for vital activities than individuals from healthy pupae. The results of this work indicate astilbin to be a potential insecticide for _S frugiperda_ and _A gemmatalis_ larvae. Astilbin occurs in high concentration in _D mollis_, and further studies have to be done to develop methodology for its use as a natural insect control agent. There is no reference to the interaction between this plant and other insects in the literature, and this is the first time that astilbin has been isolated from _D mollis_.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq), Coordenacao de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), PRONEX/MCT-FINEP, and Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP), for the financial support and scholarships (CNPq).

## References

- Wilkerson GG 1986 Wilkerson GG, Mishoe JW and Stimac JL Modeling velvetebean caterpillar (Lepidoptera: Nocutiade) populations in soybean. _Environ Entomol_ 15:809-816 (1986).
- Cruz I _et al._ 1998 (2000) Cruz I, Oliveira LJ, Oliveira AC and Vasconcelos CA, Efeito do nivel de saturacio de aluminio em solos acidos sobre os danos de _Spedoptera frugiperda_ (JE Smith) em milho. _A Soc Entomol Brasil_ 25:293-297 (1996).
- Moscardi F, Use of viruses for pest control in Brazil: the case of the nuclear polyhedrods of the soybean caterpillar, _Antoraria gannatisa. Manu Unv Oranalo Cruz_ 84:51-56 (1989).
- Moscardi F and Sosa-Gomez DR, Use of viruses against soybean caterpillars in Brazil, in _Pest management in soybean_, ed by Copina LG, Green MB and Rees RT, Elsevier Applied Science, London, pp 98-109 (1992).
- Cruz I, A lagara-do-caruchno no cultura do milho, Sete Lagoas. _EMBRAPA, CNPQMS, Circular Tecnico_ 21:1-45 (1995).
- Castillo M, Martinez-Pardo R, Garcerci MD and Coviduald F, Biological activities of natural sesquiterpene lactones and the effect of synthetic sesquiterpene derivatives on insect juvenile hormone biosynthesis. _J Agric Food Chem_ 46:2030-2035 (1998).
- Crowley P, Fisher H and Devonshire A. Feed the world. _Chem Brit_ 34:25-28 (1998).
- Miazawa M, Yoshio K, Ishikawa Y and Kameoka H, Insecticidal alkaloids against _Towophila melanogaster_ from _Nubhar japonicus_ DC. _J Agric Food Chem_ 46:1059-1063 (1998).
- Cespede CL, Calderon JS, Lina L and Aranda E, Growth inhibitory effects on fall amyromycin _Spedoptera frugiperda_ of some limonoids isolated from _Cadela_ spp (Meliaceae). _J Agric Food Chem_ 48:1903-1908 (2000).
- Morimoto M, Kumeda S and Komai K, Insect antifeedant flavonically from _GenBank affine_ D Don. _J Agric Food Chem_ 48:1888-1891 (2000).
- Schultz JC, Tannin-inset interactions, in _Chunistry and significance of condensed tannins_, ed by Hemingway RW and Karchegy JJ, Plenum Press, New York, pp 417-433 (1989).
- Bernays EA, Cooper Driver G and Bilegner M, Herbivores and plant tannins. _Adv Ecol Res_ 19:263-302 (1989).
- El Sayed NH, Soher EA, Masoud RA and Mabry TJ, Flavonoids of _Lanchocarpus speciosa. Asian J Chem_ 67:938-741 (1997).
- Han LR, Ninomiya H, Taniuchi M, Baba K, Kimura Y and Okuda H, Norepinephrine-augmenting lipotic effects from _Atilike thunbergi rhizomes. _J Nat Prod_ 61:1006-1011 (1998).
- Hargauchi H, Mochida Y, Sakai S, Masuda H, Tamura Y, Mizutani K, Tanaka O and Chou M, Ph, Protection against oxidative damage by dihydroflavonols in _Euglaharable chrysolepis. Biosci Biotech Biochem_ 60:945-948 (1996).
- Hargauchi H, Ohmi I, Masuda H, Tamura Y, Mizutani K, Tanaka O and Chou W-H, Inhibition of adose reductase by dihydroflavonols in _Euglaharable chrysolepis_ and effects on other enzymes. _Euglentia_ 52:564-567 (1996).
- Hargauchi H, Ohmi I, Fukuda A, Tamura Y, Mizutani K, Tanaka O and Chou W-H, Inhibition of adose reductase and sorbitol accumulation by astilbin and taxofolin dihydroflavonols in _Euglaharable chrysolepis. Biosci Biotech Biochem_ 61:651-654 (1997).
- Motovashii T, Miyake M, Morita T, Mizutani K, Masuda H and Ueki H, Enhancement of the vanadate-stimulated release of lipoprotein lipase activity by astilbin from the leaves of _Euglaharable cytolysis_. _Biol Pharm Bull_ 21:1517-159 (1998).
- Igarashi K, Uchida Y, Murakami N, Mizutani K  and Masuda H, Effect of astilbin in tea processed from leaves of _Euglaharable cryolyteops_ on the serum and liver lipid concentration and on the erythrocyte and liver antioxidative enzyme activities of rats. _Biosci Biotech Biochem_ 60:513-515 (1996).
- Trousdale EK, Singleton VL, Astilbin and engeletin in grapes and wine. _Pytochenology_ 22:619-620 (1983).
- Carmeiro E, Calixto JB, Delle Monache F and Yunes RA, Isolation, chemical identification and pharmacological evaluation of eucerythin, astilbin, and engelitin obtained from the bark of _Hynomea maxima_. _Int J Pharmaco_ 31:38-46 (1993).
- Ishibashi M, Oda H, Mitamura M, Okuyama K, Komiyama K, Kawaguchi K, Watanabe T, de Mello Alves S, Maekawa T and Ohtsuki K, Casein kinase II inhibitors isolated from two Brazilian plants _Hynomea parcyidia_ and _Pulfifa baccata_, _Bioorg Med Chem Lett_ 9:2157-2160 (1999).


## Page 5

* [23] Butterweck V, Jurgeniemk G, Nahrstedt A and Winterhoff H, Flavonoids from _Hypericum perforatum_ show antidepressant activity in the forced swimming test. _Planta Med_**66**:3-6 (2000).
* [24] Chen G, Shen L and Jiang P, Flavanonol glucosides of _Smilax glabra_ Rosb. _Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi_**21**:355-357 (1996).
* [25] Chen T, Li J, Cao J, Xu Q, Komatsu K and Namba T, A new flavanone isolated from rhizome _Smilax glabra_ and the structural requirements of its derivatives for preventing immunological hepatocyte damage. _Planta Med_**65**:56-59 (1999).
* [26] Closa D, Torres M, Hotter G, Bioque G, Leon OS, Gelpi E and Rosello Catafau J, Prostanoids and free radicals in Cl\({}_{4}\)C-induced hepatotoxicity in rats: effect of saitbin. _Prostaglandins Leukotrienes and Ess Fatty Acids_**56**:331-334 (1997).
* [27] Xu Q, Wu FG, Cao JS, Chen T, Jiang JY, Saiki I and Koda A, Astilbin selectively induces dysfunction of liver-infiltrating cell-novel protection from liver damage. _Eur J Pharm_**377**:93-100 (1999).
* [28] Yan R and Xu Q, Astilbin selectively facilitates the apoptosis of interleukin-2-dependent phytohemagglutinin-activated jurkat cells, _Pharmacol Res_**44**:135-139 (2001).
* [29] Cechinel-Filho V, Schlemper V, Santos AR, Pinheiro TR, Yunes RA, Mendes GL, Calixto JB and Delle Monache F, Isolation and identification of active compounds from _Drinys winteri_ barks. _J Edimphamoradi_**62**:223-227 (1998).
* [30] Cechinel-Filho V, Vaz ZR, Zuzino L, Calixto JB and Yunes RA, Antinociceptive and anti-oedematogenic properties of astilbin, taxafilon and some related compounds. _Arzneimitedforschung_**50**:281-285 (2000).
* [31] De Brito J, Manickam VS, Gopalakrishnan S, Ushioda T and Tanaka N, Determination of aglycone chirality in dihydro-flavonol 3-O-a-l-rhamnosides by 1H-NMR spectroscopy. _Chem Pharm Bull_**43**:338-339 (1995).
* [32] Kasten PJR, Precetti AACM and Parra JRP, Dados biologicos comparatives de _Sbodoptera frugiperda_ (JE Smith, 1977) em dus diesa arteriotisis e substratur natural. _Revista de Agricultura_**53**:68-78 (1978).
* [33] Parra JRP, Criacio de insets para estudos com patogenos, in _Control microblioma de insets_, ed by Alves SB, Editora Manole, Brazil, Sao Paulo, pp 348-373 (1986).
* [34] Zar JH, _Biostatistical analysis_, Prentice-Hall Inc, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, pp 133-139 (1974).
* [35] Tanzuil PB and McCarfary AR, Effects of azadirachtin and aqueous nem seed extracts on survival, growth and development of the African armworm, _Sbodoptera frugiperda. Crop Por_**9**:383-386 (1990).
* [36] Gazzoni DL, Hulmseyer A and Hoffmann-Campo CB, Efeito de diferentes doses de rutin e de quercetin na biologia de _Anticaria gommatalis_ Hubner, 1818 (Lep, Nocutiidae). _Rev PAB, Pequating Aporacaria Brasilaria_**32**:673-681 (1997).
* [37] Duffey SS and Iman MB, Inhibition of insect larval growth by phenolics in glandular trichomes of tomato leaves. _Experimia_**37**:575-576 (1980).
* [38] Isman MB and Duffey SS, Tosicity of tomato phenolic compounds to the fruitiworm, _Heliothis sea. Entomol Exp Appl_**31**:370-376 (1982).
* [39] Appel HM, Phenolics in ecological interactions: the importance of oxidation. _J Chem Eot_**19**:1521-1551 (1993).
* [40] Klocke JA and Kubo I, Defense of plants regulation of insect feeding behavior. _Florida Entomol_**74**:18-22 (1991).
* [41] Hoffmann-Campo CB, Role of the flavonoids in the natural resistance of soybean to _Heliothis wiexens_ (F) and _Trichophia ni_ (Hubner), _PhD Thesis_, University of Reading, Reading, UK, pp 165 (1995).



