# 10.1080@14786410701582282.pdf

## Page 1

This article was downloaded by: [Memorial University of Newfoundland]

On: 05 March 2015, At: 13:31

Publisher: Taylor & Francis

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Natural Product Research: Formerly

Natural Product Letters

Publication details, including instructions for authors and

subscription information:

[http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gnpl20](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gnpl20)

Unequivocal NMR assignments: O

-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives of

acid chromanones from Calophyllum

brasiliense CAMB. (Guanandi)

D. Caneppee a c, P. C. Vieira b, E. L. Dall'oglio a d, L. E. da Silva

a a P. T. Sousa Jr a Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de Mato

Grosso, Cuiaba, 78060-900, MT, Brazil

b Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos,

SP, Brazil

c Department of Chemistry, Pontificia Universidade Catolica do

Rio Grande do Sul (PUC-RS), RS, Brazil

d Departamento de Fisica-ICET-Programa de Pos-Graduacao em

Fisica e Meio-Ambiente, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso

Published online: 14 Jul 2008.

To cite this article: D. Caneppee, P. C. Vieira, E. L. Dall'oglio, L. E. da Silva & P. T. Sousa Jr

(2008) Unequivocal NMR assignments: O -methoxy-methyl esters derivatives of acid chromanones

from Calophyllum brasiliense CAMB. (Guanandi), Natural Product Research: Formerly Natural

Product Letters, 22:10, 846-853, DOI: 10.1080/14786410701582282

To link to this article: [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786410701582282](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786410701582282)

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the "Content") contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or 

## Page 2

howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, resulting, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

## Page 3

Unequivocal NMR assignments: _O_-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives of acid chromanones from _Calophyllum brasiliense_ CAMB. (Guanandi)

D. CANEPPEE+SS, P. C. VIEIRA++, E. L. DALL'OGLIO+P, L. E. DA SILVA+ and P. T. SOUSA JR**

+Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso,

Cuiaba, 78060-900, MT, Brazil ++Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil SSDepartment of Chemistry, Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUC-RS), RS, Brazil ++Departamento de Fisica - ICET - Programa de Pos-Graduacao em Fisica e Meio-Ambiente, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso

###### Abstract

The present work describes the fractionation of the crude hexane extract (EBHEX) from _Calophyllum brasiliense_ (Clusiaceae) stem bark. Derivatization of DCM2.9 fraction with diazomethane afforded the chromanones inophylloidic acid, isobrasilienisc acid, as well as, a mixture containing isobrasilienisc and brasiliensic acids, in the form of their more stable _O_-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives **1**, **2**, and **3**, respectively. The isolation of **1** from _C. brasiliense_ is described for the first time herein. The use of two-dimensional NMR methods ('H-COSY, HMQC, and HMBC) allowed the precise determination of \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H chemical shifts of compounds **1**, **2**, and **3**.

_Cabophyllum brasiliense_; Acid chromonones; Unequivocal NMR assignments

## 1 Introduction

_Calophyllum brasiliense_ (Clusiaceae), popularly known as "guanandi", is used by the population of Mato Grosso State in Brazil to treat several illnesses, mainly chronic ulcers and inflammation. Previous studies carried out in our group and elsewhere have confirmed these pharmacological properties [1,2]. Chemical studies performed on the heartwood of _C. brasiliense_ have led to the identification of several xanthones as well as the ubiquitous friedelin, sitosterol and stigmasterol [3,4]. The isolation of isoapetalic, petalic, and blancoic acids and isomers has been carried out from the seeds of this specie [5].

Brasiliensic and isobrasiliensc acids have been isolated from a resin extracted from _C. brasiliense_ stem bark [6,7]. Two xanthones, jacareubin and guanandin, isolated 

## Page 4

from _C. brasiliense_, have been shown to have antimicrobial activity [8]. It has also been demonstrated that friedelin has diuretic activity as well as anti-inflammatory and antidepressive activity on the central nervous system [9]. Intensive pharmacological studies were carried out with coumarins and xanthones isolated from the stem bark of _C. brasiliense_, some of which have shown potent cancer chemopreventing effects [10,11] as well as cell's growth inhibitors [12]. The chromanone acids have been also target to investigate the biological significance, presenting antibacterial activity [13].

Although a full characterization of some chromanone acids have been given in the literature [13], in the present work we describe the structural determination of _O_-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives of the chromanones inophylloidic acid **(1)** and isobrasilienic acid **(2)**, as well as a mixture containing **2** and brasiliensic acid _O_-methoxy-methyl ester **(3)**, respectively, and their precise attribution of \({}^{13}\)C and \({}^{1}\)H chemical shifts by two-dimensional NMR methods (\({}^{1}\)H-COSY, HMQC, HMBC), in order to correct erroneous attributions observed in previous communications [7,14].

## 2 Experimental

### General experimental procedures

NMR spectra were recorded at Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos (UFSCar) on a Bruker model ARX 400 (400 MHz \({}^{1}\)H-; 100 MHz \({}^{13}\)C-NMR) spectrometer with inverse detection. Two-dimensional experiments, carried out on pure samples of compounds **1** and **2**, were performed with standard Bruker software. The samples were dissolved in CDCl\({}_{3}\) (Aldrich) and the coupling constants (\(J\)) are quoted in Hertz. IR spectra were obtained on a Bomen, model MB 100, FTIR spectrophotometer; the samples were prepared as thin films on NaCl plates. UV spectra were obtained, from dichloromethane solutions, utilizing a Hitachi, model U-2001 spectrophotometer. Column chromatography (CC) was carried out on Merck silica: 63-230 \(\mu\)m, normal-phase; 40-63 \(\mu\)m, flash-chromatography and 63-200 \(\mu\)m silanized silica (dimethylsilane), reversed-phase. Thin layer chromatography (TLC) was performed on Merck silica, code 60 GF\({}_{254}\) and code 60 PF\({}_{254}\) (silanized). Preparative TLC (PTLC) was performed on Aldrich silica gel (5-25 \(\mu\)m). HPLC was carried out at UFSCar, on a Shimadzu LC-6AD (recycling, loop = 2 mL) and Shimadzu LC-8A, both equipped with a Shimadzu SPD-AV UV detector (254 nm) and silica columns Shim-Pack Prep-Sil(H), Shim-Pack Prep-ODS and ASAHIPack (GS-310P,21). The solvents were pumped at 5 mL min\({}^{-1}\). Optical rotations were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer model 241 polarimeter. Assays were carried out employing EBHEX and its chromatographic fractions obtained after silica gel filtration with hexane (fractions H\({}_{x}\)), dichloromethane (fractions DCM\({}_{x}\)), ethyl acetate (fractions Ac\({}_{x}\)) and methanol (fractions M\({}_{x}\)) at FCM/UFMT, according to literature procedures [1].

### Plant material

_Calophyllum brasiliense_ stem bark was collected near Santo Antonio of Leverger Road, outskirts of Cuiaba city, Mato Grosso State, in July 1996. Taxonomic ratification was 

## Page 5

carried out at UFMT by Dr Germano Guarim Neto. A voucher sample has been deposited at UFMT Central Herbarium, receiving the number 3767.

### Extraction and isolation

Hexane (54 L) was added to finely powdered stem bark of _C. brasiliense_ (18 kg), and the mixture allowed macerating for 7 days (r.t.) before filtration and solvent removal under _vacuum_ (40degC). EBHEX was obtained after drying the residue in an oven (40degC) as far as no more loss of weight was observed (686.69 g; 3.81%). EBHEX (200 g) was adsorbed on silica (400 g), and the mixture was filtered through a silica column (600 g), with 2 L of each hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and methanol. Approximately 500 mL solvent aliquots were collected or, in case colored bands could be seen, elution was carried out to collect the whole band. The following fractions were obtained after the solvents were removed under _vacuum_ (40degC) and the residue fully dried in an oven (40degC): hexane - H1 (3.17 g; 1.6%), H2 1.96 g; 0.98%); dichloromethane - DCM1 (5.73 g; 2.87%), DCM2 (72.3 g; 36.15%), and DCM3 (29.93 g; 14.97%); ethyl acetate - Ac1 (5.92 g; 2.96%), Ac2 (73.32 g; 36.66%), Ac3 (0.82 g; 0.41%), and methanol - M1 (1.25 g; 0.63%) and M2 (0.4 g; 0.2%).

Fraction DCM2 (3.27 g) was submitted to reversed-phase chromatography on silanized silica (27 g), in methanol-water (3 : 1). Fifty-seven 10 mL fractions were collected and after TLC analysis, were grouped in 14 fractions. Fraction number nine (DCM2-9) was treated with diazomethane (excess), and the resulting mixture submitted to a new silica gel chromatography in hexane-dichloromethane-ethyl acetate (8 : 1 : 1). Fifty nine fractions (10 mL) were pooled in 13 fractions after TLC analysis: DCM2-9-1 to DCM2-9-13. Fraction DCM2-9-3 was further purified by preparative TLC (hexane-acetone, 95 : 5), affording three fractions: DCM2-9-3-1 to DCM2933. Fraction DCM294 was chromatographed on silica gel column (hexane-acetone, 95 : 5), affording 24 fractions (10 mL), resulting on four fractions after TLC analysis: DCM2-9-4-1-DCM2-9-4-4. Fraction DCM2-9-5 was chromatographed on silica gel column (hexane-acetone, 95 : 5), affording 38 fractions (10 mL), resulting in seven fractions after TLC analysis: DCM2-9-5-1 to DCM2-9-5-7. Fractions DCM2-9-3-2, DCM2-9-4-2 and DCM2-9-5-2 presented the same _R_f and, therefore, were joined to a single fraction. This fraction was submitted to preparative HPLC in hexane-acetone (95 : 5). After ten 35 min cycles, two peaks could be observed. The first one afforded **1**, the front part of the second one afforded **2** and the tail of the second peak afforded a mixture containing **2** and **3**.

_6-O-methyl inophylliadic acid methyl ester_ (**1**): yellow oil (8.6 mg). [a]D2 = +10.24 (CHCl3, \(c\) = 0.0062); _v_max. (cm-1): 2955 (CH3), 1738 (C=O), 1594 (C=C), 1447 (CH2), 1378 (CH3); _l_max. nm (log _e_): 254 (2.80), 289 (2.70), 365 (2.07); _d_H (CDCl3): see table 2; _d_C (CDCl3): see table 1.

_6-O-methyl isobrasilienic acid methyl ester_ (**2**): yellow oil (8.8 mg). [a]D2 = +57.58 (CHCl3, \(c\) = 0.0072); _v_max. (cm-1): 2928 (CH3), 1737 (C=O), 1594 (C=C), 1449 (CH2), 1377 (CH3); _l_max. nm (log _e_): 259 (3.06), 290 (3.04), 372 (2.40); _d_H (CDCl3): see table 2; _d_C (CDCl3): see table 1.

_6-O-methyl brasilienic acid methyl ester_ (**3**): mixture with **2** (11.9 mg): _d_C (CDCl3): see table 1.



## Page 6



## 3 Results and discussion

Chromatographic fractionation of DCM2 fraction from the dichloromethane extract of _C. brasiliense_ stem bark afforded nine fractions (DCM2-1 to DCM2-9). Diazomethane esterification of fraction DCM2-9 followed by exhaustive column chromatography on silica gel led to the isolation and identification of three chromanone acid _O_-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives **1**, **2**, and **3**, as discussed below

Inophylloidic, brasilienic and isobrasilienic acids were first isolated in 1968 [6] and the results re-examined and corrected in 1970 [7]. Although the structures were brilliantly deduced by chemical and spectroscopic means, 1H NMR data was precarious and 13C NMR data were not described at that time. Later, Ravelonjato and co-workers [14] compared those results with the ones they had obtained at 500 MHz for the homologous _O_-methoxy-methyl esters of caloverticillic acid A (**4**) (or its epimer, caloverticillic acid B). However, the positions of many 13C chemical shifts were not ascribed and some were wrongly attributed.

Two-dimensional NMR experiments reported in this article allowed a precise attribution of 13C and 1H NMR signals for _O_-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives **1**, **2**, and **3**. Table 1 shows the high similarity of the 13C chemical shifts attributed to compounds **1**, **2**, and **3**. The differences are related to the presence or not of a cyclobutane ring and double bond position at C-7 side chain (**a**), (**b**), and (**c**). HMBC experiments carried out in compounds **1** and **2** (figure 1) allowed the unequivocal attribution of the chemical shifts of carbonylic C-4 and C-8 carbons, inversely attributed in the literature [14].

Figure 2 shows the HMBC correlation that lead to the chemical shifts values of C-5, C-6, C-9, C-10, C-11, C-12, C-13, C-14, C-19, C-24, C-25, and C-27, not described to the homologous structure **4** in the literature [14]. Table 2 shows 400 MHz 1H NMR

## Page 7

data of compounds **1** and **2**, along with the 500 MHz NMR data obtained for the homologous compound **4**[14]. HMBC long range coupling (_J_3) allowed easy identification of C-22, C-23, C-30, C-32, and C-33 methyl groups. The coupling constant values [_J_2,3 = 9.6 Hz in compound **2** and 9.3 Hz in **1**] points to a _trans_ relationship between the chromanone ring methyl groups (C-17 and C-18), a common feature within the Clusiaceae family [15]. Additionally, the small coupling constant value (_J_24,25 = 2.5 Hz) for the diastereotopic proton H-24 (81.96 ppm), in compound **1**, suggests that C-25 is part of a rigid structure. The differences between the side chains in compounds **1** and **2**, are evidenced by the presence of an absorption at \(d\)4.90 ppm, due to the H-27 vinylic hydrogen in **2**, and another at \(d\)2.36 ppm, due to the H-27 methinic hydrogen in **1**. Furthermore, the allylic methyl group, at position 29, in compound **2** absorbs at \(d\)1.55 ppm while the absorptions at \(d\)4.77 and \(d\)4.51 ppm can be attributed to the H-29 terminal vinylic hydrogens in **(1)**. In the same way, vinylic

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} \hline
**C** & **3a** & **2a** & **1a** & **4b** \\ \hline
2 & 77.6 & 77.6 & 77.5 & 77.4 \\
3 & 48.5 & 48.6 & 48.6 & 48.5 \\
4 & 192.9 & 193.0 & 192

## Page 8

H-33 hydrogens in **2**, shows an absorption at \(\delta\)4.53 ppm, whereas methylic H-33 protons in **1** absorbs at \(\delta\)1.05 or 0.79 ppm. UV and IR data are fully consistent with literature [6-7,14].

## 4 Conclusion

Structural determination, by use of modern 2-D NMR techniques, of _O_-methoxy-methyl esters derivatives **1**, **2** and **3**, prepared from diazomethane esterification from inophylline, brasiliensis and isobrasiliensis acids, respectively,

Figure 2: HMBC correlation in **(1)** allowing attribution of \(\delta_{\rm C}\) not previously performed in homologous **4**.

Figure 1: HMBC correlation allowing unequivocal attribution to C-4 and C-8 in compound **1**.



## Page 9



## Page 10

allowed the full attribution of \({}^{13}\)C NMR chemical shifts, as well as their unequivocal assignments, complementing and correcting previous literature data [14].

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful to SUDAM, CNPq, IFS, and CAPES (scholarship to D. Caneppele) for financial support.

## References

* [1] N.T. Sartori, D.T.O. Martins, D. Caneppele, P.T. Sousa Jr. _J. Ethmopharmacol._, **67**, 149 (1999).
* [2] K.L. Silva, A.R.S. Santos, P.E.O. Matos, R.A. Yunes, F.D. Monache, V. Cechinel-Filho. _Therapie_, **56**, 431 (2001).
* [3] F.E. King, T.J. King. _J. Chem. Soc._, **2**, 4158 (1953).
* [4] O.R. Gottlieb, M.T. Magalhaes, M.O.S. Pereira, A.A.L. Mesquita, D.B. Correa, G.G. de Oliveira. _Tetrahedron_, **10**, 1601 (1968).
* [5] R.D. Plattner, G.F. Spencer, D. Weisleder, R. Kleimmana. _Pytochemistry_, **13**, 2597 (1974).
* [6] G.H. Stout, M.M. Krahn, G.D. Breck. _Terahedron. Lett._, **9**, 3285 (1968).
* [7] G.H. Stout, G.D. Breck. _Tetrahedron Lett._, **23**, 1999 (1970).
* [8] B.P. Sani, R.P.L. Narashih. _Indian Journal Chem._, **7**, 680 (1969).
* [9] J.B. Harbone, H. Baxter. _Pytochemical Dictionary. A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants_, 7. 791, Taylor & Francis Ltd., London (1993).
* [10] C. Ito, M. Itoigawa, Y. Mishina, V. Cechinel-Filho, T. Mukainaka, H. Tokuda, H. Nishino, H. Furukawa. _J. Nat. Prod._, **65**, 267 (2002).
* [11] C. Ito, M. Itoigawa, Y. Mishina, V. Cechinel-Filho, F. Enjo, H. Tokuda, H. Nishino, H. Furukawa. _J. Nat. Prod._, **66**, 368 (2003).
* [12] S. Kimura, C. Ito, N. Jyoko, H. Segawa, J. Kuroda, M. Okada, S. Adachi, T. Nakahata, T. Yuasa, V. Cechinel-Filho, H. Furukawa, T. Maekawa. _Int. J. Cancer._, **113**, 158 (2005).
* [13] F. Cottiglia, B. Dhanapal, O. Sticher, J. Heilmann. _J. Nat. Prod._, **67**, 537 (2004).
* [14] B. Ravelonjato, N. Kunesch, J. Poisson. _Pytochemistry_, **26**, 2973 (1987).
* [15] S.A. Amopo. Phytochemical Studies on Some Species of the Simaroubaceae, Burseraceae and the Guttiferae. PhD thesis, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow-UK (1985).



