# 10.1016@S0031-9422(00)84061-3.pdf

## Page 1



# ALKALOIDS OF _Aspidosperma pyrifolium_

A. A. Cravero

F. J. A. Matos

Leila M. Serur

# Abstract

Two new alkaloids have been isolated from root bark and leaves of _Aspidosperma pyrifolium_ and identified as (+)-aspidospermine and 6-demethoxypyrifoline.

## INTRODUCTION

Several studies on _Aspidosperma pyrifolium_ have reported the isolation of pyrifoline (1) [1, 2] and pyrifolidine (2) [1, 3] from trunk bark, and aspidofiline (3) [4, 5] from leaves. As part of a chemical and pharmacological screening of Brazilian plants a strong hypotensive effect of the crude alkaloids from root bark and leaves of _A. pyrifolium_ was detected on the arterial blood pressure of the dog.

As the roots of the plant have not been investigated before, it was decided to carry out a chemical investigation of these parts as well as to reinvestigate the alkaloids in the leaves because of their pharmacological properties.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

_A. pyrifolium_, a tree popularly known as 'pereiro-preto', is widely distributed in north-east Brazil. The plant studied was collected in Sobral, Ceara in August 1980. The crude alkaloids were isolated from an ethanolic extract of the leaves and three alkaloids were purified by prep. TLC on Si gel. The major alkaloid was identified as pyrifoline (1) by comparison of its 1H NMR and mass spectra with those recorded for pyrifoline previously isolated from the trunk bark of the same species [1, 2].

The second substance presented spectral data similar to pyrifoline, except for the absence in the 1H NMR spectrum of the aliphatic methoxyl peak (d 3.31), suggesting the structure 6-demethoxypyrifoline (4) for this alkaloid. The mass spectrum exhibited a M+ 352 in agreement with the molecular formula, C22H28N2O2, and peaks at _m/z_ 324 [M+-28]+, 309, 281, 124 and 109 (base peak) all characteristic of the aspidosperma alkaloid skeleton.

The third alkaloid was identified as asapidofiline (3) by analysis of spectral data and by comparison with an authentic sample.

From a chloroform extract of the roots was isolated aspidospermine identified by its spectral data (mass and 1H NMR spectra) and mp [6]. To establish the configuration of 6-demethoxypyrifoline (4), it was necessary to compare its ORD curve with similar data from (+)-pyridine with a known configuration [7]. The ORD curve of (+)-aspidospermine was also obtained and compared with data recorded for (-)-aspidospermine [8]. The three alkaloids exhibited positive Cotton effects and showed almost superimposable curves. From these observations it is possible to conclude that the as-pidospermine isolated from _A. pyrifolium_ belongs to the (+) series and that it is the antipodal isomer of the known (-)-aspidospermine (6). Determination of [a]\({}_{1}^{2}\)S gave a value of +92deg whereas the lit. value for the leavo isomer is -92deg. The occurrence of the new aspidosperma-type 6-demethoxypyrifoline could be biosynthetically associated with the presence of pyrifoline, which is the major base present in the leaves of _A. pyrifolium_.

Although the isolation of aspidospermine from _A. pyrifolium_ has already been reported [6], on the basis of its optical rotation it is now possible to report the natural occurrence of the dextrorotatory isomer for the first time.

In spite of the fact that (-)- and (+)-oubrachamine (7) are biosynthetic precursors of the aspidospermine skeleton presumably by C-12 - C-19 ring closure [9-11] it is surprising that only (-)-aspidospermine is reported in the lit. The present isolation of the dextro aspidospermine (5) gives a strong support for the above hypothesis.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Leaves of _A. pyrifolium_ Mart. (10 kg, dry wt) were extracted with EtOH in a Soxhlet apparatus. The EtOH extract was coned at 45-50deg in a rotatory evaporator. To the residue was added 1 N H2SO4 (500 ml) with stirring. The aa. phase was extracted with Et2O at different pH values (3,5,7,9 and 12). The Et2O extracts obtained at pH 9 and 12 were combined and coned under red. pres. giving 54 g of a dark residue. This residue (10_b_) was chromatographed on prep. Si gel H + PF234+366 (3:1) plates using C6H6-Me2CO-MeOH (9:2.5:1) as eluent. Three fractions of prepurified alkaloids were obtained. Each fraction was further chromatographed by prep. TLC at pH 6 with Pi buffer. From ca 500 plates were isolated three pure alkaloids (1 g each).

(+)-_Pyrifoline_ (1). White crystals from control, mp 138-140deg (lit. [1], 141-144deg) [a] = 105deg (lit. [1] a +102deg). IR \(\nu\)KR cm-1 : 2920, 1660, 1550, 1480, 1200, 1068, 750, 202 UV \(\nu\)KR\(\alpha\)nm cm-1 : 2818 (435), 260 (3.93), 284-292 (infl.) (3.50; \(\lambda

## Page 2

(12H, _m_), 2.11 (1H, _s_), 2.12 (COMe, _s_), 2.4-3.30 (5H, _m_), 3.31 (OMe, _s_), 3.81 (6-OMe, _s_), 6.8-7.1 (3Ar-H, _m_), MS, _m_/_z_ 382 [M]+, 354, 339, 310, 139, 154.

6-_Demethoxypyridine_ (4). White crystals from petrol, mp 121-1235, IR\(\nu_{\text{mag}}^{\text{KBr}}\) cm-1: 2920, 1660, 1590, 1215, 750 and 720. UV \(\nu_{\text{mag}}^{\text{HOH}}\) nm (log s): 216 (434), 259 (3

## Page 3

Budzikiewicz, H., Durham, L. J. and Djerassi, C. (1962) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 59.
* [3] Djerassi, C., Gilbert, B., Shoolery, J. N., Johnson, L. F. and Biemann, K. (1961) _Experientia_**17**, 162.
* [4] Antonaccio, L. D. (1960) _J. Org. Chem._**25**, 1262.
* [5] Djerassi, C., Owellen, R. J., Ferreira, J. M. and Antonaccio, L. D. (1962) _Experientia_**18**, 397.
* [6] Serrur, L. M. and Matos, F. J. A. (1981) _Rev. Lationam. Quim._**12**, 38.
* [7] Manske, R. H. F. (1968) _The Alkaloids_ Vol. XI, p. 244.
* [8] Klyne, W., Swan, R. J., Bycroft, B. W. and Schmid, H. (1966) _Helv. Chim. Acta_**49**, 833.
* [9] Djerassi, C., Archer, A. A. P. G., George, T., Gilbert, B. and Antonaccio, L. D. (1961) _Tetrahedron_**16**, 212.
* [10] Smith, G. F. and Wrobel, J. T. (1960) _J. Chem. Soc._ 1464.
* [11] Gilbert, B. (1966) _An Acad. Bras. Cienc._**38** (suppl.) 315.



