# 10.1016@0031-9422(91)85077-D.pdf

## Page 1



# Caffeic acid esters and triterpenes of _Alibertia macrophylla_

Vanderlan da S. Bolzani, Ligia M. V. Trevisan, M. Claudia M. Young

# Abstract

A hydroalcoholic extract of the leaves of _Alibertia macrophylla_ afforded the esters of caffeic acid and 2-phenylethanol or 2-methyl butane-1,4-diol. The leaves also contain caffeic acid. The acetone extract of the stems of _A. macrophylla_ contain _a_-amyrin, _b_-amyrin, _a_-amyrenone, _b_-amyrenone, lupeol, lupenone and germanicone. Structural assignments were taken through spectral data analysis and physical properties. This is the first report on the chemistry of _Alibertia_.

## Introduction

The economic and therapeutic importance of many species of Rubiaceae is well known in Brazil, where this family includes representatives belonging to 125 genera [1]. The region of Sao Paulo has ca 204 registered species; they are herbs, shrubs or trees growing in the forest and 'cerrado' [1]. _Alibertia macrophylla_ K. Schum was of interest for phytochemical studies as the presence of fungiotoxic constituents in a polar extract of its leaves has been shown [2, 3], also, no previous studies of _Alibertia_ have been undertaken. We report the isolation of caffeic acid and two of its esters from the leaves of _A. macrophylla_. We have also examined the stems of this species: _a_-amyrin, _b_-amyrin, _a_-amirenone, _b_-amirenone, lupeol, lupenone and germanicone were isolated and identified. The structural assignments for the two new natural derivatives of caffeic acid are presented and discussed.

## Results and discussion

The hydroalcoholic extract prepared from the leaves of _A. macrophylla_ showed, when submitted to TLC and bioassay with _Cladosporium sphaerospermum_, the presence of three zones of inhibition at _Rf_ 0.22, 0.36 and 0.65 [4]. By a combination of partition into solvent systems and chromatographic methods **1a**-e were isolated from a 40% ethanol extract. The spectral properties of **1b** and **c** showed these substances as esters of caffeic acid. A molecular ion peak at _m/z_ 284 was found for **1b** (C1*H16O4) and at _m/z_ 266 for 1c (C1*H18O5). The molecular formulae were also supported by the 11C NMR data (Table 1). The IR spectra of both compounds showed the presence of _a,b_-unsaturated ester carbonyl (1695, 1630 cm-1), aromatic rings (1610 and 1520 cm-1 and of hydroxyl groups (3350-3340 cm-1).

The 1H NMR spectra of **1a** and **1b** indicated aromatic protons as an ABX system (Table 2) and a pattern similar to that of caffeic acid is suggested. It is significant that the values summarized in Table 2 are in good agreement with those published for caffeic acid and its derivatives [5-8]. The main differences between **1b** and **c** seem to be related to the alcoholic portion of the esters and were clearly shown by 1H and 13C NMR data. For **1b**, the presence of a second aromatic ring bearing a two carbon lateral chain was suggested: the 1H NMR spectra showed a broad singlet (5H) at \(d\)7.24 and two triplets at \(d\)2.64 (_J_ = 7.5 Hz) and 3.68 (_J_ = 7.5 Hz) which can respectively be assigned to the benzilic and to the carbinolic protons of a 2-phenylethoxy unit. For **1c**, the following features were deduced from 1H NMR: the signals at \(d\)4.00 and 3.86 were assigned to four carbinolic protons and the doublet at 1.01 should correspond to the protons of a

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} C & **1a** & **1b** & **1c** \\
1 & 127.00 \(s\) & 127.76 \(s\) & 127.20 \(s\) \\
2 & 114.90 \(d\) & 114.36 \(d\) & 115.35 \(d\) \\
3 & 149.55 \(s\) & 148.81 \(s\) & 148.81 \(s\) \\
4 & 146.72 \(s\) & 145.85 \(s\) & 145.01 \(s\) \\
5 & 115.15

## Page 2

methyl group. The 13CNMR data supported the assignments of two carbonic carbons (d68.02 and 60.90, respectively). As expected, all the 13C NMR assignments are completely consistent with the proposed structures.

The caffeic acid esters 1b and c, as well as the parent compound **1a** were submitted to bioassay; 1e inhibited the growth of _Aspergillus niger_, _Cladosporium cladosporioides_, _C. sphaerospermum_ and _Colletotrichum gloosporioides_ and proved to correspond to the _Rf_ 0.22 zone. Caffeic acid and other hydroxycinnamic esters are reported to have an important function as protection against herbivores and pathogens [9]. The occurrence of **1a**-**c** in the leaves of _A. macrophyla_ would account for its fungitoxic properties.



## Page 3

The triterpenes **2a, b, 3a-c, 4a, b** were isolated after preparative thin layer chromatography of the hexane solubles obtained from the acetone extract of the stems of _A. macrophylla_. Their identifications were based on the comparison of physical and spectral data, mainly 13C NMR \(d\) values, with the values reported in the literature for _a_-amyrin, _a_-amyrrenone, _b_-amyrin, _b_-amyrrenone, germanicone, lupeol and lupenone [10-13] respectively.

## EXPERIMENTAL

_Plant material. Alibertia macrophylla_ was collected in the Estacao Ecologica e Experimental de Mogi-Guacu (SP), by Dr M. C. M. Young and identified by Dr Z. L. Jung-Mendacolli (Instituto de Botanica, Sao Paulo).

_Extraction and isolation of constituents._ Dried and powdered leaves (31d g) of _A. macrophylla_ were extracted with 40% EtOH-H2O. The extract, dissolved in MeOH-H2O (9:1) was partitioned into _n_-hexane, HCC13, and eHOAc. The EtOHac solubles (2 g) were resolved by CC (silica gel, HCC13-MeOH, increasing polarity) into 22 frs. **1b** (23 mg) was separated from frs 1-2 by prep. TLC [silica gel, _n_-hexane-EtOAc (1:1) + 0.5% HOAc]. Fr. 11 submitted to prep. TLC (silica gel, CHCl3-EtO, 3:1) yielded **1a** (6.5 mg). Fr. 12s 12s 12s after prep. TLC [silica gel, CHCl3-MeOH (7:3) + 2% HOAc] afforded 1(12 mg).

The acetone extract of the stems (160 g) of _A. macrophylla_ was also examined. After partition into the system MeOH-H2O (9:1)-_n_-hexane, the hexane solubles (660 mg) submitted to prep. TLC (n-hexane-EtOAc, 4:1) led to the separation of _a_- and _b_-amyrin (2a + 3a, 198 mg). luppened (**4a**, 20 mg), luppened (**4b**, 80 mg), _a_-amirene (**2b**, 27 mg), _b_-amirene (**3b**, 23 mg) and germanicone (3c, 39 mg).

_2-Phenylethyl caffeine_ (1b). Guml \(\lambda_{\text{mean}}^{\text{mean}}\) nm (log _e_): 332 (4.18), 218 (4.11), 203 (4.34). MS _m_/_z_ (rel int.): 284 (100), 179 (145) (100), 147 (600), 105 (207, 274) (103 (cm) + 13340, 1695, 1630, 1610, 1520; 1H NMR 200 MHz, (CD3)_C0 see Table 2. 13C NMR [50:1 MHz, (CD3)_C0] see Table 1.

_2-Methyl-4-hydroxy-butyl caffeine_ (1c). Guml, [_a_]25 + 83.2deg (MeOH; c:0.74); MS _m_/_z_ (rel int.): 266 (5), 165 (59), 135 (25), 87 (51), 69 (100), IR \(\nu_{\text{min}}^{\text{min}}\) cm - 1: 3350, 1655, 1630, 1610, 1590, 1520.

\({}^{1}\)H NMR [200 MHz, CD3)2O] see Table 1, 13C NMR [50:1 MHz, (CD3)2O] see Table 2.

_Acknowledgements--_ The authors wish to thank Dr M. Yoshida and Mr. L. C. Roque Universidade de Sao Paulo for 1H and 13C NMR spectra. V. da S. Bolzani and M. C. M. Young are grateful to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico for research fellowships.

## References

* [1] Angeli, J. (1970) _Flora Analitica e Fitogeografica do Estado de Sao Paulo_, 1st Edn, p. 767. Phyton Ed., Sao Paulo.
* [2] Braga, M. R. (1988) M.Sc. Thesis. Instituto de Biocincias, USP, Sao Paulo.
* [3] Young, M. C. M., Braga, M. R., Dietrich, S. M. and Gottlieb, H. E. (1989) _Citenc. Cult._ 41 (7, suppl.) 490.
* [4] Homans, A. L. and Fuchs, A. (1970) _J. Chromatog._ 51, 327.
* [5] Kelley, C. J., Mahajan, J. R., Brooks, L. C., Neubert, L. A., Brememan, W. R. and Carmack, M. (1975) _J. Org. Chem._ 40, 1804.
* [6] Kelley, C. J., Harruff, C. R. and Carmack, M. (1976) _J. Org. Chem._ 41, 449.
* [7] Sticher, O. and Lahloub, M. F. (1982) _Plania Med._ 46, 145.
* [8] Andary, C., Wilde, R., Laffitte, C., Privat, G. and Winternitz, F. (1982) _Photochemistry_ 21, 1123.
* [9] Molgaard, P. and Rava, H. (1988) _Photochemistry_ 27, 2411.
* [10] Seo, S., Tomita, Y. and Tori, K. (1975) _Tetrahedron Letters_ 7.
* [11] Wenkert, E., Baddeley, G. V., Burfitt, I. R. and Moreno, L. N. (1978) _Org. Magn. Reson._ 11, 337.
* [12] Gonzalez, A. G., Fraga, B. M., Gonzalez, P., Hernandez, M. G. and Ravelo, A. G. (1981) _Photochemistry_ 20, 1919.
* [13] Bhattacharya, J. and Barros, C. B. (1986) _Photochemistry_ 25, 274.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} H & Ia & **1b** & **1c** \\
1 & — & — & — \\
2 & 7.02 \(d\) (2.0) & 7.13 \(d\) (1.0) & 7.20 \(d\) (1.0) \\
3 & — & — & — \\
4 & — & — & — \\
5 & 6.75 \(d\) (8.0) & 6.83 \(d\) (8.0) & 6.85 \(d\) (8.0) \\
6 & 6.98 \(d\) (2.0, 8.0) & 7.07 _d_d_ (8.0, 2.0) & 7.05 _d_d

