# 10.1016@j.cbi.2010.08.008.pdf

## Page 1



# Casearin X exhibits cytotoxic effects in leukemia cells triggered by apoptosis

Paulo M. Pinheiro Ferreira, Andre G. Santos, Aristeu G. Tininis, Patricia M. Costa, Alberto J. Cavalheiro, Vanderlan S. Bolzani, Manoel O. Moraes, Leticia V. Costa-Lotufo, Raquel C. Montenegro, Claudia Pessoa

# Abstract

Clerodane diterpenes have demonstrated cytotoxic; antiplasmodial and anti-ulcer properties. In the present work, we determined the cytotoxic effect of casearin L (Cas L), O (Cas O) and X (Cas X) and (--)-hardwickic acid isolated from _Casearin sylvestris_ leaves, and investigated the underlying mechanisms involved in _in vitro_ cell death induced by Cas X in HL-60 leukemia cells (0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 mM). Cytotoxicity tests demonstrated that Cas X was the most active compound studied, showing greater cytotoxic effects against CEM and HL-60 lines (Isc\({}_{50}\) of 0.4 mM) and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC, Isc\({}_{50}\) of 1.2 mM). After 24th exposure, Cas X caused a decrease in 5-bromo-20-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation (36.6 and 24.5% labeling at 0.7 and 1.5 mM, respectively), reduction in viability, and increase in apoptotic and necrotic leukemia cells in a dose-dependent manner evidenced by the trypan blue and _A_O/EB (acridine orange/ethidium bromide) assays. Moreover, Cas X-treated cells exhibited nuclear fragmentation and cytoplasmic vacuolization depending on the concentration tested. These characteristics of apoptosis or secondary necrosis were confirmed by flow cytometry which revealed DNA fragmentation, phosphatidylserine externalization, activation of the effector caspases 3/7 and mitochondrial depolarization. We then found evidence that Cas X causes cell death via apoptotic pathways, corroborating the potential of casearins as compounds with promising antitumor-related properties.

## Introduction

Cancer is a pathological consequence with multifactorial causes such as mutations in specific genes (proto-oncogenes/tumor suppressors) or post-translational modifications of proteins, where key events can increase cancer risk and lead to uncontrolled proliferation [1]. Chemotherapy remains the most important line of defense for patients with hematological malignancies and aggressive forms of solid tumors. However, drug toxicity and efficacy vary widely among these patients [2]. Many drugs normally kill cancer cells by inducing either apoptosis or necrosis, two forms of cell death with distinct morphological and biochemical features [3-5]. In this scenario, plant compounds have made valuable contributions to the discovery of new naturally occurring anticancer agents, especially those from tropical and sub-tropical regions of the world [6].

#### Casearia sylvestris

Swartz (Salicaceae), a medicinal tree that grows practically throughout the entire Brazilian territory from Amazonas State (Tapajos River region) to Rio Grande do Sul State [7,8], is popularly known as "guacatonga," "cafezinho-do-mato," "cafe-Silvestre" and "erva-de-bugre." Its leaves are used for treating traumas, for skin and oral wound healing and as a topical anesthetic and antiseptic [7,9]. _In vitro_ and pre-clinical studies have highlighted its anti-inflammatory [10-12], antimicrobial [13-15], antiplasmodial [16], and anti-ulcer [11,17,18] properties.

Phytochemical investigations of _C. sylvestris_ leaf extracts have led to the discovery of bioactive clerodanes, the casearins and casearvestrins, which are oxygenated tricyclic diterpenes with excellent cytotoxic and antitumor potential [14,19,20-22]. Despite their well-known antiproliferative actions, there are no studies showing how these diterpenes cause cell death, although Huang et al. [23] have suggested that clerodane diterpenes isolated from _Casearia membranacea_ induce apoptosis in PC-3 cells (human prostate tumor line).



## Page 2

In this work, we determined the cytotoxic activity of clerodane diterpenes [casearins L (Cas L), O (Cas O) and X (Cas X) and (-)-hardwickiic acid isolated from C. _sylvestris_ leaves and investigated the cytotoxic effects of Cas X on HL-60 leukemia cells and the underlying mechanisms involved in its _in vitro_ cytotoxic action.

## Material and methods

### Plant material and structure determination

Leaves of _C. sylvestris_ were collected at the Parque Estadual Carlos Botelho (Sao Miguel Arcanjo, Sao Paulo, Brazil) in March and July 2004. Voucher specimens were deposited at the Herbarium 'Maria Eneida P. Kaufmann' (Instituto Botanico do Estado de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil) with the reference numbers AGS04, AGS05, AGS06, AGS13 and AGS19. The plant material was identified by Dr. lines Cordiero (Instituto Botanico do Estado de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil). Dried and powdered leaves of _C. sylvestris_ were extracted with ethanol in a stainless steel extractor with solvent teruka for ca. 24 h at 40 degC. The crude extract was concentrated under reduced pressure (rotary evaporator) and dried in desiccators over silica gel under reduced pressure to yield a dry residue.

The structure of the compounds caearins L, O, X and (-)-hardwickiic acid was determined from spectrometric data (nuclear magnetic resonance, ultraviolet, infrared and mass spectrometry) and by comparison with spectral information available in Santos et al. [21] and Santos et al. [22].

### Cytotoxicity against tumor cell lines

The cytotoxicity of the clerodane diterpenes [(Cas L, Cas O, Cas X and (-)-hardwickiic acid)] was evaluated by the MTT assay [24] against 3 human leukemia cell lines: HL-60, K-562 and GEM, all obtained from the National Cancer Institute (NCI, Bethesda, MD, USA). Cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin, at 37 degC with 5% CO2. By an indirect way, tumor cell proliferation was quantified through the ability of living cells to reduce the yellow dye 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) to a purple formazan product [24]. Briefly, cells were plated in 96-well plates and diterpenes (0.01-10 uM) were added to wells. After 69 h of incubation, the supernatant was replaced by fresh medium containing MTT 10%. Three hours later, the MTT formazan product was dissolved in 150 uLDMSO and absorbance was measured at 595 nm (DTX 880, Beckman Coulter). Doxorubicin (Dox, Sigma Aldrich) was used as a positive control (0.02-8.6 uM).

To avoid false proliferation data, the experiments were performed in triplicate and the proliferation rate was always compared to negative controls. In all replicates, similar inhibition rates and cell proliferation in negative control wells were higher than in the treated wells.

### Alamar Blue assay

In order to investigate the selectivity of Cas X for normal proliferating cells, the Alamar Blue(tm) assay was performed with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) after 72 h drug exposure. All studies were performed in accordance with Brazilian research guidelines (Law 196/96, National Council of Health).

Heparinized blood (from healthy, non-smoker donors who had not taken any drug for at least 15 days prior to sampling, aged between 18 and 30 years old) was collected, and PBMC were isolated by a standard method of density-gradient centrifugation over Ficoll-Hypaque. PBMC were washed and resuspended at a concentration of 3 x 105 cells/mL in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 u/mL streptomycin at 37 degC with 5% CO2. Phytohemagglutinin (4%) was added at the beginning of culture, according to Cavancanti et al. [25] with some modifications. PBMC were then plated in 96-well plates (3 x 105 cells/well in 100 uL of medium). After 24 h, the test compound (0.01-10 uM) dissolved in 1% DMSO was added to each well, and the cells were incubated for another 72 h. Dox (0.02-8.6 uM) was used as positive control. Control groups received the same amount of DMSO. Twenty-four hours before the end of the incubation, 10 uL of stock solution (0.312 mg/mL) of Alamar Blue (Resazurin, Sigma Aldrich Co) were added to each well. The absorbance was measured using a multiple reader (DTX 880 Multimode Detector, Beckman Coulter(r)), and the drug effect was quantified as the percentage of control absorbance at 570 nm and 595 nm. The absorbance of Alamar Blue in culture medium is measured at a higher wavelength and a lower wavelength. The absorbance of medium only is also measured at the higher and lower wavelengths. The absorbance of the medium alone is subtracted from the absorbance of medium plus Alamar Blue at the higher wavelength. This value is called AOHW. The absorbance of the medium alone is subtracted from the absorbance of medium plus Alamar Blue at the lower wavelength. This value is called AOHW. A correction factor R0 can be calculated from AOHW and AOHW, where \(R\)0 = AOHW/AOHW. The percent Alamar Blue reduced is then expressed as follows: % Reduced = _A_LW - (_A_HW \(R\)0) x 100.

### Evaluation of mechanism involved in leukemia cell (HL-60) cytotoxicity

The following experiments were performed in order to investigate the mechanism involved in the cytotoxic effect of Cas X. The doses were chosen based on IC50 values of Cas X in HL-60 cells after 24-h exposure. Cas X dissolved in sterile DMSO was added to HL-60 cell cultures (0.3 x 106 cells/mL) to obtain final concentrations of 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 uM (IC50/2, IC50 and 2 x IC50, respectively). Dox, 0.6 uM, was used as a positive control.

#### Trypan blue exclusion

Cell viability was determined by the trypan blue exclusion assay [26]. Aliquots from each well were removed from cultures after 24 h of incubation and cells were scored in a Neubauer chamber.

#### Inhibition of DNA synthesis

HL-60 cells were plated in 24-well tissue culture plates (2 mL/well) and treated with Cas X. Before the end of drug exposure, 20 uL of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU, 10 mM) were added to each well and the cells incubated for another 3 h at 37 degC. To determine the amount of BrdU incorporated into DNA, cells were harvested, transferred to cytospin slides, and allowed to dry for 2 h at room temperature [27]. Cells that had incorporated BrdU were labeled by direct peroxidase immunocytochemistry, using the chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB). Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, mounted, and coverslipped. The determination of BrdU positivity was performed by light microscopy (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Two hundred cells were counted per slide to determine the percentage of BrdU-positive cells.

#### Staining with hematoxylin-eosin

Untreated or Cas X-treated HL-60 cells were examined for morphological changes by light microscopy (Metrimpex Hungary/PZO-Labimex Modelo Studar Lab(r)). To evaluate morphology, cells were harvested, transferred to cytospin slides, fixed with methanol for 1 min and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H8E, Sigma Aldrich Co. - St. Louis, MO/USA).



## Page 3



#### 2.4.4 Morphological analysis using fluorescence microscopy

Acridine orange/ethidium bromide (AO/EB) staining of HL-60 cells was performed to determine the cell death pattern induced by increasing concentrations of Cas X. Although AO and EB are DNA intercalating molecules, the first is able to cross intact membranes and confers green appearance to the nucleus of viable cells. On the other hand, EB is incorporated mainly by non-viable cells or in the presence of membrane instability, staining nucleus in red [28]. So, after 24 h of incubation, cells were pelleted, and each sample was mixed with 1 mL of aqueous AO/EB solution (100 mg/mL of AO in PBS; 100 mg/mL EB in PBS) just prior to fluorescence microscopy analysis and quantification (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Three hundred cells were counted per sample and scored as follows: viable cells, apoptotic cells and necrotic cells [29].

#### 2.4.5 Flow cytometry analysis

All flow cytometry analyses were performed in a Guava EasyCytre Mine using Guava Express Plus software. Five thousand events were evaluated per experiment and cell debris was omitted from the analysis.

##### 2.4.5.1 Cell membrane integrity

Cell membrane integrity was evaluated by the exclusion of propidium iodide (50 mg/mL, Sigma Aldrich Co. - St. Louis, MO/USA). Briefly, 100 mL of treated and untreated cells were incubated with propidium iodide (50 mg/mL). The cells were then incubated for 5 min. Fluorescence was measured and cell morphology, granularity and membrane integrity were determined [30].

##### 2.4.5.2. Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation

Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation was evaluated by the incorporation of propidium iodide (50 mg/mL). Briefly, HL-60 cells were treated and then incubated at 25 degC for 30 min, in the dark, in a lysis solution containing 0.1% citrate, 0.1% Triton X-100 and 50 mg/mL propidium iodide. Fluorescence was measured and DNA fragmentation was analyzed [31].

##### 2.4.5.3. Measurement of mitochondrial transmembrane potential

Mitochondrial depolarization was evaluated by incorporation of rhodamine 123 (Sigma Aldrich Co. - St. Louis, MO/USA). Rhodamine 123 is a cell-permeable, cationic, fluorescent dye that is readily sequestered by active mitochondria without inducing cytotoxic effects. Briefly, cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in 200 mL of 1 mg/mL rhodamine 123 for 15 min in the dark. After incubation, cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in 200 mL in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Fluorescence was measured and percentage mitochondrial depolarization was determined [29].

##### 2.4.5.4. Phosphatidylserine (PS) externalization

PS externalization was demonstrated by flow cytometry after PS staining with annexin V according to the method described by Vermes et al. [32]. Briefly, cells were washed twice with cold PBS and then resuspended in 135 mL of PBS with 5 mL of 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD) and 10 mL of annexin V-PE (Guava Nexin Assay Kit). The cells were gently vortexed and incubated for 20 min at room temperature (20-25 degC) in the dark. Afterward, the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (EasyCytre from Guava Technologies). Annexin V is a phospholipid-binding protein that has a high affinity for PS. 7-AAD, a cell impermeant dye, is used as an indicator of membrane structural integrity. Fluorescence of annexin V-PE was measured at 583 nm (yellow fluorescence) and 7-AAD at 680 nm (red fluorescence). The percentages of early and late apoptotic cells and necrotic cells were then calculated.

##### 2.4.5.5. Detection of caspases 3 and 7

Caspase 3/7 activity was estimated by flow cytometry, using the Guava EasyCytre Caspase Kit, after 24 h of incubation. HL-60 cells (3 x 105 cells/mL) were incubated with Fluorescent Labeled Inhibitor of Caspases (FLICA) and maintained for 1 h at 37 degC and 5% CO2. After incubation, 80 mL of washing buffer were added and cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 200 mL of washing buffer and centrifuged again. The cells were then resuspended in the working solution (propidium iodide 1:200 in 1x washing buffer) and analyzed immediately by flow cytometry.

### Statistical analysis

For cytotoxicity studies, the IC50 values and their 95% confidence intervals were obtained by nonlinear regression using the GraphPad program (Intuitive Software for Science, San Diego, CA). In order to determine differences, data were compared by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the Newman-Keuls test (_p_ < 0.01).

## Results

### Cytotoxicity against tumor and normal cells

Cytotoxicity analyses by MTT after 72 h of incubation displayed that Cas X was the most active clerodane diterpene (Table 1), showing higher cytotoxic effects against CEM and HL-60 cells with IC50 values of 0.4 mM for both cell lines. Interestingly, K-562 cells were more resistant to Cas X, displaying an IC50 of 9 mM. On the other hand, caesarins L and O were moderately cytotoxic while (-)-hardwickiic acid was ineffective in inhibiting cell proliferation. PBMC assay showed IC50 values of 1.2 (1.0-1.4) mM and 1.5 (1.1-2.0) mM for Cas X and Dox, respectively.

All following experiments were performed with HL-60 cells to investigate the mechanism of action of Cas X.

### Cell viability, DNA synthesis and morphological changes

HL-60 cells treated with Cas X had significantly reduced cell viability and increased number of non-viable cells (_p_ < 0.01), showing a dose-dependent effect after 24 h of exposure (Fig. 1A).

Aiming to understand the antiproliferative effect of Cas X, BrdU incorporation into the DNA was measured. All experiments were performed in three concentrations (0.7, 1.5 and 3 mM), but the highest one did not allow a confident cell analysis after treatment,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c} Cell line & Compound − IC50 μM/mL (μM)a \\ (−)-Hardwickiic acid & Casearin L & Casearin O & Casearin X & Doxorbitcin \\ (−) & 55(15.5) & 2.7 (5.2).2–1.3–4. & 2.6 (4.3).2–3.0 & 0.2 (0.4).0–2.0–3.0 & 0.02 (0.04).0–0.02–0.03 \\ HL-60 & 35(15.5) & >5 (15.5) & 3.3 (5.6).2–6.42 & 0.2 (0.4).0–1.0–2.0 & 0.02 (0.04).01–0.02 \\ K-562 & >5(15.5) & 2.5 (4.8).1–1.5–5. & 3.0 (5.1).2–4.2 & 4.8 (9.0).2–6.8–7.0 & 0.14 (0.24).09–0.23 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Cytotoxicity activity of clerodane diterpenes on human leukemia cell lines after 72 h of exposure evaluated by MTT assay.



## Page 4

probably because the concentration of 3uM is too higher, leading to destabilization of the plasma membrane and severe cell destruction, interfering in the morphological examination required by the method [33]. As seen in Fig. 1B, Cas X led to decreasing BrdU incorporation, with 36.6 and 24.5% labeling in relation to control at 0.7 and 1.5 uM, respectively (_p_ < 0.01), while Dox (0.6 uM) led to 26.5% BrdU labeling.

To establish whether the growth inhibition displayed by Cas X was related to the induction of apoptosis and/or necrosis, treated cells were analyzed using AO/EB staining by fluorescence microscopy and the numbers of viable, apoptotic and necrotic cells were determined. After treatment, there was a reduction in the number of viable cells in a dose-dependent manner, while apoptotic and necrotic cells increased (_p_ < 0.01) (Fig. 1C). Apoptosis was observed at the lower doses of 0.7 and 1.5 uM (82 and 88.1%, respectively), while at the highest dose, 3.0 uM, necrosis was the main cell death pattern (77.7%).

Treated and untreated cells were examined under light microscopy following H/E staining. Control cells exhibited a typical non-adherent, round morphology with vacuolization (Fig. 2A), while Cas X-treated cells displayed a gradual chromatin condensation and fragmentation, vacuolization of the cytoplasm, cell shrinking and destabilization of the plasma membrane (Fig. 2C-E), especially at 1.5 uM (Fig. 2E). Dox (0.6 uM) induced a reduction in cell volume, along with nuclear disintegration and destabilization of the plasma membrane (Fig. 2B).

### Mechanism of action underlying Cas X cytotoxicity - flow cytometry analysis

#### Membrane disruption

Cas X induced plasma membrane disruption in HL-60 cells in a dose-dependent manner (_p_ < 0.01, Fig. 3A), whereas at 1.5 uM (5.8%) and 3.0 uM, 24.6% of the cells showed membrane lysis when compared to untreated cells (1.4%). Doxorubicin, positive control, also caused membrane disruption (7.4%).

#### Mithochondrial DNA fragmentation

Mitochondrial depolarization is a feature of apoptosis. HL-60 treated cells (Fig. 3C) showed mitochondrial depolarization at all concentrations tested: 23.2, 68.8 and 21.8%, for 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 uM, respectively. It is important to note that at the highest concentration (3.0 uM) a false mitochondrial repolarization occurred, which can be explained by severe cell destruction [33].

#### Mithochondrial depolarization

Caspase 3/7 activation was found with all concentrations tested (Fig. 3D). Early apoptotic cells were observed with 3.0 uM Cas X (17.3%). Meanwhile, an increase in late apoptosis (13.3, 27.7 and 10.8%) and necrosis (6.4, 6.9 and 6.1%) was observed in cells treated with 1.5 uM and 3.0 uM Cas X and Dox, respectively (_p_ < 0.01). No differences were observed at the lowest concentration of Cas X (0.7 uM).

#### Mithophatidylserine externalization

Phosphatidylserine (PS) detection is a hallmark of apoptosis; PS resides on the surface of the plasma membrane, where cell damage leads to its externalization [32]. Cells treated with Cas X at all concentrations displayed PS externalization (_p_ < 0.01, Fig. 4). The number of early apoptotic cells increased in a dose-dependent manner [10.1, 18.4 and 38.4% for cells treated with Cas X at 0.7 (Fig. 4C), 1.5 (Fig. 4D) and 3.0 uM (Fig. 4E), respectively]. Meanwhile, late apoptosis was more frequent at 1.5 and 3.0 uM (17.8 and 39.6%, respectively).

## 4 Discussion

Drug discovery from medicinal plants has played an important role in cancer chemotherapy. Of all the available anticancer drugs between 1940 and 2002, 40% were natural products _per_ se or natural product-derived [34,35]. Nevertheless, many cancer patients fail chemotherapy, either because of undesired side effects or multi-drug resistance [2]. Therefore, it is very important to find new compounds with antineoplastic activity with more specificity against cancer cells and thus fewer side effects. In this way, _Casearia_ species have a wide range of biological activities [11,24,36,37] that make it a probable source of new active compounds with anticancer properties. In the present work, the cytotoxic effect of the clerodane diterpenes (-)-hardwickiic acid and casearins L, O and X isolated

Fig. 1: Effects of Caesarin X (Cas X 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 μM) on HL-60 leukemia cells after 24 h of incubation. A – Viability determined by trypan blue staining; B – BrdU (5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine) incorporation; C – Cell death pattern determined by acridine orange and ethidium bromide-staining (AO/EB). Negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 μM) was used as positive control (D). Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (S.E.M) from three independent experiments; \(p\) < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student–Newman–Keuls test.



## Page 5

from _C. sylvestris_ leaves was determined in three leukemia lines (CEM, HL-60 and K-562). Also, the cytotoxicity of Cas X was investigated in normal PBM proliferating cells. The underlying mechanism of action of Cas X was further evaluated using the HL-60 cell line as a model [33,38].

MTT assays showed that all compounds tested were active against at least one cell line, where Cas X was the most active against HL-60 and CEM cell lines. PBMC were also sensitive to Cas X but 3-fold less than the leukemia cells. Only (-)-hardwickiic acid showed no cytotoxicity against the leukemia cell lines. Several authors have demonstrated that clerodane diterpenes, secondary metabolites present in _Casearia_ species, are cytotoxic to different tumor cell lines, such as colon (HCT-116), leukemia (HL-60), ovarian (A2780), prostate (PC-3), and normal fibroblasts (L-929, V-79) [14,22,37,39,40,41]. More recently, we demonstrated the cytotoxic capacity of the Cas X against leukemia (MOLT-4, IC50 value of 0.22 mM), melanoma (MDA/MB-435, 0.35 mM), nervous system (SF-295, 0.43 mM), and colon (HCT-8, 0.97 mM) cancer cells [22]. Concerning chemotherapeutic potential, it is important to determine if the compound shows harmful effects in normal dividing cells such as proliferating leukocytes [42]. Herein, the data institute a narrow selectivity of Cas X towards cancer cells, though we previously showed that Cas X was up to 12-fold more selective against adherent cancer lines when compared to normal fibroblasts [22].

Structural comparison of known casearins revealed that the main differences in activity involve substitutions at C-2, C-6, C-7, C-18 and C-19. Replacement of the acyl group at C-6 markedly decreases activity of the derivatives, indicating that the bulkiness at that site is important for biological activity [20]. Cytotoxic effects of casein L, O and X seem to depend on the ring structure formed by carbons C-18 and C-19, since acid hydrolysis and opening of this ring leads to molecular instability and loss of bioactivity [37] as seen with (-)-hardwickiic acid, which does not inhibit cell proliferation (Fig. 5). Moreover, (-)-hardwickiic acid was one of the first differences reported in \(C\) sylvestris without the typical highly oxygenated backbone [21]. Many of the clerodanes that are highly oxygenated exhibit effective insect antifeedant, antibacterial, cytotoxic and antifungal properties [14,41,43].

The antiproliferative effects of Cas X in leukemia cells were confirmed by the trypan blue exclusion assay, BrdU incorporation and flow cytometry. Furthermore, morphological analysis using HE and AO/BE staining after 24 h of incubation revealed that treated cells displayed typical apoptotic and necrotic features, including signs

Fig. 2: Morphology of untreated and Casearin X-treated HL-60 cells after 24 h of incubation. A – Control; B – Doxorubicin 0.6 μM; C, D and E – Casearin X 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 μM, respectively. Black arrow: chromatin condensation and shrinkage; White arrow: vacuoles in the cytoplasm; White dashed arrow: plasma membrane disintegration. H&E staining. Magnification, ×400.



## Page 6

of extensive destabilization of the plasma membrane, reduction in cell volume, intense karyorrhexis (nuclear fragmentation) and pyknotic nuclei typical of necrotic processes, suggesting rapid activation of apoptosis pathways that culminate in the induction of necrosis. In fact, Cas X-treated cells displayed apoptotic features concentrations as low as 0.7 uM with an increase in necrotic cells at 3.0 uM, probably as a result of a later apoptosis stage.

Generally, apoptotic cells simultaneously show membrane integrity and high rates of DNA fragmentation [5]. Since PI enters the cells only if the membrane becomes permeable, it is widely

Fig. 4: Analyses of phosphatidylinositolserine externalization performed with Annexin V and 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-A\(\cdot\)AD) in HL–60 cells treated with Casearin X [Cas 0.7 (C), 1.5 (D) and 3.0 μM (E)] and determined by flow cytometry after 24 h exposure. Negative control (A) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance (Control). Oxonorubicin (0.6 uM, B) was used as positive control (Dox), Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (S.E.M) from three independent experiments. \(p\) < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls test.

Fig. 3: Flow cytometry analysis of Casearin X (Cas X 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 μM) effects on leukemia HL–60 cells. A – Cell membrane integrity evaluated by the exclusion of propidium iodide; B – DNA fragmentation evaluation by nuclear fluorescence using propidium iodide, Triton X-100 and citrate; C – Mitochondrial transmembrane potential determined by rhodamine 123 interaction; D – Activation of caspase-3 and -7 incubated with FLUXaM solution. Negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Oxonorubicin (0.6 μM) was used as positive control (D), Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (S.E.M) from three independent experiments. \(p\) < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student–Newman–Keuls test.



## Page 7

used to measure plasma membrane integrity and to discriminate between primary and secondary necrosis. Also, a critical stage of apoptosis involves the acquisition of surface changes by dying cells, which trigger their specific recognition and removal by phagocytes, where the latter could eventually prevent potential tissue injury resulting from cell lysis _in situ_[44]. This cell engulfment is signaled by externalization of PS, a phospholipid predominantly observed on the inner surface facing the cytosol [32]. If apoptosis is activated, PS on the external leaflet of the lipid bilayer can be detected using annexin V, a 35-kDa Ca2+-binding protein, with high affinity for PS. The lower dose effects observed after Cas X treatment were membrane integrity, mitochondrial depolarization, DNA fragmentation and PS externalization, all features of apoptosis. As a nuclear feature of apoptosis, the internucleosomal fragmentation of double-stranded DNA is attributed to caspases, cysteine aspartate-specific proteases synthesized as zymogens that cleave different proteins, such as caspase-3, the major effector caspase that predominantly disintegrates laminin and nuclear mitotic apparatus proteins [45]. With increasing concentration of Cas X, necrosis features such as loss of membrane integrity, loss of mitochondrial depolarization, and caspase 3/7 highly activated were observed after Cas X treatment. These data confirm those obtained with morphological approaches (trypan blue exclusion and AO/EB and H&E staining) in which dose-dependent effects were observed, suggestive of secondary necrosis or late apoptosis.

Secondary necrosis occurs when apoptotic cells cannot maintain ATP production or control oxidative stress [46]. Dose-dependent regulation of cellular processes is one of the most important characteristics of signaling molecules naturally occurring in cells. Therefore, depending on the concentration used, many different processes may be influenced and/or altered [47]. The data presented here are at odds with a previous work by Carvalho et al. [13] who demonstrated that casearins G, S and T displayed DNA damage via acetylation in _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ mutants. Our findings are also in agreement with those of Huang et al. [23] who discovered that caseamenbrins A-F, clerodane diterpenes isolated from _C. membranacea_ leaves, are able to activate caspase-8 and -9 in PC-3 cells.

In conclusion, the data presented in this work demonstrate that casearins L, O and X have a strong cytotoxic effect on leukemia cell lines, while (-)-hardwickic acid does not, which is probably related to the highly oxygenated backbone present in the casearins and absent in (-)-hardwickic acid. Also, we provide strong evidence that Cas X exerts its cytotoxic effect through induction of apoptosis, which emphasizes the potential of casearins as compounds with promising antitumor-related properties and as interesting lead molecules for the design of new anticancer drugs.

## Conflicts of interest statement

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments

We wish to thank CNPq, Instituto Claude Bernard, FAPESP, FUNCAP, and FINEP for the financial support. We are grateful to Silvana Franca dos Santos and Maria de Fatima Teixeira for technical assistance and Dr. A. Leyva for his help with English editing of the manuscript.

## References

* (1) C.C. Benz, C. Yau, Ageing, oxidative stress and cancer: paradigms in parallax. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8 (2008) 875-879.
* (2) C. Jayson, J. Harris, How participants in cancer trials are chosen: ethics and conflicting interests, Nat. Rev. Cancer 6 (2006) 330-336.
* (3) J.F.R. Kerr, A.H. Wyllie, A.R. Currie, Apoptosis: a basic morphological phenomenon with wide range implications in tissue kinetics. Br. J. Cancer 26 (1972) 239-257.
* (4) J.M. Chervitz, M.E. van, Methods for detecting and quantifying apoptosis, Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 36 (1998) 259-278.
* (5) G. Denecker, D. Vercammen, M. Steemans, T. Vanden Berghe, G. Brouckaert, G. Van Loo, B. Zhivotovsky, W. Fiers, J. Groetten, W. Decders, P. Vandenbeele, Death receptor-induced apoptotic and necrotic cell death: differential role of caspases and mitochondria, Cell Death Diff. 8 (2001) 829-840.
* (6) G.M. Cragg, D.J. Newman, Plants as a source of anti-cancer agents, J. Ethnoharmachol. 100 (2005) 72-79.
* (7) R.R. Torres, K. Yamamoto, Taxonomina das epxplcies de Csorgant Jacq, (Flacourciancec) de Csorgant Jacq, (Fl

## Page 8

* [22] A.G. Santos, P.M.P. Ferreira, G.M. Vieira-Jorinc, C.C. Perez, A.G. Tinnis, G.H. Silva, V.S. Bolzani, L.V. Costa-Lotufo, C. Pessoa, A.J. Cavalheiro, Caserain X. its degradation product and other clerodane dieterpens from leaves of _Caseria sybertysis_: evaluation of cytotoxicity against normal and tumour human cells, Chem. Biol.y. 7 (2010) 205-215.
* [23] D.M. Huang, Y.C. Shen, C. Wu, Y.T. Huang, F.L. Kung, C.M. Teng, J.H. Guh, Investigation of extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis pathways of new credordance dieterpends in human prostate cancer CEC -S. celli, F. Pharmacol. 503 (2004) 17-24.
* [24] T. Mosman, Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays, J. Immunol. Methods 65 (1983) 55-63.
* [25] B.C. Cavalcanti, C.M.L. Sombra, J.H.H.L. De Oliveira, R.G. Souza, M.O. Moraes, C. Pessoa, Cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of ingenamine G isolated from the Brazilian marine sponge _Pachychalina alcaloidifera_, Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 147 (2008) 409-415.
* [26] D. Renzi, M. Valtolina, R. Foster, The evaluation of the multi-endpoint cytotoxicity assay system, AITA 21 (1993) 89-96.
* [27] F. Pera, P. Mattis, K. Detzer, Methods for determining the proliferation kinetics of cells by means of 5-bromodeoxynuridine, Cell Tissue Kinet. 10 (1977) 255-264.
* [28] A.McGhan, S.J. Martin, R.P. Bissonnette, A. Mahboubi, Y. Shi, R.J. Mogil, W.K. Nishioka, D.R. Green, The end of the (cell) line: methods for the study of apoptosis in vitro, Methods Cell. Biol. 46 (1995) 153-158.
* [29] F.M. Cury-Bouvertain, C. Pompela, R. Curi, Comparative toxicity of oleic acid and linoleic acid on Jurkat cells, Clin. Nutr. 2 (2003) 721-732.
* [30] D. Darryskiewicz, S. Bruno, G. Del Bino, W. Gorczyca, M.A. Hotz, P. Lassota, F. Traganos, Features of apoptotic cells measured by flow cytometry, Cytometry 13 (1992) 795-808.
* [31] I. Nicoletti, G. Migliorati, M.C. Pagliacci, F. Grignani, C. Riccardi, A rapid and simple method for measuring thymocyte apoptosis by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry, J. Immunol. Methods 139 (1991) 271-279.
* [32] I. Vermes, C. Haanen, H. Steffens-Nakken, C. Reutenigsberger, A novel assay for apoptosis. Flow cytometric detection of phosphatidylinositolserine expression on early apoptotic cells using fluorescein labelled annexin V, J. Immunol. Methods 184 (1995) 39-51.
* [33] C.C.G. Militao, I.N.F. Dantas, C. Pessoa, M.J.C. Falco, E.R. Silveira, M.A.S. Lima, R. Curi, T. Lima, M.O. Moraes, L.V. Costa-Lotufo, Induction of apoptosis by pre-rocarpens from _Plasmodium falciparum_ in HL-60 human leukemia cells, Life Sci. 78 (2006) 2409-2417.
* [34] D.J. Newman, G.M. Cragg, K.M. Snader, Natural products as a source of new drugs over the period 1981-2002., J. Nat. Prod. 66 (2003) 1002-1037.
* [35] M.S. Butler, The role of natural product chemistry in drug discovery, J. Nat. Prod. 67 (2004) 2141-2153.
* [36] M.H. Borges, A.M. Soares, V.M. Rodrigues, A. Quintero, S. Lizano, J.M. Gutierrez, J.R. Giglio, M.I. Homis-Brandeugro, Effects of aqueous extract of _Caseria sybertysis_ (Flavouriaceae) on actions of snake and bee worms and on activity of phospholipases A, Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 1278 (2000) 21-30.
* [37] R.B. Williams, A. Norris, J.S. Miller, C. Birkinshaw, F. Ratovoson, R. Andrianstfer-Jan, Y.E. Rasmison, D.G.I. Kingston, Cytotoxic credordance dieterpends and their hydrolysis products from _Caseria_ ingress from the reinforces of Madagascar, J. Nat. Prod. 70 (2007) 206-209.
* [38] S.J. Collins, The HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cell line: proliferation, differentiation, and cellular oncogene expression, Blood 70 (1987) 1233-1244.
* [39] E.L. Maistro, I.C. Carvalho, M.S. Mantovani, Evaluation of the genotoxic potential of the _Caseria_ sybertysis extract on HTC and VP5 cells by comet assay, Toxicol. Vitro 18 (2004) 337-342.
* [40] Y.C. Shen, T.W. Wang, C.H. Wang, A.T. Khalil, J.H. Guh, Two new cytotoxic dicerdane dieterpends from _Caseria membrane_, Chem. Pharm. Bull. 52 (2004) 108-110.
* [41] G.M. Vieira-Jorinc, T.O. Conayckes, L.O. Regasini, P.M.P. Ferreira, C. Pessoa, L.V. Costa-Lotufo, R.B. Torres, N. Boralle, V.S. Bolzani, A.J. Cavalheiro, Cytotoxic deridane diterpends from _Caseria obliquia_, J. Nat. Prod. 72 (2009) 1847-1850.
* [42] M.C. Anzetti, P.S. Melo, N. Duran, M. Haun, Comparative cytotoxicity of dimethylamide-crotonin the promyelocytic leukemia cell line (H160) and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, Toxicol. 188 (2003) 261-274.
* [43] A.T. Merrit, S.T. Ley, Clerodane diterpends, Nat. Prod. 9 (1992) 243-287.
* [44] C. Grimsley, K.S. Ravichandram, Cues for apoptotic cell engulfment: eat-me, don't-eat-me and come-get-me-signals, Trends Cell Biol. 13 (2003) 648-656.
* [45] AStrasser, I.Connor, V.M. Dixit, Apoptosis signaling, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69 (2002) 217-245.
* [46] D. Scheinichen, M. Jankowski, H. Raschulte, B. Juttner, H.D. Kleine, Z.U. Meyer, A. Vissendorf, S. Piepenbrock, J. Heine, Lack of influence of omega-3 fatty acid-enriched lipids on apoptosis and secondary necrosis of cultured human lymphocytes, Nutrition 19 (2003) 441-445.
* [47] M. Czyz, A. Szulawska, A.K. Bednarek, M. Duchler, Effects of anthracycline derivatives on human leukemia X562 cell growth and differentiation, Biochem. Pharmacol. 70 (2005) 1431-1442.



