# 10.1016@S0031-9422(03)00109-2.pdf

## Page 1



# Iridoid glucosides from _Randia spinosa_ (Rubiaceae)

Lidilhone Hamerski

Maysa Furlan

Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva

Alberto Jose Cavalheiro

Marcos Nogueira Eberlin

Daniela Maria Tomazela

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

NuBBE- Nielco de Bioensaio, Biosinstese e Ecofisologia de Produtos Naturais, Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista- UNESP, CP-355.CEP 14800-900, A.raraquara-SP, Brazil Thomson Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Instituto deQuimica, Universidade Estadualde Campinas-UNICAMP, CP6154, CEP 13083-970, Campinas-SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

An iridoid glucoside: randomisde, along with five known iridoids: galioside, deacetylasperulosidic acid methyl ester, scandoside methyl ester, geniposide and gardenoside, were isolated from the stems of _Randia spinosa_. The structures were determined by spectroscopic analysis, including 2D NMR techniques.

(c) 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Randia spinosa_, Rubiaceae; Iridoid glucosides

## 1 Introduction

_Randia spinosa_ belongs to the Ixorodeae subfamily in the Rubiaceae, these being known for the biosynthesis of iridoids as main secondary metabolites (Robbrecht et al., 1996). This genus is strictly neo-tropical, comprises about 80 species (Robbrecht, 1994) and some are known to display pharmacological properties such as anti-inflammatory (Baghdikian et al., 1997; Recio et al., 1994), antileishmanial (Tandon et al., 1991), and anti-tumor (Abdel-Kader et al., 1997) activities. _R. spinosa,_ popularly known as "sacrificio de Cristo", is traditionally used in the Northeast of Brazil to treat inflammatory diseases (Correa, 1974). During continuing studies on Brazilian Rubiaceae plant species, the aqueous fraction from the EtOH extract of _R. spinosa_, collected at Pacatuba, Ceara State was investigated. This work resulted in the isolation of one iridoid glucoside, randomisde **(1)** together with the known iridoids galioside **(2)** (Karikas et al., 1987), deacetylasperulosidic acid methyl ester **(3)**, (Ishiguro et al., 1983), scandoside methyl ester **(4)** (Miyagoshi et al., 1987; Inouye et al., 1974), geniposide **(5)** (Jensen, et al., 1973; Endo and Taguchi, 1973) and gardenoside **(6)** (Inouye et al., 1974; Bailleul et al., 1977).

## 2 Results and discussion

Randinoside **(1)** was obtained from the aqueous fraction of the EtOH extract of _R. spinosa_ stems following semi-preparative HPLC, described in the Experimental section. The negative HRTOF-ESMS analysis of 1 established its molecular formula as C33H46O20, which was deduced from the _quasi_-molecular ion peak at _m_/_z_

## Page 2

779.2791 [M + H2O]\({}^{-}\). MS/MS experiment on this _quasi_-molecular ion gave one fragment at \(m/z\) at 375.1255 [(M + H2O)-404.1536] indicating the loss of one unit A (see below) from compound **1** (Fig. 1). The ES-MS spectrum showed a peak at \(m/z\) 763 assigned to [M + H]\({}^{+}\) and the intense peaks at \(m/z\) 601 and 163, which suggested loss of a glucose unit. In addition, peaks at \(m/z\) 404 and 387, as well as at \(m/z\) 359 were also observed, which might be formed from cleavage of ester linkages. The UV spectrum of this compound displayed an absorption maximum at 239 nm, which is characteristic of an iridoidal skeleton, and intense IR bands at 3450-3500 and 1708 cm\({}^{-1}\), which indicated the presence of hydroxyl and ester carbonyl functionalities, respectively. On the basis of its high resolution MS and NMR spectroscopic data (Table 1), the structure of an iridoid glucoside was proposed for this compound. The analysis of \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra indicated the presence of two distinct iridoit units, which are hereafter referred to as units A and B. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum showed signals at \(\delta\) 7.37 (\(d\), \(J\) = 1.4 Hz), 5.78 (\(d\), \(J\) = 2.5 Hz), 6.14 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 2.7, 5.7 Hz), 5.72 (\(dd\), \(J\) = 5.7, 1.7 Hz), 3.62 (\(d\),

## Page 3

1974; Bailleul et al., 1977) and musaaenoside (Gardner et al., 1987; Takeda et al., 1977, respectively). The _cis_ junction between the two rings and the _O_-glycosyl residue at C-1 is biosynthetically supported with a b configuration (Bianco, 1990). According to these assumptions the new iridoid glucoside adopts the 1a/1b, 5a/5b, 8a/8b, and 9a/9b \(S\) configurations, similar to those iridoid models.

## 3 Experimental

### General

Optical rotations were determined in MeOH using a Polamat A Carl Zeiss Jena polarimeter equipped with a sodium lamp operating at 546 and 548 nm. IR spectra were obtained using a Perkin Elmer 1600 (series FTIR) spectrometer, whereas UV spectra were performed using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 14P UV/vis spectrometer. ES-MS was conducted on a VG Platform Fisons instrument and HRTOF-ESMS was performed using a Q-Tof (Micromass) (40 eV). 1H (500 MHz) NMR, 13C (125 MHz) NMR and 2D NMR spectra were obtained on a Varian Inova 500 spectrometer. The NMR spectral data were recorded in CD3OD or DMSO-_d_6, and chemical shifts were expressed in \(d\) (ppm), referring to TMS. Silica gel (230-400 mesh ASTM, particle size 0.040-0.063 mm, Merck), Amberlite XAD-7 nonionic polymeric adsorbent (20-60 mesh, surface area 450 m2/g) or Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia) were used in the CC fractionations. Prep HPLC was performed using an ODS column (Phenomenex Luna ODS, 21.20 mm i.d.x250 mm) and UV detection at 254 nm.



## Page 4



### Plant material

The stems of _R. spinosa_ (4.5 kg) were colleted in Pacatuba, Ceara State, in March 1996. A voucher specimen (Andrade-19) was deposited at the herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica, at Universidade Federal do Ceara (UFCE).

### Extraction and separation

Dried and powdered stems (1.9 kg) of _R. spinosa_ were extracted with EtOH. The ethanolic extract (44.0 g) was partly dissolved in _n_-BuOH. Subsequent addition of water generated two phases (A and B), which were dried under reduced pressure separately. The _n_-BuOH fraction (**A**) was solubilized at 80% MeOH and partitioned with hexane, CHCl3 and EtOAc. The aqueous fraction (B, 5.0 g) was subjected to XAD-7 column chromatography and successfully eluted with H2O, MeOH/H2O (1:1) and MeOH, affording thirteen fractions. Fraction 5 [MeOH/H2O (1:1), 440 mg] was applied to a Sephadex LH-20 column eluted with EtOAc/MeOH (2:1), affording 23 fractions. Pooled fraction (14-16) (200 mg) was purified by prep HPLC [RP-18 column, MeCN-H2O (6:94)], yielding pure compounds galioside **2**, (4.5 mg), deacetyl-asperulosidic acid methyl ester **3**, (35.3 mg), scandoside methyl ester **4**, (21.0 mg) and the new iridoid raminoside **(1**, 8.5 mg). Fraction 7 (MeOH, 300 mg) was subjected to silica gel column eluted with CHCl3/MeOH/H2O/HOAc (80:17.5:1.5:1), and afforded pure geniopische **5**, (21.0 mg) plus fraction C. Fraction C (35.0 mg) was further purified by prep HPLC [RP-18 column, MeCN-H2O (6:94)], leading to pure gardenoside **6**, (4.0 mg). Compounds **2**-**6** were identified by comparison of their physical and spectral data with those of the literature.

### Randinoside **1**

White powder; [a]20 -6.5 (_c_ 1.7, MeOH); UV (MeOH) _l_max 239 nm; IR (KBr), 3500, 3399 and 1708 cm-1; 1H NMR (500 MHz, CD3OD) and 13C NMR (125 MHz, CD3OD) data, see Table 1; ESMS _m_/_z_ 763 [M + H]+, 404, 387, 359, 331, 225 HRTOF-ESMS _m_/_z_ 779.2791 [M + H2O]-, (requires C33H46O20 + H2O 779.2710).

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants of the State of Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biota-FAPESP- The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biotasp.org.br) Grant No. 98/05074-0 awarded to Dr. Bolzani, principal investigator. MF and VSB are grateful to CNPq for research fellowships. LH thanks FAPESP for providing a PhD scholarship.

## References

* Abdel-Kader et al. (1997) Abdel-Kader, M.S., Wisse, J., Evans, R., Werff, van der Hendrik, Kingston, D.G.I., 1997. Bioactive iridoids and a new lignan from _Allamanda cathartica_ and _Himatanthus fallase_ from the Suriname Rainforest. Journal of Natural Products 60, 1294-1297.
* Baghdikian et al. (1997) Baghdikian, B., Lanhers, M.C., Fleuretin, J., Ollivier, E., Maillard, C., Balansard, G., Mortier, F., 1997. An analytical study, anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of _Harpagophytum procmhens_ and _Harpagophytum zeyberi_. Planta Medica 63, 171-176.
* Bailleul et al. (1977) Bailleul, F., Delaveau, P., Rabron, A., Plat, M., Koch, M., 1977. Feretoisde and gardenoside from _Feretia apodanthera_, C-13-NMR spectra in iridoid series. Phytochemistry 16, 723-726.
* Bianco (1990) Bianco, A., In: Atta-ur-Rahman, 1990. (Ed.), Studies in Natural Products Chemistry, Vol. 7. Elsevier Sciences Publishers B.V., Amsterdam, p. 454.
* Correa (1974) Correa, M.P., 1974. Diconario de Plantas uteis do Brasil, Vol 5. Ministerio da Agricultura, Rio de Janeiro.
* Endo & Taguchi (1973) Endo, T., Taguchi, H., 1973. Constituents of _Gardenia jasminoides_ geniposide and genipin-genitobioside. Chemical Pharmaceutical Bulletin 21, 2684-2688.
* Gardner et al. (1987) Gardner, D.R., Narum, J., Zook, D., Stermitz, F.R., 1987. New iridoid glucosides from _Castilleja_ and _Beseya_: 6-hydroxyadoxoside and 6-isovanillytcatapol. Journal of Natural Products 50, 485-489.
* Inouye et al. (1974) Inouye, H., Takeda, Y., Nishimura, H., 1974. Two new iridoid glucosides from _Gardenia jasminoides_ fruits. Phytochemistry 13, 2219-2224.
* Ishiguro et al. (1983) Ishiguro, K., Yamaki, M., Takagi, S., 1983. Studies on iridoids-related compounds. The structure and antimicrobial activity of aglucones of galioside and gardenoside. Journal of Natural Products 46, 532-536.
* Jensen et al. (1973) Jensen, S.R., Kjaer, A., Nielsen, B.J., 1973. Geniposide and monopropein in _Cortus suecia_. Phytochemistry 12, 2065-2066.
* Karikas et al. (1987) Karikas, G.A., Eueby, M.R., Waigh, R.D., 1987. Contituents of the stems of _Arbutus unedo_. Planta Medica 53, 223-224.
* Miyagoshi et al. (1987) Miyagoshi, M., Amagaya, S., Ogihara, Y., 1987. The structural transformation of gardenoside and its related iridoid compounds by acid and beta-glucosidase. Planta Medica 53, 462-464.
* Recio et al. (1994) Recio, M.C., Giner, R.M., Manez, S., Rios, J.L., 1994. Structural considerations on the iridoids as anti-inflammatory agents. Planta Medica 60, 232-234.
* Robbrecht (1994) Robbrecht, E., 1994. Advances in Rubiaceae Macrosystematic, Vol 6. Opera Botanica Belgica.
* Robbrecht et al. (1996) Robbrecht, E., Puff, C., Smets, E., 1996. Second International Rubiaceae Conference. Opera Botanica Belgica.
* Takeda et al. (1977) Takeda, Y., Nishimura, H., Inouye, H., 1977. Studies on monoterpene glucosides and related natural products. Two new iridoid glucosides from _Mussaenda parriflora and Mussaenda shikokiana_. Phytochemistry 16, 1401-1404.
* Tandon et al. (1991) Tandon, J.S., Srivastava, V., Guru, P.Y., 1991. Iridoids--a new class helishannicidal agents from _Nyctanthes arbortrististis_. Journal of Natural Products 54, 1102-1104.



