# 10.1016@S0031-9422(98)00069-7.pdf

## Page 1



# ACYL LUPEOLS FROM _Cnidoscolus vitifolius_

Rosenei L. Brum, Neli K. Honda, Sonia C. Hess, Alberto J. Cavalheiro

# Abstract

In addition to 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid, 3_b_-acetyl-, cinnamoyl-, dihydroxymethyl-lupool, a new ester of lupool has been isolated from the stems of _Cnidoscolus vitifolius_. Its structure was established to be 3_b_-hexanoyl lupool by spectroscopic methods. (c) 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

## Introduction

Cnidoscolus vitifolius is a latex-producing plant growing in the higher lands of the "pantanal" of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil. It is used in folk medicine for the treatment of callosities and cataract [1], and is known by the vernacular name of "cansancao". In this communication we report the isolation from the stems of _C. vitifolius_ of 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid, a mixture of sterols, and four 3_b_-lupool esters, one of which is a new compound.

## Results and discussion

In addition to 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid and a mixture of sterols, the methylene dichloride extract of the stems yielded four acyl derivatives of lupool (see Experimental). Three of them were identified by NMR techniques to be the known 3_b_-_O-cinnamoyl, -dihydrocinnamomoyl and -acetyl lupools [2, 3]. The other ester is a new compound, and was assigned structure **1**. Compound **1** was obtained as a dextrorotatory powder. The 1oC NMR spectrum exhibited for the triterpene moiety the same signals as other acyl lupools [2]. Additional signals were found for an ester function (d 173.7), four methylenes (d 34.8, 31.3, 24.8 and 22.3) and a methyl (d 13.9), which agree for an hexanloyl group. Accordingly, the 1H NMR spectrum showed a triplet (_J_ = 7.5 Hz) at d 2.29 for the methylene a to the carboxyl group. An homologous compound, lupool heptanate, has been recently reported from _Acacia suma_ (Leguminosaea) [4].

## Introduction

### _Cnidoscolus vitifolius_

The _Cnidoscolus vitifolius_ is a latex-producing plant growing in the higher lands of the "pantanal" of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil. It is used in folk medicine for the treatment of callosities and cataract [1], and is known by the vernacular name of "cansancao". In this communication we report the isolation from the stems of _C. vitifolius_ of 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid, a mixture of sterols, and four 3_b_-lupool esters, one of which is a new compound.

## Results and discussion

In addition to 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid and a mixture of sterols, the methylene dichloride extract of the stems yielded four acyl derivatives of lupool (see Experimental). Three of them were identified by NMR techniques to be the known 3_b_-_O-cinnamoyl, -dihydrocinnamomoyl and -acetyl lupools [2, 3]. The other ester is a new compound, and was assigned structure **1**. Compound **1** was obtained as a dextrorotatory powder. The 1oC NMR spectrum exhibited for the triterpene moiety the same signals as other acyl lupools [2]. Additional signals were found for an ester function (d 173.7), four methylenes (d 34.8, 31.3, 24.8 and 22.3) and a methyl (d 13.9), which agree for an hexanloyl group. Accordingly, the 1H NMR spectrum showed a triplet (_J_ = 7.5 Hz) at d 2.29 for the methylene a to the carboxyl group. An homologous compound, lupool heptanate, has been recently reported from _Acacia suma_ (Leguminosaea) [4].

### _Plant material_

_Cnidoscolus vitifolius_ (Mill) Pohl was collected in Corumba (Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil) and identified by Dr I. Cordeiro (Instituto Botanico de Sao Paulo) and Dr E. E. Dias (Herbario da UFMS em Campo Grande/MS-Brasil). A voucher specimen is deposited in herbarium CGMS under number 2352.

### _Extraction and isolation_

The powdered air-dried stems (1.5 Kg) were extracted with cold CH2Cl2. Repeated CC on Silica gel (hexane with a gradient of Me2CO or Et2O) of the extract afforded compound **1** (40 mg), lupool dihydroxymethylcinnamate (150 mg), lupool cinnamate (35 mg), lupool acetate (20 mg), 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid (125 mg) and a mixture of sterols (50 mg), successively.

### _Identification of known compounds_

Lupool-dihydrocinnamate, -cinnamate, -acetate [2, 3] and 3-acetyl aleuritolic acid [5] were identified by NMR data. The mixture of sterols (sitosterol, cam

## Page 2

pesterol and stigmasterol) was analysed by GC/MS with co-injection with authentic samples.

Lup-20(29)-en-3\(\beta\)-O-hexanoate **(1)**

C\({}_{36}\)H\({}_{60}\)O\({}_{2}\). FAB-MS \(m/z\) (rel. int.): 523 [M \(-\) H]\({}^{-}\) (5), 425 [M \(-\) C\({}_{6}\)H\

