# 10.1016@0031-9422(83)80034-X.pdf

## Page 1



# Six differences from _Vellozia compacta_

Angelo C. Pinto

# Abstract

_Vellozia compacta_ contains six new di terpenes of the pimarane type. Their structures were deduced on the basis of spectral data and chemical modification.

## Introduction

The Velloziaceae constitute one of the most interesting plant families occurring in South America and Africa. The family contains _ca_ 250 species of perennial herbs and shrubs, of which the genus _Vellozia_ Vand. contains _ca_ 140 species [1]. These plants are found in rocky regions on dry soil. They are ligneous, rooted superficially to the soil and they grow very slowly. In spite of their apparent fragility they attain a surprising longevity. This may be partly due to the terpenes which are present in large quantities in these plants and which might act as chemical defence against predators [2].

As part of our programme on systematic phytochemical investigation of Brazilian Velloziaceae, we wish to report on the study of _Vellozia compacta_ Martius ex Schultes, a perennial species widely distributed in the State of Minas Gerais, Brazil.

## Results and discussion

The hexane extract of roots, stem and leaf sheaths of _V.ompacta_ yielded a series of new diterpenes of the pimarane type besides compactone (**1**) and one diterpene with a clesithantane skeleton (**2**). Substances 1 and 2 were discussed in our previous works [3, 4]. Characterization of the new pimarane type substances (**3**-**8**) is reported in this paper.

In accordance with their substitution pattern, the compounds listed can be divided into three groups.

### Group 1

The spectral data of compactol (**3**) suggested two hydroxyl, one vinyl and four tertiary methyl groups. This information, together with the molecular formula, C20H34O2, obtained from the high resolution mass spectrum suggested that **3** could be a diterpenoid of the pimarane type, similar to those found in this family during our previous studies [3].

A carbonl methine signal at d3.24 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 9 and 5 Hz) accounted for a secondary hydroxyl group. The multiplicity of the signal of the CHOH proton demonstrates that it is flanked by two hydrogens and, from its coupling constants, an axial orientation could be assigned to it. Consequently, the hydroxyl group is equatorial.



## Page 2

Oxidation of compound **3** with Jones' reagent afforded **9**. The IR spectrum of this compound showed a broad absorption in the region 3420-2950 cm-1 and a carbonyl band at 1730 cm-1, strongly suggesting the presence of a carboxyl group. Chemical confirmation of this assumption was obtained by methylation (CH2N2) leading to **10**, which showed, in the IR, absorptions for two carbonyl groups (1740 and 1712 cm-1). The mass spectrum of **10** presented the molecular ion at _m_/_z_ 334 and an intense peak at _m_/_z_ 138 resulting from McLafferty rearrangement involving the keto group and probably the hydrogen at C-5.

Similar results were obtained when **3** was oxidized by either PCC or PCD [5].

A confirmation of structure **3** by oxidation into compactone (**1**) failed. Reduction of **1** with sodium borohydride in methanol yielded an epimeric mixture of alcohols (2:1) in which compactod (**3**) was the one major isolated.

Compactoritol (**4**) was obtained as colourless prisms, and shown to have the formula C20H34O2. The IR spectrum showed a broad peak at 3350 cm-1 (OH), it also exhibited a vinyl band at 905 cm-1. The 1H NMR spectrum in pyridine-_d_3 was very similar to that of compactod (**3**) except for the presence of a pair of doublets centred at \(\delta\)3.10 (1H, \(J\) = 11 Hz) and 3.44 (1H, \(J\) = 11 Hz), due to the CH2OH of C-1.

The 13C NMR spectrum of **4** confirmed its structure with the carbon resonances being in agreement with a 7\(b\),_b_-dihydroxypimarane possessing a hydroxymethyl group at the C-18 equatorial position. This was deduced from the chemical shifts of Me-19 and C-5 (_d_ 18.2 and 46.0, respectively [6]).

### Group 11

The unsaturated compounds of this group comprise two a,b-unsaturated pimarane ketones. The molecular formula of 12_b_-hydroxy-7-oxopimar-8(9),15-dien (**5**), C20H30O2, was determined by high resolution mass spectrometry. The IR spectrum revealed the presence of a conjugated ketone (1645 cm-1), hydroxyl (3480 cm-1) and vinyl (3080 and 910 cm-1) groups. The UV confirmed the a,b-unsaturated carbonyl group [_i_ EtOH 252 nm (log \(e\) 4.15)].

The 1H NMR spectrum, in deuterochloroform showed signals for four tertiary methyl groups (_b_ 0.90, 95, 0.99 and 1.14), one tertiary vinyl [5.05 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 18 and 1.5 Hz), 5.09 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 10 and 1.5 Hz) and 5.72 (1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 18 and 10 Hz)] group and one carbonic proton \(d\) 3.66 (1H, \(t\), \(J\) = 6 Hz). The multiplicity of the carbonic proton signal and the magnitude of its coupling constants suggested that the hydroxyl group is pseudo-equatorial. The stereochemistry of the hydroxyl at C-12 was confirmed by the high field position of the methyl group at C-17 (_d_ 19.8). The shielding was attributed to the strong g-gauche effect of the hydroxyl group (Table 1) [7].

The UV, IR and 1H NMR spectra of 11_b_-hydroxy-7-oxopimar-8(9),15-dien (**6**) were similar to those of **5**. A carbonet melting signal at \(\delta\)4.60 indicated a secondary hydroxyl group. The low yield position of the carbonic proton of **6** suggested that the CHOH proton might be allylic [8]. The interaction between the secondary hydroxyl group and ethylenic linkage was derived by oxidation of **6** with PCC. The product, 7,11-dioxopimar-8(9),15-diene (7), exhibited, in the UV, an absorption at \(\lambda_{\text{max}}^{\text{EHO}}\) 264 nm (log \(e\) 3.93) for an endedine [9].

The stereochemistry of the hydroxyl group at C-11 was deduced from the 1H NMR spectrum of **6** in deuteropyridine. The methyl group at C-20 suffered a downfield shift of 0.23 on changing from deuterochloroform to pyridine solution, which establishes its _syndiaxial_ relationship with the hydroxyl group [10]. The A/B _trans_ junction was determined by the positive Cotton effect for the _n_-_p_* transition in the CD spectrum. (0.334 mg/ml in dioxane [_th_] = + 7.830 at 326 nm).

Reduction of **7** (structure elucidation, see below) with sodium borohydride in methanol yielded the keto alcohol.



## Page 3



**11**, which showed, in the IR, absorptions for hydroxyl (3390 cm\({}^{-1}\)) and carbonyl (1653 cm\({}^{-1}\)) groups. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **11** exhibits a pair of doublets centred at \(\delta\)4.13 (1H, \(J\) = 9 and 6 Hz).

Dehydration of **5** and **6** with TsOH/\(\Phi\)H yielded the \(\alpha\),\(\beta\),\(\gamma\),\(\delta\)-unsaturated carbonyl compound, **12**. The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **12** showed signals for the olefinic protons of an AB system [\(\delta\) 6.01 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 10 Hz) and 6.27 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 10 Hz)]. The UV spectrum of **12** contained a band at \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) 309 nm (log \(\epsilon\) = 3.85) which confirmed an extended conjugation and, consequently, the position of the hydroxyl at C-12 in **5**.

### Group III

The compounds of this group comprise two imparanes with cross-conjugated CO-C=C-CO of the transoid type. The cross-conjugated compound 7,11-dioxopimar-8(9),15-diene, obtained through oxidation of **6**, was identical with the diketone, **7**, isolated from the plant.

The \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum of 7 showed a vinyl group, two keto groups at C-7 and C-11 and a double bond between C-8 and C-9 [\(\delta\) 144.5 (\(d\)) and 112.3 (\(t\)) (CH = CH\({}_{2}\)), 200.4 and 201.6 (two ketones C-7 and C-11) 154.9 (s, C-9) and 141.5 (s, C-8)) [11].

The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of 7 showed a pair of doublets centred at \(\delta\)2.38 and 2.82 (\(J\) = 16 Hz) for the hydrogens of C-14.

Reduction of the double bond between C-8 and C-9 with zinc-acetic acid confirmed the enedione system [12]. In the mass spectrum of the reduced compound **13** the most prominent peak is the one at \(m/z\) 137. This fragment is the product of a McLafferty rearrangement followed by the cleavage of the C-7-C-8 bond.

The last compound described in this paper is 12\(\beta\)-hydroxy-7,11-dioxopimar-8(9),15-dien (**8**). The molecular formula, C\({}_{20}\)H\({}_{28}\)O\({}_{3}\), was obtained from high resolution mass spectrometry.

The UV spectrum of **8** was similar to that of 7. The IR spectrum showed one hydroxyl (3448 cm\({}^{-1}\)) and two carbonyl groups (1668 and 1660 cm\({}^{-1}\)).

The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum of **8** showed a signal at \(\delta\)4.22 (1H, \(d\), \(J\) = 2 Hz) for the carbinolic proton. The magnitude of the coupling constants suggested that the hydroxyl group is \(\beta\)-oriented, which allows an \(\omega\)-type coupling with the hydrogen at C-14. The chemical shift of C-13 observed in the \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectrum (\(\delta\) 46.0) is further evidence for the localization of the hydroxyl group at C-12.

Treatment of **8** with acetic anhydride in the presence of DMAP gave the acetate, **15**.

Reduction of **8** with zinc-acetic acid yielded **13**, identical in all aspects to the product obtained by the similar reaction with **7**.

The structure of **8** was confirmed by correlation of its acetate, **15**, obtained by treatment with acetic anhydride in the presence of DMAP, with compound **5** as described below. Thus, acetylation of **5** (acetic anhydride-DMAP) into **14** and subsequent \(t\)-butyl chromate oxidation furnished a compound identical with **15** by spectrophysical data.

## Experimental

Mps uncorr. (Kofler apparatus); CC: Merck Si gel (0.05-0.20 mm); TLC: Merck Si gel H, G or PF\({}_{254\pm 366}\).

_Vellozia compacta_ was collected in the Serra do Cipo, State of Minas Gerais, Brazil. Stem, roots and leaf sheaths were cut into small pieces and extracted with hexane. The hexane soln was coned _in vacuo_. Crude extract (90 \(\delta\)) thus obtained was redissolved in CHCl\({}_{3}\) absorbed on 90 g Si gel 60 and, after evaporation of the solvent, placed on top of a column of 1 kg of the same absorbent. Elution was started with hexane and the polarity of the eluent increased gradually. Compounds were eluted in the following order, although in the first chromatographic fractionation the separations was not clear-cut, often requiring purification on smaller columns or by prep. TLC.

7,11-_Dioxopimar-8_(9),15-_dien_ (7). White-yellow crystals from hexane, mp 88-89, 0.2\(\%\) yield of the dry plant [\(\alpha\)]\({}_{259\pm 4}^{529}\) = 34.8 (c 1.23); UV \(\lambda_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) nm: 264 (log = 3.93); IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) - 1; 3020, 2940, 1670, 1450, 1200, 1000, 960 and 920; IR \(\nu_{\max}^{\rm EtOH}\) (100 MHz, CDCl\({}_{3}\), TMS \(\pm\) s1; standard): \(\delta\) 0.90 (3H, s), 0.94

## Page 4

_Oxidation of 12_d-acetyl-7-oxopimar-89(),15-_dien_ (**14**). To a soln of **14** (78 mg) in dry CCLs (10 ml) were added, under stirring, HOAc (4 ml), Ac2O (2.2 ml) and _t_-butyl chromate (2.4 ml). The reaction medium was refluxed for 3 hr, after which the solvents were evaporated under red. pres. The product was extracted successively (twice) with a sat aq. soln of oxalic acid, CHCl3 and H2O. Evaporation of the CHCl3 layer furnished **15** (76.2 mg, 95deg-) as a yellowish oil.

_Compactone_ (**1**). White needles from hexane and EtOAc (5:1), mp 217-218deg, 0.1deg yield of the dry plant. CD (dioxane; \(c\) 4.5 x 10-4 g/ml): [0]335, 0, [0]320 - 2252, [0]307, - 4188, [0]285, - 22027, [0]21600; 0 R: \(\nu_{\text{max}}^{\text{KBr}}\)cm\({}^{- 1}\

## Page 5

(1H, _dd_, \(J\) = 17,10 Hz): \({}^{13}\)C NMR: Table 1; MS _m_/_z_ (rel. int.): 322 [M]\({}^{+}\) (8), 273 (4), 251 (5), 183 (3), 171 (6), 145 (5), 123 (8), 121 (9), 109 (8), 107 (10), 105 (9), 95 (10), 79 (12), 55 (22) and 31 (100). Found, _m_/_z_ 322.2545 (C\({}_{20}\)H\({}_{34}\)O\({}_{3}\) requires 322.2499).

## References

* [1] Aycensu, E. S. (1973) _Biotropica_**5**, 135.
* [2] Gilbert, B. (1977) _Pontif. Accad. Sci. Ser. Varia._**41**, 225.
* [3] Pinto, A. C., Silva, A. J. R., Mayer, L. M. U. and Braz Filho, R. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18**, 2036.
* [4] Pinto, A. C. (1980) _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**52**, 473.
* [5] Corey, E. J. and Schmidt, G. (1979)_Tetrahedron Letters_**399**.
* [6] Wenkert, E. and Buckwalter, B. L. (1972) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**94**, 4367.
* [7] Pinto, A. C., Garcez, W. S., Silva, R. S., Valente, L. M. M., Peixoto, E. M., Queiroz, P. P. S. and Pereira, A. L. (1982) _J. Chem. Res._ (S) 154, (M) 1701.
* [8] Zelnik, R., Rabenhorst, E., Matida, A. K., Gottlieb, H. E., Lavie, D. and Panizza, S. (1978) _Phytochemistry_**17**, 1795.
* [9] Scott, A. I. (1964) _Interpretation of the Ultraviolet Spectra of Natural Products_ p. 61. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
* [10] Demarco, P. V., Farkas, E., Doddrell, D., Banavara, L. M. and Wenkert, E. (1968) _J. Am. Chem. Soc._**90**, 5480.
* [11] Garcia-Alvarez, M. C., Paternostro, M., Piozzi, F., Rodriguez, B. and Savona, G. (1979) _Phytochemistry_**18**, 1835.
* [12] Herz, W. and Schmid, J. J. (1969) _J. Org. Chem._**34**, 3464.



