# 10.1021@np049863m.pdf

## Page 1

Indole Glucoalkaloids from _Chimarrhis turbinata_ and Their Evaluation as Antioxidant Agents and Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors

Carmem Lucia Cardoso, Ian Castro-Gamboa, Dulce Helena Siqueira Silva, Maysa Furlan, Rosangela de A. Epifanio, Angelo da Cunha Pinto, Claudia Moraes de Rezende, Joselia Alencar Lima, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: 55 16 201-6660.Fax: 55 16 222-7932. E-mail: bolzani@ug.unesp.br Universidade Estadual Paulista(-INESP). Universidade Federal Fluminense. Universidade Federal Fluminense. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. 10.1021/np049863m CCC: $27.50

###### Abstract

As part of our study on bioactive agents from Brazilian rainforest plants, two new glucoalkaloids, 3,4-dehydro-strictosidine (**1**) and 3,4-dehydro-strictosidine acid (**2**), were isolated from _Chimarrhis turbinata_, along with seven known glucoalkaloids, cordifoline (**3**), strictosidine acid (**4**), strictosidine (**5**), 5a-carboxystrictosidine (**6**), turbinatine (**7**), desoxycorridoline (**8**), and harman-3-carboxylic acid (**9**). The structures of the new alkaloids were established on the basis of comprehensive spectral analysis, mainly 1D and 2D NMR experiments, as well as high-resolution HRESIMs. Alkaloid 3 showed strong free-radical scavenging activity against 1,1-diphenyl-2-picylhydrazyl (DPPH) as well as pronounced anti-oxidant activity evidenced by redox properties measured by EICD-HPLC. Additionally, alkaloids **1-9** were submitted to TLC screening for acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Both **7** and **8** were shown to be moderate acetylcholinesterase inhibitors at a concentration of 0.1 and 1.0 _m_M, respectively. In an in vitro rat brain assay, **7** showed moderate activity (IC50 1.86 _m_M), compared to the standard compound, galanthamine (IC50 0.92 _m_M).

## Introduction

### _Chimarrhis turbinata_

The study of the _Chimarrhis turbinata_ was performed by the Swiss National Institute of Standards and Technology (NSF), who was performed in a 1980s to 1980s. The study of the _Chimarrhis turbinata_ was performed by the Swiss National Institute of Standards and Technology (NSF), who was performed in a 1980s to 1980s.



## Page 2

(Figure 1). COSY and NOESY experiments were fundamental to assign the relative configuration of C-15, C-20, and C-21 of this alkaloid, which was inferred to have the same stereochemistry as strictosidine. The structure of **1** was thus defined as 3,4-dehydro-strictosidine.

Compound **2** was obtained as a pale yellow amorphous powder. HRESINGS analysis gave a protonated molecular ion [M + H]+ peak at _m/z_ 515.2056, corresponding to the molecular formula C28H30N2O9. The IR spectrum showed absorptions at _v_max 3440 and 3368 cm-1, indicating the presence of -OH and -NH fractions, respectively. Inspection of the NMR data (1H, 13C, DEPT, and 2D experiments) showed a structure similar to **1**, including also a glucose moiety, confirmed by the ESIMS fragment ion at _m/z_ 353.1596 [M - Glc + H]+ and NMR data. The only difference in the 'H and 13C NMR spectra (Tables 1 and 2) of alkaloid **2** was the absence of signals corresponding to a methoxyl group (_th_ = 3.69, _d_C = 53.0), which is consistent with the presence of a carboxylic acid function, corroborated by the signal at \(d\) 175.0 (C=O) and the IR absorption at 3440 cm-1 assigned to the carboxylic hydroxy group. HMBC cross-peaks (Figure 1) confirmed the 'H and 13C NMR assignments, and the proposed structure for compound **2** as the new 3,4-dehydro-strictosidine acid.

Compounds **3**-**6** were identified as cordioline,7 strictosidine acid,8 strictosidine,8 and 5a-carboxystrictosidine,8 respectively, after comparison of their NMR spectral data with reported values. Compound **7** was previously isolated from this plant.3 The _b_-carboline alkaloids **8** and **9** were identified as desoxycordifoline7 and harman-3-carboxylic acid,9 respectively. After careful analysis of the literature, 13C NMR data for compounds **3** and **9** were found to be unpublished and thus these data are included in Table 2.

Compounds **1**-**9** were tested toward the DPPH radical (Table 3).10 Alkaloid **3** showed strong scavenging activity against the DPPH radical (IC50 18.3 _m_g/mL) using the antioxidant standard rutin (IC50 12.3 _m_g/mL) as reference,

## Page 3

whereas all other isolated alkaloids showed moderate to weak activity (IC \(>\) 40 \(\mu\)M). This result indicates that the free-radical scavenging activity of this indole alkaloid is due to its higher hydrogen-donating ability (to DPPH), provided by the hydroxy group at C-10, which results in a more efficient radical-scavenging effect.11 The electrochemical behavior displayed by these alkaloids showed a good correlation with the radical-scavenging effect measured in the DPPH assay, which clearly indicates that substances with oxidative peaks above +1.2V (Table 3) and a small oxidative capacity have weaker radical-scavenging properties than those that are oxidized at lower potentials.12 Compounds **1**-**9** were submitted to preliminary TLC screening for selecting potential AchE inhibitors,13 in which only compounds **7** and **8** inhibited the enzyme at 0.1 and 1.0 \(\mu\)M concentrations. Due to the limited amount of alkaloid **8**, only compound **7** was submitted to further evaluation in an in vitro rat brain assay, to measure its AchE inhibitory potential, and showed a moderate activity (IC50 1.86 \(\mu\)M) when compared with the standard galan-thaming (IC50 0.92 \(\mu\)M).

### Experimental Section

**General Experimental Procedures.** Optical rotations were measured on a Perkin-Elmer polarimeter in MeOH at 25 \({}^{\circ}\)C, using a sodium lamp operating at 598 nm. UV spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2401 PC spectrophotometer. IR spectra were run on a Perkin-Elmer FT-IR 600 spectrophotometer. 1H (500 MHz) and 1degC (125 MHz) NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian DRX-500 spectrometer, using TMS as internal standard. ESIIMS were obtained on a VG Platform Fisons instrument, and HRTOF-ESIMS-MS was performed using a Q-TOF (Micromass) (40 eV) instrument. Column chromatography was carried out on silica gel 230-400 mesh (Merck), XAD-4 (Sigma-Aldrich), and Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia). TLC was performed using silica gel 60 (Merck, \(\mu\) = 230 mesh) and precoated silica gel 60 PF54 plates. Spots on TLC were visualized under UV light and/or by spraying with anisaldehyde-H2SO4 reagent followed by heating at 120 \({}^{\circ}\)C and/or Dragonedorff reagent. Preparative HPLC was performed on a Prep LC 4000 system (Waters) using C18 (250 mm x 21,20 mm, Luna-Phenomenex) columns.

**Plant Material.** Authenticated _Chimarrthis turbinata_ DC. was collected in Reserva do Viro, Belem, PA, Brazil, in February 2000 and identified by Dr. Marina Therera V. do A. Campos. A voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of the Botanic Garden, Sao Paulo (Voucher No. Lopes-51).

**Extraction and Isolation.** Air-dried bark and leaves from _C. turbinata_ were separately powdered and extracted with ethanol. Both ethanolic extracts were dissolved in MeOH-H2O 80% and partitioned with EtOAc and _n_-BuOH. The _n_-BuOH fraction (12.3 g) after solvent evaporation was dissolved into H2O (5 mL) and submitted to filtration over XAD-4 eluted with H2O, MeOH-H2O (20 -100% gradient), acetone, MeOH-CH2Cl2 (1:1), CH2Cl2, and Et2O. The subtractions obtained (A-K) were compared by TLC and revealed with specific reagents to alkaloids (Dragendorff). Fractions A (5.0 g), B (700.00 mg), and C (253.0 mg) were purified. Fraction A was submitted to VLC (vacuum-liquid chromatography) using octadecylsilane silica and gradient elution of decreasing polarity with H2O, MeOH, acetone, and CH2Cl2 to give seven fractions. Fraction A (468.00 mg) was purified by HPLC using MeCN-H2O-AcOH

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline carbon & **1** & **2** & **3** & **9** \\ \hline
1 & & & & 136.1 s \\
2 & 135.2 s & 136.2 s & 137.2 s & \\
3 & 138.5 s & 148.0 s & 141.9 s & 141.7 s \\
4 & & & & 115.4 d \\
4a & & & & 127.0 s \\
4b & & & 121.3 s \\
5 & 48.2 t & 48.0 t & 136.8 s & 122.1 d \\
6 & 28.0 t & 16

## Page 4

(15:84.5:0.5) as mobile phase, UV detection at 237 nm, and a flow rate of 12 mL min-1 and afforded 5a-carboxynitrosidine (**6**) (5.0 mg). Fraction B (700.0 mg) was dissolved into MeOH and submitted to gel filtration on Sephadex LH-20 eluted with MeOH, affording 23 fractions (B1-B23). After TLC comparison, fractions B13-B15 were combined (90 mg) and purified by HPLC using MeCN-H2O-AcOH (15:84.5:0.5) as mobile phase, with UV detection at 237 nm and a flow rate of 12 mL min-1, affording the new derivative (1.5 2 mg).

The ethanolic fraction (1.5 g) was purified by semipreparative HPLC using MeCN-H2O-AcOH (15:84.5:0.5) as mobile phase, UV detection at 237 nm, and a flow rate of 12 mL min-1, to afford the new derivative **2** (17.0 mg) and the known compounds **9** (30.0 mg), **3** (24.6 mg), **6** (154.1 mg), and **8** (148.9 mg).

The aqueous fraction from the bark (10 g) was submitted to RP-18 VLC eluted with decreasing polarity elements as indicated above to give seven fractions. Fraction 1 (9 g) was purified by semipreparative HPLC [MeCN-H2O-AcOH (15:84.5:0.5); UV detection at 237 nm; flow rate 12 mL min-1], affording compounds **4** (15.0 mg), **5** (20.0 mg), and **6** (15.0 mg) and two unresolved peaks (A, retention time 19.9 min; B, retention time 50.7 min). Fraction A (28 mg) was further purified by semipreparative HPLC [MeCN-H2O-AcOH (13: 86.5:0.5); UV detection at 254 nm; flow rate 12 mL min-1], affording **3** (16.4 mg). Fraction B (227.7 mg) was purified by preparative HPLC [MeCN-H2O-AcOH (20:79.5:0.5), UV detection at 237 nm; flow rate 12 mL min-1] and afforded **7** (14.0 mg) and **8** (90.0 mg).

**3,4-Dehydro-strictosidine (1):** amorphous yellow powder; UV _ma_ (MeOH) 358 (3.9), 239 (3.0 nm); IR (KBr) 3496 (OH), 3370 (NH), 1710 (C=O) cm-1; \(\mathrm{{}^{1}H}\) and \(\mathrm{{}^{13}C}\) NMR (see Tables 1 and 2); HRESIMs _mz_ 529.2166 [M + H]-(\(\mathrm{{}^{1}C}\) scaled for C2:H2O2O2 + H, 529.2186).

**3,4-Dehydro-strictosidine acid (2):** amorphous yellow powder; UV _ma_ (MeOH) 356 (3.5), 240 (3.0) nm; IR (KBr) 3440 (OH), 3368 (NH) cm-1; \(\mathrm{{}^{1}H}\) and \(\mathrm{{}^{13}C}\) NMR (see Tables 1 and 2); HRESIMs _mz_ 515.2056 [M + H]-(\(\mathrm{{}^{1}C}\) scaled for C2:H2O2O2 + H, 515.2030).

**Determination of the Radical-Scavenging Activity.** 2,2-Diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) was used as a stable radical in methanol (200 \(\mu\)mol, 2 mL). The reagent was added to 1 mL aliquots of compounds **1**-**9**, previously dissolved in methanol, to yield final concentrations of 100, 80, 40, 20, 10, and 5 \(\mu\)M. Each mixture was shaken and held for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. Rutin was used as a standard compound. DPPH solution (2 mL) in methanol (1 mL) served as control. The evaluation of the reduced form of DPPH generated in situ was performed measuring the decrease in the current (_I_) on the electrochemical cell of the EICD.\({}^{10}\) The areas obtained in each chromatogram were normalized and compared with the one obtained for the blank. The radical-scavenging activity of the samples was expressed in terms of C50 (concentration in \(\mu\)M required for a 50% decrease in current (_I_) by the reduced form of DPPH).

**Redox Potential.** The determination of the optimal potential (_E_xx) required to apply on each compound was obtained by means of hydrodynamic voltammograms generated for each compound\({}^{10}\) (Table 3).

**TLC Screening Assay for Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors.** Samples were dissolved in MeOH or in MeOH-CH2Cl2 mixtures to 0.1 and 1.0 mM concentrations. Physostigmine and galathamine were used as reference compounds in two concentrations (0.1 and 0.01 \(\mu\)M). After application of 2 \(\mu\)L of each sample on a silica gel plate, it was sprayed with DTHSATC1 reagent (1:1 solution of 1 mM 5,5-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) and 1 \(\mu\)M acetylthicololine iodide in buffer) until saturation of the silica. The plate was allowed to dry for 5 min, and then 3 U/mL of enzyme solution was sprayed. After a while, a yellow background appeared, with white spots showing the inhibitory compounds.\({}^{4}\)

**Evaluation in a Rat Brain Assay.** The protocol adopted for this in vitro assay is described by Ellman and co-workers.\({}^{14}\)

**Acknowledgment.** This work was funded by grants of the Sao Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP) within the Biota-FAPESP-The Biodiversity Virtual Institute Program (www.biota.org.br), grant no. 98/05074-0 awarded to V.S.B., Principal Investigator. V.S.B., M.F., I.C.-G., and C.L.C acknowledge CNPq and FAPESP for research and Ph.D. fellowships. The authors wish to thank Universidade de Campinas (UNICAMP) for providing high-resolution mass spectral analysis.

## References

* (1) Baldach, A. _A Flora Nacional na Medicina Domestica_; Imprensa Nacional: Sao Paulo, 1970; p 31.
* (2) Pinto, A. C.; Silva, D. H. S.; Selzani, V. D.; Lopes, N. P.; Epifanio, R. _Quim. Nova_**2002**, _85_, 45-61.
* (3) Cardoso, C. L.; Silva, D. H. S.; Tomazela, D. M.; Young, M. C. M.; Eberlin, M. N.; Boziani V. _J. Nat. Prod._**2003**, _66_, 1017-1021.
* (4) Kyung, I. R.; van de Meent, M.; Ingenhang, K.; Verporte, R. _J. Chromatogr. A_**2001**, _915_, 217-223.
* (5) Caporasse, M.; Coune, C.; Angenot, L. _J. Pharm. Belg._**1983**, _38_, 135-139.
* (6) De Silva, K. T. D.; King, D.; Smith, G. N. _Chem. Commun._**1971**, _16_, 908-909.
* (7) Brown, R. T.; Row, L. R. _Chem. Commun._**1967**, \(9\), 453-455.
* (8) Brandt, V.; Tits, M.; Geerling, A.; Frerich, M.; Penele, J. J.; Delaude, C.; Verporte, R.; Angenot, L. _Photochemistry_**1999**, \(5\), 1711-1716.
* (9) Sanchez, L. W. E.; Brown, K. S., Jr. _An. Acad. Bras. Cienc._**1971**, _43_, 603-605.
* (10) Castro-Gamboa, I.; Cardoso, C. L.; Silva, D. H. S.; Cavalheiro, A. J.; Furlan, M.; Bolzani, V. S. _J. Bras. Chem. Soc._**2003**, _14_, 7717-776.
* (11) Son, S.; Lewis, B. A. _J. Agric. Food Chem._**2002**, _50_, 468-472.
* (12) Yamasaki, K.; Hashimoto, A.; Koksuneya, Y.; Miyamoto, T.; Sato, T. _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**1994**, _42_, 1663-1665.
* (13) Fawcett, J. R.; Bordayo, E. Z.; Jackson, K.; Liu, H.; Peterson, J.; Switak, A.; Frey, W. H. _Brain Res._**2002**, _950_, 10-20.
* (14) Ellman, G. L.; Courtney, K. D.; Andres, V.; Featherstone, R. M. _Biochem. Pharmacol._**1961**, \(7\), 88-91.



