# 10.1016@0031-9422(83)80035-1.pdf

## Page 1



# THREE _Ent_-Kaurene Diterpenes from _Vellozia Caput-Ardeae_

Angelo C. Pinto, Richard Pinchin and Susan K. Do Prado

# Abstract

Three new _ent_-kaurene diterpenes have been isolated from the roots and stem of _Vellozia caput-ardaeae_. Their structures were elucidated by spectroscopic methods as _ent_-9_b_-hydroxy kaur-16-cne, _ent_-11a-hydroxy kaur-16-ene and _ent_-9\(b\),11a-dihydroxy kaur-16-ene.

## Introduction

In previous papers [1, 2] we described two kaurene diterpenes and one _seco_-kaurene from _Vellozia caput-ardaeae_. In the present communication we report the isolation and structural determination of three hydroxylated kaurenes from the same species.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The molecular formulae of the isomeric alcohols **1a** and **2a** (C20H32O) and the diol **3a** (C20H32O2) were determined by high-resolution mass spectrometry. The 1H NMR spectra of each of the three compounds contained resonances assigned to three tertiary methyl groups and an exocyclic methylene which suggested that they were tetracyclic diterpenes, probably of the kaurene class.

The oxygen-containing functional group of **1a** was shown to be a secondary hydroxyl group by IR (\(v_{\max}^{\text{KBr}}\text{cm}^{- 1}\): 3450 and 1060) and by the presence of a triple doublet at \(d\) 4.28 (1H, \(J\) = 10, 8 and 8 Hz) in the 1H NMR spectrum. This signal was shifted downfield to \(d\) 5.37 upon acetylation of 1a to **1b**. The multiplicity of this signal (_ddd_) indicated the vicinity of methine and methylene units. This limited the possible positions for the hydroxyl group to C-6 or C-11. The C-6 position was eliminated by analysis of the 13C NMR spectra (Table 1). In the spectrum for kaurene, the triplets for C-2, C-6 and C-11 are found near \(d\) 20 while the triplets for C-7 and C-12 appear near \(d\) 40 and 30, respectively [3]. As the 13C NMR spectrum of **1a** exhibited only two triplets near \(d\) 20 and absence of a triplet near 30, it was clear that C-11 was oxygenated. This was further corroborated by the spectroscopic properties of the ketone **1c** derived from **1a**. The 13C NMR signals for C-9 and C-12 showed the expected downfield shifts (Table 1) for **1c** compared to **1a**. Compound **1a** was, thus, identified as _ent_-11a-hydroxykaur-16-cne.

Compound **2a** was found to be a tertiary alcohol: IR \(v_{\max}\text{cm}^{- 1}\): 3500; 13C NMR singlet at \(d\) 77.6, and the absence in the 1H NMR spectrum of signals which could be assigned to a carbonic proton.

Further evidence for the location of the hydroxyl group at C-9 was the dehydration product **2b** of **2a**, whose 1H NMR spectrum exhibited a triplet at \(d\) 5.14 (1H, \(J\) = 4 Hz) [4]. Comparison of the 13C NMR spectra of **2a** and kaurene [3] confirmed the above deductions. The C-9 hydroxyl group in **2a** caused an up-field shift in the resonances assigned to C-1, C-5, C-7 and C-15 through the strong _g_-effects within the cyclic system [5, 6]. The chemical shift of C-20, as expected, was unaltered in comparison to the model compound. This data also confirmed the stereochemistry assigned to **2a**. Compound **2a** was, therefore, identified as _ent_-9_b-hydroxy-kaur-16-cne.

The 1H NMR spectrum of compound **3a** showed two signals at \(d\) 1.62 and 2.10 (both exchangeable with D2O). This data determined that **3a** was a diol. One of the hydroxyl groups was secondary, as shown by a double doublet at \(d\) 3.96 (1H, \(J\) = 10 and 8 Hz) which moved downfield to 4.94 upon acetylation of **3a** to **3b**. The

## Page 2

presence of a tertiary hydroxyl group was confirmed by the 1H NMR spectra of **3b** and the ketone **3c**, obtained from **3a** by oxidation.

The position of the tertiary hydroxyl group was determined to be at C-9, from the 13C NMR chemical shifts of C-1, C-5, C-7 and C-15 in comparison with the spectrum of **2a**.

The multiplicity of the signal assigned to the carbonicic proton, a double doublet, limited the location of the secondary hydroxyl group to C-1, C-7 or C-11. Positions C-1 and C-7 were eliminated by analysis of the 13C NMR spectra of compounds **3a**-**3c**.

As regards the stereochemistry of two substances, **1a** and **3a**, the magnitude of the coupling constants for the carbonicic proton at C-11 in these substances and their derivatives (**1b** and **3b**) made it obvious that this hydroxyl group was equatorial. Compound **3a** was, thus, shown to be _ent-9b_,11a-dihydroxy-kaur-16-ene.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Mps are uncorr. IR spectra were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer 137B. 1H and 13C NMR spectra at 100 and 25.2 MHz, respectively, and chemical shifts [d (ppm)] measured from TMS as int. standard. Optical rotation was determined in CHCl3 on a Perkin-Elmer 241.

_Isolation of_ ent-11a-_hydroxy_kaur-16-_ene_ (**1a**) ent-9b-_hydroxy_kaur-16-_ene_ (**2a**) and ent-9b,11a-_dihydroxy_kaur-16-_ene_ (**3a**). Chromatography of the hexane extract (51 g) of roots, stems and leaf sheaths of _Vellozaia caput-ardae_, collected in Diamantina, State of Minas Gerais, Brazil, yielded **1a**, mp 106-108, 2029. 5/day plant wt; IR \(\begin{equation*}{\mathrm{R}}{\mathrm{P}}_{{\mathrm{max}}}^{{\mathrm{K}}}{\mathrm{C}}^{-1}\end{equation*}\); 3450, 2940, 1650, 1060 and 880. 1H NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3): _δ_ 0.84 (3H, _δ_), 0.86 (3H, _δ_), 3.



## Page 3

CDCl3_x_d_ 0.85 (3H, \(a\)0.90 (3H, _s_), 1.17 (3H, _s_), 3.50 (1H, \(s\), exchangeable with \(\text{D}_{2}\text{O}\)) and 4.80 (2H, \(p\)3) 13C NMR (25.2 MHz, CDCl3_c_): _δ_ 18.6 (19, 2.0 (2), 2.01 (1, 2.8 (0), 29.1 (1, 2.3 (1), 3.2 (1), 3.3 (3), 33.7 (0, 34.6 (1), 4.05 (4), 4.1 (6), 4.23 (4), 4.38 (s), 43.8 (t), 4.80 (4), 4.90 (s), 77.6 (s), 102.8 (_r_) and 155.0 (s), MS _m_/_zel. int.): 288 [M] + (60, 270 (36, 255 (48), 163 (36), 146 (56, 136 (66), 123 (84), 109 (62), 91

