# 10.1016@S0031-9422(99)00132-6.pdf

## Page 1



# A chromene and prenylated benzoic acid from _Piper aduncum_

Debora Cristina Baldoqui

Massuo Jorge Kato

Alberto Jose Cavalheiro

Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani

Maria Claudia M. Young

Maysa Furlan

maysaf@iq.unesp.br Instituto de Quimica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, CP 355, 14800-900 Araraguara, SP, Brazil Instituto de Quimica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, CP 26077, 05599-970 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil Secao de Fisiologia e Bioquimica de Plantas, Instituto de Botanica, CP 4005, 01051 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

###### Abstract

In addition to meridolol, 2',6'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxydihydrochalcone, methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3'-methyl-2'-butenyl)-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate, methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate and methyl 8-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate, two new natural products were isolated from the leaves of _Piper aduncum_, 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate and 3-(3',7'-dimethyl-2',6'-ocatadienyl)-4-methoxybenzoic acid. The structures of the isolates were established based on analysis of spectroscopic data, including ES-MS. The DNA-damaging activity of the isolated compounds was also investigated against mutant strains of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_. (c) 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

_Keywords: Piper aduncum_; Piperaceae; Chromenes; Prenylated benzoic acid; Dihydrochalcone; Nerolidol; DNA-damaging activity +
Footnote †: journal:

## 1 Introduction

Chemical studies carried out on Piperaceae species have revealed the occurrence of a variety of compounds including essential oils, pyrones, lignoids and unsaturated amides (Parmar et al., 1997; Alecio, Bolzani, Young, Kato, & Furlan, 1998). The species _Piper aduncum_ L. is used as remedy for stomach aches and as an insect repellent (Asprey & Thornton, 1954). Previous investigations on _P. aduncum_ have described phenylpropanoids, such as myristicin and dillapiol, benzoic acid derivatives, chromenes and flavonoids (Burke & Nair, 1986; Orjala, Eldelmeier, Wright, Rali, & Sticher, 1993a; 1993b; Moreira, Guimaraes, & Kaplan, 1998). During the course of chemical studies on _P. aduncum_ we isolated seven compounds, including a new chromene **1** and a new benzoic acid derivative **5**. In the search for potential anticancer agents employing a mechanism-based yeast bioassay for DNA-modifying agents (Gunatilaka, Samaranayake, Kingston, Hofmann, & Johnson, 1992; Gunatilaka, Kingston, & Johnson, 1994), it was found that the chromenes 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate acid (**1**), methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3'-methyl-2'-butenyl)-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate (**2**), methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate (**3**), methyl 8-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromeene-6-carboxylate (**4**) and the benzoic acid derivative, 3-(3',7'-dimethyl-2',6'-occtadienyl)-4-methoxybenzoic acid (**5**), were active. Although chromene and benzoic acid derivatives are frequently isolated from _Piper_ species and many of them exhibit diverse biological activity such as antimicrobial, molluscicidal (Orijala et al., 1993b), germination inhibition, fungicidal (Nair & Burke, 1990) and insecticidal activities (Bernard et al., 1995), there is no previous report describing damaging effect on DNA. In this paper we report the structure elucidation for two new isolated compounds **1** and **5** and the growth inhibitory effects of compounds **1-5** against strains of _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_.



## Page 2



## 2 Results and discussion

A CH\({}_{2}\)Cl\({}_{2}\)-soluble part of MeOH extract of the leaves of _P. aduncum_ was fractionated by CC on silica gel followed by HPLC to afford compounds **1**-**5**, neor-lidol and 2',6'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxydihydrochalcone.

2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chrome-6-carboxylic acid (**1**) was shown to have a molecular formula C\({}_{12}\)H\({}_{12}\)O\({}_{3}\) by analysis of its electrospray mass spectrum (ES-MS), \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra. Its IR spectrum revealed absorption bands at 2400-3400/1680 and 1600/1445 cm\({}^{-1}\) characteristic of carboxylic acid and aromatic groups, respectively. Its \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum exhibited close similarities to those of 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chrome-6-carboxylate **3** (Burke & Nair, 1986) by the presence of two doublets at \(\delta\) 5.65 and 6.34 (9.9 Hz) and a singlet at \(\delta\) 1.46 (2 CH\({}_{3}\)) and, as in the case of **3**, its spectrum showed three aromatic signals at \(\delta\) 7.86 (dd, \(J\) = 2.0 and 8.4 Hz), 7.72 (d, \(J\) = 2.0 Hz) and 6.79 (d, \(J\) = 8.4 Hz), corroborating the presence of a trisubstituted aromatic ring. As indicated by IR and by \({}^{1}\)H and \({}^{13}\)C NMR spectra (Table 1), the methyl ester function in **3** was replaced by a carboxylic acid function (\(\delta_{\rm C}\) 171.0) and the structure of compound **1** was determined as depicted.

3-(3',7'-dimethyl-2',6'-octadienyl)-4-methoxybenzoic acid (**5**) has the molecular formula C\({}_{18}\)H\({}_{22}\)O\({}_{4}\) deduced by analysis of electrospray mass spectrum (ES-MS) and \({}^{13}\)C NMR data. In its IR spectrum, absorptions for an aromatic acid carbonyl group (1680 cm\({}^{-1}\)) and an aromatic ring (1600, 1490 cm\({}^{-1}\)) were present, while the UV spectrum displayed an absorption maximum at 254 nm (\(\log\epsilon\) 3.8) corresponding to the aromatic ring.

The \({}^{1}\)H NMR spectrum (Table 1) of **5** showed signals corresponding to three coupled aromatic resonances at \(\delta\) 6.87 (d, 1H, \(J\) = 8.4 Hz), 7.88 (d, 1H, \(J\) = 2.2 Hz) and 7.96 (dd, 1H \(J\) = 8.4, 2.2 Hz) for a 1,4,5-tri-substituted aromatic ring and \(\delta_{\rm H}\) 1.34 (1H, s); it also displayed a singlet at 3.90 (3H, s) for a carboxylic acid

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l r r r r} \hline  & **1** & & **5** & \\ \cline{2-4}  & H & C\({}^{\rm a}\) & H & C\({}^{\rm a}\) \\ \hline
1 & & – & – & – & 122.5 (s) \\
2 & & – & 77.2 (q) & 7.88 d (2.2) & 130.8\({}^{\rm b}\) (d) \\
3 & 5.65 d (9.9) & 131.0 (d) & – & 129.7\({}^{\rm b}\

## Page 3

function and an aryl methoxyl group, which were confirmed by the signals at _d_C 168.4 and 55.2, respectively, in its 13C NMR spectrum. The monoterpene side chain signals were determined from DQCOSY and HETCOR spectra. Thus, the methylene protons H-1' at \(d\) 3.34 (2H, d, \(J\) = 7.3 Hz) were coupled to the olefinic proton H-2' at \(d\) 5.31 (1H, t, \(J\) = 7.3 Hz), which in turn showed an allylic coupling to the methyl group H-9' at \(d\) 1.71 (3H, s). The methine proton H-6' at \(d\) 5.10 (1H, t, \(J\) = 7.2 Hz) was further coupled to the methylene proton H-5' at \(d\) 2.07 (2H, m). The \(E\) geometry for the D23'-double bond was established on the basis of the 13C NMR data of the vinyl methyl group H-9' (De Haan & van de Ven, 1973). The position of the monoterpene moiety was deduced by NOESY spectrum analysis and by comparison of the 1H and 13C NMR spectral data with those published for methyl 3-(3,7-dimethyl-2,6-octaldenyl)-4-methoxybenzoicate (Orjala et al., 1993b).

The known compounds 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)-2_H_-chromene-6-carboxylate (**2**), methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromene-6-carboxylate (**3**), methyl 8-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-2_H_-1-chromene-6-carboxylate (**4**) and 2',6'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxydihydrohalcone were previously isolated from the same source (Burke & Nair, 1986; Diaz, Arias, & Nathan, 1987; Orjala et al., 1993a; Moreira et al., 1998), while nerolidol (Ramos, Da Silva, Luz, Zoghbi, & Maia, 1986) was isolated for the first time from _P. aduncum_.

Compounds **1**-**5** were evaluated against genetically engineered mutants of yeast _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ and have showed IC12 values of 120 and 100; 130 and 100; 105 and 120; 110 and 120; 130 and 120 mg/ml against the mutant yeast strains RS 321N and RS 322YK (_rad_ 52Y), respectively. Even though the activity could be considered weak, they were selective towards mutant strains lacking DNA cleavage repair mechanism since they were inactive (IC12 > 1,000 mg/ml) against the 'wild type' strain RS 188N (_rad_ +) (Gunatilaka et al., 1992; 1994). As there is no previous report on the activity of chromene compounds on DNA, the data obtained here are the basis for our further search for antitumoral or fungicidal compounds in the Piperaceae.

## Experimental

### Instrumentation and chromatography materials

Silica gel (Merck 230-400 mesh) was used for all column chromatography unless otherwise stated and solvents were redistilled prior to use. 1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded at 200 and 50 MHz, respectively, using CDCl3 as a solvent and TMS as reference. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet spectrometer. ES-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. HPLC separations were performed on a Shimadzu LC-10AS using a reversed phase column (Waters Nova Pak, C18; 3.9 x 150 mm) eluted with MeOH:H2O (3:2), flow rate of 0.5 ml/min and detection at 254 nm.

### Plant material

_Piper aduncum_ L. (Piperaceae) leaves were collected at Reserva da Ripasa, Ibate, SP and identified by Dr. Guillermo E. D. Paredes (Universidad Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Lambayeque, Peru). The voucher specimen is deposited at Departamento de Ecologia, Instituto de Biociencias-USP.

### Bioassays

The screening methods utilizing mutant strains of _S. cerevisiae_ have been described elsewhere (Gunatilaka et al., 1992). IC12 values refer to the concentration in mg/ml required to produce an inhibition zone of 12 mm diameter around a 100 ml well during a 48 h incubation period at 37degC. The positive control campothecin was active at 5.0 ml/ml for RS 322YK and at 200 ml/ml for RS 188N; streptonigrin was active at 4.0 ml/ml for RS 321N.

### Extraction and isolation of constituents

The CH2Cl2-soluble part of MeOH extract of powdered leaves of _P. aduncum_ (24.0 g) was applied to a silica gel column (300 g), and eluted with hexane containing increasing volumes of EtOHAc (up to 100%) to give 46 fractions (A1-A46). Fraction A3 (961.5 mg) was applied to a silica gel column (2.5 g) 230-400 mesh, eluted with hexane containing increasing concentrations of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give 14 fractions (B1-B14). Fraction B2 afforded compound **2** (13.0 mg). Fraction A4 (218.0 mg) was chromatographed via silica gel CC, eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give 10 fractions (C1-C10). Fraction C5 (133.0 mg) yielded pure compound **3** (23.0 mg). Fraction A5 was chromatographed on silica gel CC, eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 70%) to give nerolidol (180 mg). Fraction A11 (675.6 mg) yielded the pure compound **4** (171 mg). Fraction A13 (980.0 mg) was chromatographed on silica gel CC, eluted with hexane containing increasing amounts of EtOAc (up to 90%) to give the compound 2',6'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxydihydrohalcone (408.0 mg). Fraction A14, a green gum (25.0 mg), was further purified by reversed-phase HPLC, as described in the general experimental procedures, to give **5** (12.3 mg). The dried and powdered leaves (1.003 g) of _P. aduncum_ were extracted 

## Page 4

with EtOAc (five times, 150 ml each). The resulting extract (325.6 mg) was dissolved in CHCl3 and partitioned with an aqueous solution of NaHCO3 (six times, 50 ml each). The aqueous fraction was neutralized with HCl (6 N) and submitted to partition with EtOAc (three times, 100 ml each) to give a residue (248.0 mg). This fraction (248.0 mg) was submitted to a prep. TLC eluted with CHCl3:MeOH (98:2) and HOAc (1%) to give 12.0 mg of compound **1**.

_2,2-Dimethyl_-2H-_1-chromene_-_6-_carboxylic acid_ (**1**): amorphous solid; UV (MeOH) \(\lambda_{\max}\) (\(\log\epsilon\)): 240 nm (1.9); IR \(\nu_{\max}\) (KBr): 2400-3400, 3010, 2920, 2870, 1680, 1610, 1485, 1440, 1135 cm\({}^{-1}\); ES-MS \(m/z\) (rel int): 205 [M + 1] (100); 1H and 13C NMR, see Table 1.

_3-(3',7'-Dimethyl-2',6'-ocatedienyl)-4-methoxybenzoicacid_ (**5**): amorphous solid; UV (MeOH) \(\lambda_{\max}\) (\(\log\epsilon\)): 254 nm (3.8); IR \(\nu_{\max}\) (KBr): 2400-3400, 3005, 1680, 1640, 1600, 1488, 1445, 1130 cm\({}^{-1}\); ES-MS \(m/z\) (rel int): 303 [M + 1] (100); 1H and 13C NMR, see Table 1.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by grants from FAPESP, PADCT and CNPq. MF, VdSB, MJK and MCMY are grateful to CNPq for the fellowships. DCB thanks CAPES for providing a scholarship. We also acknowledge Dr. D.G.I. Kingston (Department of Chemistry, VPI and S.U.) for the yeast strains, RIPASA for facilities in the provision of plant material and Dr. Guillermo E. Delgado Paredes (Universidad Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Lambayeque, Peru) for identification of plant material.

## References

* (1)
* (2)Alecio, A. C., Bolzani, V. da S., Young, M. C. M., Kato, M. J., & Furlan, M. (1998). _Journal of Natural Products_, _61_, 637.
* (3)
* (4)Asprey, G. F., & Thornton, P. (1954). _Medicinal Plants of Jamaica_. Kingston, Jamaica: West Medical Journal p. 17.
* (5)
* (6)Bernard, C. B., Krishnamurty, H. G., Chauret, D., Durst, T., Philogene, B. J. R., Sanchez-Vindas, P., Hasbun, C., Poveda, L., San Roman, L., & Arnason, J. T. (1995). _Journal of Chemical Ecology_, _21_, 801.
* (7)
* (8)Burke, B., & Nair, M. (1986). _Phytochemistry_, _25_, 1427.
* (9)
* (10)De Haan, J. W., & van de Ven, L. J. M. (1973). _Organic Magnetic Resonance_, \(5\), 147.
* (11)
* (12)Diaz, P. P., Arias, T., & Nathan, P. J. (1987). _Phytochemistry_, _26_, 809.
* (13)
* (14)Gunatiaka, A. A. L., Samaranayake, G., Kingston, D. G. I., Hofmann, G., & Johnson, R. K. (1992). _Journal of Natural Products_, _55_, 1648.
* (15)
* (16)Gunatiaka, A. A. L., Kingston, D. G. I., & Johnson, R. K. (1994). _Pure and Applied Chemistry_, _66_, 2219.
* (17)
* (18)Moreira, D. D., Guimaraes, E. F., & Kaplan, M. A. C. (1998). _Phytochemistry_, _48_, 1075.
* (19)
* (20)Nair, M. G., & Burke, B. A. (1990). _Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry_, _38_, 1093.
* (21)
* (22)Orjala, J., Eldelmeier, C. A. J., Wright, A. D., Rali, T., & Sticher, O. (1993a). _Phytochemistry_, _34_, 813.
* (23)
* (24)Orjala, J., Eldelmeier, C. A. J., Wright, A. D., Rali, T., & Sticher, O. (1993b). _Planta Medica_, _39_, 546.
* (25)
* (26)Parmar, V. S., Jain, S. C., Bisht, K. S., Jain, R., Taneja, P., Jha, A., Tyagi, O. D., Prasad, A. K., Wengel, J., Olsen, C. E., & Boll, P. M. (1997). _Phytochemistry_, _46_, 597.
* (27)
* (28)Ramos, L. S., Da Silva, M. L., Luz, A. I. R., Zoghbi, M. G. B., & Maia, J. G. S. (1986). _Journal of Natural Products_, _49_, 712.



