# 10.1248@cpb.56.407.pdf

## Page 1



# Antinociceptive Profile of 2,3,6-Trisubstituted Piperidine Alkaloids:

3-_O_-Acetyl-spectaline and Semi-synthetic Derivatives of (-)-Spectaline

Claudio Viegas, Jr., Magna Suzana Alexandre-Moreira, Carlos Alberto Manssour Fraga, Eliezer Jesus Barreiro, Vanderlan da Silva Bolzan, Ana Luisa Palhares de Miranda,

# Abstract

In early studies, we have reported the antinociceptive profile of (-)-spectaline, a piperidine alkaloid from _Cassia spectabilis_. The present study describes the synthesis, the antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities of a series of 2,3,6-trialkyl-piperidine alkaloids: the natural (-)-3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (LASSBio-755) and ten semi-synthetic specialine derivatives. Structure-activity relationship (SARs) studies were performed. The structures of all synthesized derivatives were confirmed by means of nuclear magnetic resonance. Compounds were evaluated for their analgesic (acetic acid-induced mouse abdominal constrictions, hot-plate test, formalin-in-duced pain test) and some of them for the anti-inflammatory activities (carrageenan-induced rat paw edema test). The pharmacological results showed that several of the new compounds given orally at a dose of 100 _μ_mU/kg significantly inhibited the acetic acid-induced abdominal constrictions, but they were less active than (-)-spectaline. LASSBio-755 and LASSBio-776 were the most actives with 37% and 31.7% of inhibition. In the formalin-induced pain only LASSBio-776 was able to inhibit by 34.4% the paw lifelong response of the inflammatory phase, (-)-spectaline and LASSBio-755 did show any activity. In the carrageenan-induced rat paw edema, only (-)-spectaline exhibited an anti-inflammatory profile, showing an ED50 value of 56.6 _μ_mU/kg. Our results suggest different mechanisms of action for the analgesic activity observed for LASSBio-776 (3-_O_-Bocedaleline), LASSBio-755 (3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline) and (-)-spectaline (LASSBio-754). The antinociceptive profile of some of the semi-synthetic specialine derivatives extends our research concerning the chemical and pharmacological optimization of isolated natural products in the search of new drug candidates from brazilian biodiversity.

## Introduction

### Anti-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory

Anti-inflammatory

## Page 2

withing test (ED50=48.5 \(\mu\)mol/kg) and capsaicin induced pain (ED50=20.8 \(\mu\)mol/kg).[8]

Extending our research program concerning the bio-prospection of natural products and its derivatives, we have selected, to conclude this investigation, another abundant piperidine alkaloid, (-)-3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (**LASSBio-755**, Chart 1) and synthesized other 10 semi-synthetic derivatives prepared from natural (-)-spectaline, _i.e._ a series of 2,3,6-trisubstituted piperidine alkaloids. The present study was focused on the synthesis, evaluation of antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory properties and structure-activity relationship (SAR) analysis of these new derivatives in order to verify the stereoelectronic contributions and requirements of the pharmacophoric groups A, B and C for the antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities (Chart 1).

## Results and Discussion

The antinociceptive profile of all new 2,3,6-trisubstituted piperidine derivatives developed herein was initially evaluated using classical acetic acid-induced mouse abdominal constriction test,[9] with indomethacin as standard. The results are disclosed in Fig. 1. Some of the new compounds given orally at a dose of 100 \(\mu\)mol/kg significantly inhibited the acetic acid-induced abdominal constrictions, but they were less active than (-)-spectaline and indomethacin. Among them, the natural acetate derivative (**LASSBio-755**) and its _O_-Boc analogue (**LASSBio-776**) were the most actives with 37% and 31.7% of inhibition. Based on these results some preliminary structure-activity relationships were analysed. Comparing the inhibitory profile of compounds **LASSBio-782**, **LASSBio-821** and **LASSBio-775** with **LASSBio-776** and **LASSBio-755** indicates that the presence of groups that blocked the hydrogen bond donnor character of the piperidine nitrogen seems to be deletery for the analgesic activity. On the other hand, the antinociceptive activity showed to be inversely dependent of the volume of the groups at C-3 (OR1 group) once that the inhibition of the constrictions follows the order R1=H>Ac>Boc. The introduction of more polar and hydrogen bond-donating hydroxy groups at C-13' in the alcohol or oxime derivatives, _i.e._**LASSBio-781**, **LASSBio-820** and **LASSBio-784**, did not result in a increase of the antinociceptive activity but indicated through the direct comparison of the bioprofile of compounds **LASSBio-781** and **LASSBio-820** that the stereochemistry at C-3 seems to be a pharmacophoric requirement for an adequate fit in the target receptor. Additionally, the introduction of an acetyl group at C-3 of **LASSBio-755** modify drastically the toxicological aspect of these alkaloids, once that it did not show any sign of toxicity when administered at a single dose of 500 \(\mu\)mol/kg (data not shown) in contrast with (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**).[8]

Considering the significant antinociceptive activity observed for **LASSBio-755** and its analogue **LASSBio-776** we decided to investigate its effects on other models of pain and compare the results with that showed by (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**).[8] In the formalin-induced pain[10] only **LASSBio-776** was able to inhibit by 34.4% the paw licking response of the inflammatory phase, (-)-spectaline and **LASSBio-755** did show any activity (Fig. 2). Indomethacin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the later phase without interfering on the earlier one in the formalin-induced pain test.[11] These results on the formalin-induced pain test led us to investigate the anti-inflammatory profile of these same compounds on the carrageenan-induced rat paw edema.[9]**LASSBio-755** and, unexpectedly, **LASSBio-776** did not show an anti-inflammatory activity at the dose used. Only (-)-spectaline was able to inhibit the edema formation, showing an ED50 value of 56.6 \(\mu\)mol/kg (Fig. 3). The same order of potency was observed for both antinociceptive (ED50=48.5 \(\mu\)mol/kg)[9] and anti-inflammatory (ED50=56.6 \(\mu\)mol/kg) (Fig. 3) activities of (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**), indicating a common pathway of action.

Despite the absence of effect on the neurogenic phase of the formalin test at the dose used, **LASSBio-755** and **LASSBio-776** showed a significant increase in the latency time in the hot-plate test,[12] similar to morphine, while (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**), even at a dose of 300 \(\mu\)mol/kg, was inactive (Fig. 4).

The hot-plate and formalin test differs in some aspects. Hot-plate test is based on the use of a short-duration nociceptive thermal stimulus (phasic pain) while formalin use a long-duration chemical stimulus (tonic pain). Tissue injury leads to a persistent afferent input in the latter. The nociceptive response in the first phase of formalin and hot-plate models seems to result from direct activation of nociceptors and is inhibited by drugs which act mainly at central sites.[13, 14] Centrally acting analgesics are also effective in the second phase.[10] This phase is attributed mainly to the development of an inflammatory reaction at the site of injection and increased synaptic transmission in the spinal cord.[13]

Fig. 1: Effect of the 2,3,6-Trisubstituted Piperidine Alkaloids and Indomethacin in Mice Abdominal Constrictions Induced by Acetic Acid (0.6%, i.p.)

Fig. 2: Effect of (−)-Specttaline (**LASSBio-754**), **LASSBio-755**, **LASSBio-776** and **Indomethacin** in Mice Formalin-Induced Pain Test

Each column represents the mean−5.E.M. (−10 animals per group). *_p_<0.05 (Student’s / test) as compared to the vehicle control group.



## Page 3

Considering the central activity observed for **LASSBio-755** and **LASSBio-776** in the hot-plate test, it was expected to observe some activity in the earlier phase of the formalin that could be dependent of the magnitude of the dose. The first phase of formalin is brief and occurs in the first 5 min. The first measure in the hot-plate test was at 30 min and only **LASSBio-755** showed a significant activity. **LASSBio-776** showed a significant activity from 60 min. Since the compounds were administered orally and the dose used was the same in both tests, the lack of activity on the neurogenic phase could be related with the pharmacokinetics profile of the compounds and somewhat with the mechanisms of the pain processing in these different models.

Recently, searching for new candidates compounds useful for treating Alzheimer's disease, the chloride analogues of some of these semi-synthetic piperidine alkaloid derivatives were described as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.15 The cholinergic system was involved in the transmission of nociceptive information and cholinergic drugs, such as muscarinic and nicotinic agonists, and also acetylcholinesterase inhibitors were described to induce antinociception.16-18 The acetylcholine-induced constriction test has been used for screening analgesic compounds.19 In this model (-)-spec-taline and **LASSBio-776** similarly inhibited the constrictions by 44.7% and 47.9%, respectively, while **LASSBio-755** showed a more important antinociceptive effect, inhibiting the constrictions by 82% (Fig. 5). These results in addition with the hot-plate test and the acetylcholinesterase inhibition15 suggest the involvement of the cholinergic system in the antinociceptive response elicited by **LASSBio-776** and **LASSBio-755**.

Taken together these results suggest differents mechanisms of action for the analgesic activity observed for **LASSBio-776** (3-_O_-Boc-spectaline) and **LASSBio-755** (3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline), acting mainly by modulation of receptors located at central nervous system, and for (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**) that showed to be a peripheral analgesic and anti-inflammatory agent.

In conclusion, this study revealed new analgesic compounds derived from (-)-spectaline without apparent toxicity and gave support to the strategy of modifications of isolated natural products from brazilian biodiversity seeking the optimization of the biological activities in the search of new drug candidates.

## Experimental

**Chemistry** The natural alkaloids (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**) and (-)-3-_O_-acetyl-spectaline (**LASSBio-755**) were obtained from the ethanolic extract of flowers of _Cassia spectroballs_ (DC). Iwus _et al_. (Leguminose), as previously described.6,7)

For the preparation of the target derivatives from (-)-spectaline (**LASSBio-754**) the reaction sequences outlined in Chart 2 were followed. Reaction of **LASSBio-754** with HCl under anhydrous conditions in CH2Cl2 yielded the hidrochloride **LASSBio-768**. Carbamate **LASSBio-775** and carbonate **LASSBio-776** were prepared as a 1:2 mixture, by reaction of **LASSBio-754** with (BOC)/PECl2N in CH2Cl2-32D silver **LASSBio-777** was obtained by reaction of **LASSBio-754** with _tert_-butyl dimethyl ethyl nitrate (TBSOfT)/2,6-lutidine in CH2Cl2,23D Treatment of carbonate **LASSBio-776** with BrCl4-DMAP/EtN23,25D and MSCl/EtN in CH2Cl2, afforded _N_-benzyl carbonized **LASSBio-782** and _N_-methylomethyl carbonate **LASSBio-821**, respectively. Oxidation of **LASSBio-754** under Jones conditions yielded the diketone **LASSBio-766**, that was subsequently reduced with LiAlH4 in THF to afford **LASSBio-782**. Reduction of **LASSBio-754** with NaBH4 in MeOH furnished **LASSBio-781**, that differs from **LASSBio-820** at the absolute configuration on C-3. Finally, **LASSBio-754** was converted into the oxime **LASSBio-784** by reaction with NH2OH-HCl in pyridine/ EtOH27.27

Melting points were determined with a Microquimica MQAP-301 melting point apparatus and are uncorrected. 1H- and 1C-NMR spectra were

Fig. 4: Time Course Effect of (−)-Spectaline (**LASSBio-754**), **LASSBio-755**, **LASSBio-776** and Morphine in the Hot-Plate Test

Data are expressed as mean ±S.E.M. (_n_ = 10 animals per group). *_p_ < 0.05 (Student’s \(t\) test) as compared to the vehicle control group.

Fig. 5: Effect of (−)-Spectaline (**LASSBio-754**), **LASSBio-755**, **LASSBio-776** in Mice Aceitcholine-Induced Abdominal Constrictions

Each column represents the mean ±S.E.M. (_n_ = 10 animals per group). *_p_ < 0.05 (Student’s \(t\) test) as compared to the vehicle control group.

Fig. 3: Effect of (−)-Spectaline (**LASSBio-754**), **LASSBio-755**, **LASSBio-776** and Indomethacin in Carrageenan-Induced Rat Paw Edema

## Page 4

recorded on a Varian Unit 500 spectrometer at 500 and 125.67 MHz, respectively, using DMSO-_d__s_, CDCl3, and CD,OD as solvents and TMS as internal standard; gCOSY, gHMQC, gHMBC, and DEPT NMR experiments were performed in the same spectrometer, using standard Varian pulse sequences. All chemical shifts were reported as 8 (ppm) values. The chemical reagents used in synthesis were purchased from E. Merck (Darmstadt, FRG) and Aldrich (Milwaukee, U.S.A.). Extracts were dried over MgSO4 and solvents were removed under reduced pressure. Column chromatography was accomplished on Al2O3 grade I, type WN-3. TLC visualization was made by sprayed with iodochloroplatinate (Merck) and Dragonoff reagents.

**2-(_R_-)Methyl-6-(_S_)-(tetradecyl-13'-one)-piperidin-3-(_R_)-d_ Hydrochloride **(LASSBio-76a)** To 102.4 mg (0.31 mmol) of 2-(_R_)-methyl-6-(_S_)-(tetradecyl-13'-one)-piperidin-3-(_R_)-d **(LASSBio-75a)** dissolved in dried CH3Cl2 (3 ml), was added anhydrous HCl. Let was added for 30 min at room temperature. The hydrochloride **LASSBio-768** (112 mg) was obtained in 98% drop (15 mL); **H-NMR (DMSO-d)** 8.10 (4 M, 7-6.5 Hz, 17-1.19 (m, 18H, 142-10 H-10; 17-1.28 m, 22 m, 17-1.1; 41 (m, 2H, 2H, 14-15-s); 1.50 (2m, 2H, 11-11): 1.81 (m, 1H, 5-

## Page 5

added to resultant solution, that was kept stirring for additional 10 min up to pH 10. This solution was extracted with EiOAc, dried over MgSO4, evaporated and purified by Al,O, column chromatography using EiOAc (3): hexane (7) as eluent, furnishing 70.9 mg of a brownil of 6.8%. 1H-NMR (CDCl) _d_: 8.17 (d, 3H, _J_=6.7 Hz, H-7); 1.27 (m, 2H, H-2' to H-11'); 1.32 (m, 1H, H-1'); 1.42 (m, 1H, H-1'); 1.54 (m, 1H, _I_-5a); 1.81 (m, 1H, H-5a); 2.13 (s, 3H, 1H-14'); 2.20 (m, 1H, H-4a); 2.40 (t, 2H, _J_=8.0 Hz, 2H-12'); 2.42 (m, 1H, H-4a); 2.92 (m, 1H, H-6); 3.34 (t, 1H, _J_=6.7 Hz, H-2).

_-(R)_-Methyl-6-(_S_)-(tetradecyl-13'-hydroxy)-piperidin-3-01 (LASSHo-820) 1.49 mmol/43 m.g of LaH14 was suspended to 0.5 ml anhydrous/43 frit, stirred and cooled to 0 degC, under N2, atmosphere. Then, 0.31 mmol (100 mg) of 2-(_R_)-(_R_)-(_S_)-(tetradecyl-13'-one)-piperidin-3-0a, dissolved in 0.5 ml THF, was added, drop to drop, and reaction carried out for 2 h period. Reaction was quenched by the addition of 0.43 ml of H2O, 0.43 ml of aqueous NaOH 15% and more 1.3 ml of H2O, subsequently. The mixture was stirred overnight, filtrated, extracted with CH2Cl2, dried over MgSO4 and concentrated, resulting in 90 mg of dried in soil. Yield 90%, 1H-NMR (CDCl) _d_: 8.17 (1.10 (d, 3H, _J_=7.3 Hz, H-7); 1.27 (m, 2H, H-11' to H-11'); 1.12-12'); 1.37 (m, 4H, H-12', H-14'); 1.51 (m, 1H, H-5a); 1.58 (m, 1H, H-5a); 2.03 (m, 2H, H-4); 2.70 (m, 1H-6); 2.89 (m, 1H, H-3); 3.93 (m, 1H, H-13').

_2-(R)_-Methyl-6-(_S_)-(tetradecyl-13'-hydroxy)-piperidin-3-(_R_)-ol (LASSHo-781) 0.345 mmol/43 1.045 mmol/43 1.



## Page 6

Pharmacol. Chemother_, **32**, 295--310 (1968).
* [20] Greene T. W., Watts P. G. M., "Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis," 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, 1999.
* [21] Furstner A., Thiel O. R., _J. Org. Chem._, **65**, 1738--1742 (2000).
* [22] Ishizuka T., Kunieda T., _Tetrahedron Lett._, **28**, 4185--4188 (1987).
* [23] Corey E. J., Venkateswarlu A., _J. Am. Chem. Soc._, **94**, 6190--6191 (1972).
* [24] Emde H., Domsch D., Feger H., Frick U., Gotz A., Hergott H. H., Hofmann K., Kober W., Krageloh K., Oesterle T., Steppan W., Westa W., Simchen G., _Synthesis_, **1**, 1--26 (1982).
* [25] Schlessinger R. H., Lopes A., _J. Org. Chem._, **46**, 5252--5253 (1981).
* [26] Corey E. J., Noe M. C., Guzman-Perez A., _J. Am. Chem. Soc._, **117**, 10817--10824 (1995).
* [27] Shirner R. L., Hermann C. K. F., Morrill T. C., Curtin D. Y., Fuson R. C., "The Systematic Identification of Organic Compounds," 7th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997.
* [28] DePay C. H., Ponder B. W., _J. Am. Chem. Soc._, **81**, 4629--4631 (1959).
* [29] Zimmerman M., _Pain_, **16**, 109--110 (1983).
* [30] Matheus M. E., Oliveira L. F., Freitas A. C., Carvalho A. M., Barreiro E. J., _Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res._, **24**, 1219--1222 (1991).



