# 10.2174@187152010794728620.pdf

## Page 1

Evaluation of Effect of Triterpenes and Limonoids on Cell Growth, Cell Cycle and Apoptosis in Human Tumor Cell Lines

Cristiane M. Cazal, Kantima Choosang, Vanessa Gisele P. Severino, Marcio S. Soares, Andre Lucio F. Sarria, Joao B. Fernandes, Maria Fatima G.F. Silva, Paulo Cezar Vieira, Pannee Pakkong, Gabriela M. Almeida, Melena Vasconcelos, Maria S.J. Nascimento, Madalena M.M. Pinto

# Abstract

Six triterpenes and eight limonoids were evaluated for their capacity to inhibit the growth of three human tumour cell lines, breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), non-small cell lung cancer (NCI-H460) and melanoma (A375-C5). The mechanisms involved in the observed cell growth arrest of the four most potent compounds were carried out by studying their effect in cell cycle profile and programmed cell death. The results showed that one triterpene (odoratol) and two limonoids (geduin and cedrelone) caused cell cycle arrest while only the limonoids geduin and cedrelone were found to be very potent inducers of apoptosis.

## INTRODUCTION

Cancer represents one of the most severe health problems worldwide and the development of new anticancer drugs and more effective treatment strategies are fields of utmost importance in drug discovery and clinical therapy. Based on significant advances in cancer biology, much of the research in these areas is currently focused on cancer-specific mechanisms and the corresponding molecular targets [1].

Natural products have been the major sources of chemical diversity driving pharmaceutical discovery over the past century. Many natural products and synthetically modified natural product derivatives have been successfully developed for clinical use to treat human diseases in almost all therapeutic areas [2]. In fact, plant-derived compounds have played an important role in treatment of cancers, and some of the most promising and effective drugs have come up from plant sources like taxol8, camptothecin, combrestatin, vinblastine and vincristine. These drugs have also been the major source of new drug candidates for cancer chemotherapy [3]. Apart from these, many other plant-derived compounds are now in clinical trials as anticancer agents.

One of the most interesting groups of plant natural products is the triterpeneoid group. Over the past decade, coming to the foreground of interest due to their diverse biological effects are a large group of cyclic triterpenoid-like substances which comprise more than 4000 different identified compounds so far. Triterpenoids are studied for their anti-inflammatory activity, hepatoprotective, analgesic, antimicrobial, antimicotic, virostatic, immunomodulatory and tonic effects. They are used in prevention and treatment of hepatitis, parasitic and protozoal infection and above all, for their cytotoxic effects [4].

From a biological point of view, most important triterpeneoid structures are oleanane, ursane, lupane and dammarane triterpenoids. However, in what concerns the anticancer effects, not many triterpeneoid compounds have been so far studied. Among these, the lupane triterpene betulinic acid and the ursane triterpenes boswellic acid and ursolic acid have been exhaustively studied for their anti-cancer effects.

Betulinic acid, which belongs to the lupane group, has been investigated intensively for its anticancer activity. Betulinic acid was found to exhibit the cytotoxic effects against human melanoma cell lines MEL-1, 2 and 4 having the IC50 ranging from 0.5-1.6 mg/ml and dose dependent fragmentation of DNA with induction of apoptosis occurred 24 hours after administration [5]. Cytotoxic effects of betulinic acid were also found in other cell lines including ovarian A2780, OVCAR-5, GROV-1, large cell lung cancer NCI-H460, epidermoid carcinoma A431, melanoma Me665/2/21, Me665/260, small cell lung cancer POGB and POGB/DX doxorubicin resistant with the IC50 values ranging from 1.5-4.5 mg/ml. However, it showed lower toxicity to non-tumor cell lines such as HDFC (normal dermal fibroblasts, IC50 = 10.2 +- 1.5 mg/ml) and PBL (peripheral blood lymphocytes, IC50 = 50 mg/ml), in comparison with doxorubicin (HDFC, IC50 = 0.38 mg/ml; PBL, IC50 = 0.02 mg/ml). Interestingly, betulinic acid was markedly more effective than cisplatin, doxorubicin, vincristin and radiation on the primary cancer cells isolated from glioblastoma multiforme [6]. It was demonstrated also that one of the mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic effect of betulinic acid and its derivatives was apoptosis induction which was mediated by increasing permeability of the mitochondrial membrane which disturbs the transmembrane potential, causing the release of cytochrome-_c_ and AIF (apoptosis inducing factor), with the resulting activation of caspases 3 and 8. Subsequent cleavage of the substrates and nuclear fragmentation thus occurred [7]. Inhibition of mitochondrial membrane permeability by enhanced expression of Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL proteins suppresses activation of caspases and other markers of apoptosis of neuroectodermal origin [8]. Furthermore, betulinic acid was found to exert its cytotoxic effect against human glioma cell lines

## Page 2

(LN-229, U87, MG, T98G, LN-18 and LN-308) and an increased level of the proapoptotic protein Bax was observed 24 hours after treatment with butulinic acid. The induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are essential for activation of caspase 3, also occurred [9]. On the other hand, clones of these cell lines expressing high levels of Bcl-2, showed reduced ROS without activation of betulinic acid induced apoptosis. These findings were in accordance with the fact that the antiapoptotic properties of Bcl-2 are connected with antioxidative defence mechanisms. This underlines the importance of producing ROS in the induction of apoptosis by betulinic acid. Betulinic acid is also an inhibitor of the enzyme aminopeptidase N which takes part in the angioproliferative and metastatic activity of tumors. From a clinical perspective, it is interesting to point out that betulinic acid exhibits its greater effect in an environment with a pH lower than 6.8, which is the case for the majority of tumors [10]. Tellingly, in contrast to non-cancer cells, cancer cells subjected to hypothermia showed increased sensitivity to betulinic acid [11].

For the ursane group, boswellic acid and its derivatives were found to be cytotoxic to glioma cell lines [12]. In animal model, depending on dose, they caused an increased passage of cells to apoptosis, inhibition of tumor growth and extension of survival after implantation of cell lines of malignant glioma C6 [13]. Derivatives of boswellic acid were found to induce differentiation in leukemic cell lines in low concentrations and in high concentrations they led to apoptosis [14]. The antiproliferative effects of these derivatives are connected to their ability to inhibit both topoisomerase I and IIa, whose activity is critical for the proliferation of cancer cells. Acetyl-11-keto-b-boswellic acid (AKBA), originally isolated from _Boswellia serrata_, was found to inhibit constitutive STAT3 (signal transducers and activators of transcription-3) in human multiple myeloma cells [15]. Activation of STAT3 has been linked with survival, proliferation, chemoresistance and angiogenesis of tumor cells, including human multiple myeloma. Thus, agents that can suppress STAT3 activation have potential as cancer therapeutics. Lipophilicity of boswellic acid derivatives allows them to penetrate the blood-brain barrier and thus renders them the potential for use in the treatment of malignancies of the CNS. Concerning this, they were found to show higher inhibitory effects against glioma cells than those of the clinically used anticancer agents camptothecins [16] and etoposide [12]. Furthermore, derivatives of boswellic acid are shown to be suitable for palliative treatment of progressive or relapsing brain tumors, due to, among other things, their anti-edematous properties [17]. Another interesting member of the ursane group is involic acid, a ubiquitous triterpenoid in higher plants. This compound was found to show inhibitory activity against mammalian DNA polymerases \(a\) and \(b\), and human DNA topoisomerases I and II. It also inhibits bovine DNA polymerase \(a\), rat polymerase \(b\), HIV reverse transcriptase. It was also found to lower transcription of COX-2 by inhibition of the signal pathways PKC and AP-1. As the expression of PKC and AP-1 is elevated in a number of tumors, thus targeting these molecules is one of the aims of antiproliferative therapy [18].

One of the most important members of the oleanane group is oleanolic acid which is present in high concentration in the ginseng root and it showed a range of antitumor effects. Oleanolic acid was shown to induce differentiation in the teratocarcinoma cell line F9 [19]. Furthermore, it was found to exhibit also antimutagenic and antiangiogenic activities [20, 21]. In addition, it also stimulates the release of NO and TNF-a, including induction of iNOS activity and TNF-a expression in macrophages. This effect is mediated by its ability to activate DNA binding to the transcription complex NF-kB and thereby its activation. Maslinic acid, another oleanane triterpenoid which is present in high concentrations in the protective wax-like coating of olives, was shown to exhibit inhibitory effects on the growth of HT29 colon cancer cells [22]. Treatment with maslinic acid resulted in a significant inhibition of cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner and caused apoptotic death in colon-cancer cells. Mechanism study has revealed that maslinic acid inhibited considerably the expression of Bcl-2 whilst increasing that of Bax. It also stimulated the release of mitochondrial cytochrome-_c_ and activated caspases 9 and 3. Finally, for the damamarane group, fomilletic acids A and B, the secondary metabolites of basidomycete _Fomillea frazinea_, were shown to inhibit mammalian DNA polymerase \(a\) and \(b\), and human DNA topoisomerase I and II. It exhibited also cytotoxic effects on cancer cell lines NUGC-3, and PC-12 where differentiation was observed with subcytotoxic concentrations [23].

In the course of our research program on isolation, synthesis and evaluation of anticancer activity of plant natural products, we have evaluated the capacity of two dammarane type triterpenes (**1** and **2**), four triucallane type triterpenes (**3-6**, Fig. **1**) and eight 

## Page 3

limonoids (**7**-**14**, Fig. **2**) to inhibit the _in vitro_ growth of three human tumor cell lines namely breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), non-small cell lung cancer (NC1-H460) and melanoma (A375-C5). Furthermore, the mechanism underlying the growth inhibitory activity of the four most active compounds was also investigated for their effects on the cell cycle profile and the programmed cell death of the NCI-H460 cells.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### General Experimental

1H and 13C NMR spectra were recorded in CDCl3, at ambient temperature on a Bruker ARX 400 instrument operating at 400 and 80 MHz, respectively. The Shimadzu LC-6AD model HPLC equipped with a Shimadzu SPD-6AV UV detector (240 and 215 nm) and a Biodex Asahiba GS-310 2Ga column (400 x 25 mm, 5mm particle size) was used. For column chromatography, Silica gel 60 (Acros organics) and Sephadex LH 20 (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech AB) were used. Solvents were from Synt and reagents were from SIGMA, unless otherwise stated.

### Extraction and Isolation of the Compounds

_Isolation of Cabraleadiol (1) and Octillone (2)_

Fruits of _Cabralea canjerana_ (Vell.) Mart. was collected in Federal University of Viosa, MG, Brazil. The plant material was identified by T.D. Pennington of the Royal Botanical Garden, Kew (UK). A voucher specimen was deposited in the Herbarium of Departamento de Engenaharia Flowerstal, Dendrologia of the Federal University of Viosa.

After removing seeds, dried fruits (460g) were ground and extracted with ethanol (3 x 500 mL), at room temperature and the solution was evaporated under reduced pressure to give 88 g of a concentrated ethanolic extract which was dissolved in 400 ml of a 3:1 mixture of MeOH-H2O. The aqueous methanolic solution was partitioned successively with hexane (2x300 ml), CH2Cl2 (2x300 ml) and E6OAc (2x300 ml) to furnish hexane (47.4 g), dichloromethane (5.4 g) and ethyl acetate (4.4 g) fractions. The hexane fraction was applied over a silica gel column (250 g) and eluted with hexane-CH2Cl2-EtOAc-MeOH gradient, eight 700 ml fractions were collected as follows: fr 1 (hexane), fr 2 (hexane-CH2Cl2, 1:1); fr 3 (hexane-CH2Cl2, 3:7); Fr 4 (hexane), fr 5 (CH2Cl2-EtOAc, 1:1); fr 6 (EtOAc), fr 7 (EtOAc-MeOH, 1:1); fr 8 (McOH), Fr. 2 (120 mg) was placed on a gel permeation column of Sephadex LH-20 (50 g) and eluted with a 1:1 mixture of MeOH-CH2Cl2 to afford three 250 ml subfractions. Subfr 2 (88.6 mg) was chromatograph on a silica gel column (15 g) and eluted with a 1:1 mixture of hexane-Me2CO to give five 100 ml fractions. Frs 3 and 4, after evaporation of the solvent by reduced pressure, afforded, respectively, 24.4 mg of cabraleadiol (**1**) and 16.3 mg of ocotillone (**2**) whose structures were established by 1H and 13C NMR as well as comparison of their spectral and physical data with those reported in the literature [24, 25].

### Isolation of 7-Deacetoxy-7-Oxogedunin (7) and 6-Acetoxygedunin (10)

Fruits of _Carpa guianensis_ Aubl. were purchased from the city of Belem (Para State, Brazil). Dried and ground fruit arid (160g) was extracted with MeOH (3 x 500 ml) at room temp. The methadonic solution was evaporated under reduced pressure to give 40 g of the crude methanol extract which was dissolved in 150 ml of a 4:1 mixture of MeOH-H2O and then partitioned with hexane (3x 150 ml) and EtoAc (3x 150 ml) to give, respectively 23 g and 15 g of hexane and ethyl acetate extracts. The ethyl acetate extract was

Fig. **(2)**: Structure of limonoids (**7**-**14**) evaluated for growth inhibitory activity against three human tumour cell lines.



## Page 4

applied to a flash column chromatography of silica gel (200 g) and eluted with hexane-CH2Cl2-Me2CO -MeOH gradient, and 50 ml fractions were collected as follows: frs 1-2 (hexane), frs 3-6 (hexane-CH2Cl2, 7.3), frs 7-18 (hexane-CH2Cl2, 1:1), frs 18-21 (CH2Cl2, frs 22-23 (CH2Cl2, 7.3), fr 24 (CH2Cl2-Me2CO, 1:4), frs 25 (150 ml, MeOH). Purification of fr 8 by isocitrate HPLC, using a mixture of MeOH/CH2Cl2 (7:3) as solvent and a UV detection at 254 nm, yielded 32.1 mg of 7-deacetoxy-7-oxogedunin (**7**) and 55.8 mg of 6-acetoxygedunin (**10**) whose structures were established by comparison of their 1H and 1NNMR data with those reported in the literature [26].

### Preparation of Acetonide of Odoradol (5)

Odoradol (4, 25 mg) was dissolved in 2.5 ml of acetone and one drop of conc.H2SO4 was added. The mixture was stirred at room temperature, under N2 atmosphere, for 3 h after which the solution was evaporated and the product was dissolved in ethyl acetate and the solution was washed with H2O to remove H2SO4. Evaporation of the solvent gave 15 mg of acetonide of odoratol (**5**).

Isolations of the triucnaline triterpenes odoratone (**3**), odoratol (**4**), 22-hydroxytrinculan-7, 24-diene-2,3-diene (**6**) and the limonoids gedunin (**8**) and 7-deacetoxyedunin (**9**) from _Cedrela odorata_ grafted on _Toona clata_ var. _anstrulis_ have been described previously by de Paula _et al._[27, 28]. Isolation and characterization of the limonoids 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazadirone (**11**), credclone (**12**), toonacilin (**13**) from _Toona clilata_ were described by Neto _et al._[29, 30] while isolation of guyanin (**14**) from _Hortia oreadica_, was reported by Severino _et al._[31].

### Biological Activity

#### Reagents

RPMI-1640, foetal bovine serum (FBS), L-glutamine, phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and trypsin were from Gibco Invitrogen Co. (Scotland, UK). Acetic acid, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), penicillin, streptomycin, sulforhodamine B (SRB) and trypan blue were from Sigma Chemical Co (Saint Louis, USA). Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and Tris were from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany).

#### Solutions of Compounds

Stock solutions of compounds were prepared in DMSO and kept at -20 degC. Appropriate dilutions of the compounds were freshly prepared just prior to each assay.

#### Cell Lines

Three human tumour cell lines, MCF-7 (breast adenocarcinoma, ECACC), NCI-H460 (non-small cell lung cancer, a kind gift from NCI, Bethesda, USA) and A375-C5 (melanoma, ECACC) were grown as a monolayer and routinely maintained in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated FBS, 2 mM glutamine and antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin), at 37 degC in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2.

### Tumour Cell Growth Assay

The effect of the compounds on the growth of the described human tumour cell lines was evaluated according to the procedure adopted by the National Cancer Institute (NCI, USA) in the "_In vitro_ Anticancer Drug Discovery Screen", which uses the protein-binding dye SRB to assess cell growth [32, 33]. The plating density of each cell line was 1.5 x 105 cells/ml for MCF-7, and 7.5 x 105 cells/ml for NCI-H460 and A375-C5. Cells were allowed to attach overnight in 96-well plates and were then exposed for 48 h to five serial concentrations of the compounds, starting from a maximum concentration of 150 mM (final concentration). At the end of this incubation period the adherent cells were fixed _in situ_ with 10% TCA (final concentration), washed with distilled water and stained with 0.4% SRB (solubilised in 1% acetic acid). The bound stain was solubilised in 10 mM Tris and the absorbance was measured at 492 nm in a microplate reader (EAR400 STL-Labinstruments). For each test compound and for each cell line a dose-response curve was made and the value of GI50, corresponding to the concentration of compound that inhibited 50% of the net cell growth, was calculated as described elsewhere [33]. Doxorubicin, used as a positive control, was tested in the same manner.

### Flow Cytometric Analysis of Cell Cycle Profile and Levels of Apoptosis in the NCI-H460 Cell Line

The compounds with GI50 bellow (or similar to) 10 mM were selected for further analysis of their effect on cell cycle profile and apoptosis. These assays were carried out in the NCI-H460 cells, since they were one of the most sensitive cells to these compounds. Cells were plated in 6-well plates (7.5x104 cells/ml) and incubated at 37 degC for 24 h, in order to adhere. Cells were then incubated for 48 h with complete medium (control), the compounds solvent (DMSO) or with the compounds at their respective GI50 concentrations (determined by the SRB assay). Cells were then harvested and further processed for cell cycle analysis and apoptosis detection.

For cell cycle analysis, cells were fixed in 70% ethanol and subsequently resuspended in PBS containing 0.1 mg/ml RNase A and 5 mg/ml propidium iodide. Cellular DNA content (for cell cycle analysis and presence of sub-G1 peak) was then analyzed as previously described [34], using an Epics XL-MCL Coulter flow cytometer, plotting at least 20,000 events per sample.

Apoptosis was analyzed using the Human Annexin V-FITC/PI apoptosis Kit (Bender MedSystems, Vienna, Austria), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Measurement of phosphatidylserine externalization was processed using a flow cytometer plotting at least 20,000 events per sample (as above).

Both cell cycle distribution and apoptosis data were analyzed using the FlowJo 7.2 software (Tree Star, Inc.). At least three independent experiments were carried out and results are presented as the average and standard error (SEM) of those experiments.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Six triterpenes (Fig. **1**) and eight limonoids (Fig. **2**) were evaluated for their ability to inhibit the _in vitro_ growth of three human tumour cell lines, namely breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), non-small lung cancer (NCI-H460) and melanoma (A375-C5), using the protein-binding dye suflorhodamine B (SRB) method and their growth inhibitory effect, expressed as GI50 (mM), is shown in Table **1**.

Following a continuous exposure for 48 h, all six triterpenes (**1-6**) and only four limonoids (**8**, **11**, **12**, **13**) were found to be active against all three tumour cell lines whereas the other four limonoids (**7**, **9**, **10** and **14**) were inactive (Table **1**). The triucnaline triterpene odoradol (**4**) and the limonoids gedunin (**8**), 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b -epoxyazadirone (**11**) and cedrelone (**12**) showed strong cell growth inhibitory activity, presenting their GI50 values below 12 mM for all three cell lines. Interestingly, the limonoid cedrelone (**12**) was found to be not only the most active growth inhibitor but also more selective on NCI-H460 (GI50 = 2.77 +- 0.07 μM) and A375-C5 (GI50 = 2.60 +- 0.21 μM) cell lines when compared to odoradol (**4**), gedunin (**8**) and 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazadirone (**11**). While the damamame calabreadiol (**1**) showed moderate activity in all three cell lines (GI50~30 μM), the triucnaline triterpenes odoratone (**3**) and 22-hydroxytrinculanalla-7,24-diene-2,3-diene (**6**) showed moderate growth inhibitory activity against MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cells but strong activity against A375-C5 cells. On the other hand, the damamare triterpene cocillone (**2**) showed only weak inhibitory activity against MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cells but moderate activity against A375-C5 cells whereas the limonoid toonacillin (**13**) showed weak inhibitory activity against all three cell lines. Though carbaleaediol (**1**) and cocoillone (**2**) are both 20, 24 - epoxydamame, they differ only in the stereochemistry of C-24 and the functional group on C-3. With the C-24\(S\) configuration and the hydroxyl 

## Page 5

group on C-3, cabraleadiol (**1**) exhibited _ca._ three times higher in growth inhibitory activity against MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cells than that of octillone (**2**) which has a ketone function on C-3 and the opposite configuration of C-24. However, the growth inhibitory effects on the A375-C5 cells are similar for both compounds. In fact, cabraleadiol (**1**), isolated from various plant sources, has been previously tested for its cytotoxicity against various tumour cell lines. Phongmayrkin _et al._ [35] reported a weak cytotoxic effect of this compound, isolated from _Chisocheton penduliflorus_ (Meliaceae), on a breast cancer (BC) cell line. Qiu _et al._ [24] have found no cytotoxic effect of cabraleadiol (**1**), isolated from _Aglaia lawii_, on the LNCaP, Col 2 and KB cancer cell lines. On the other hand, octillone (**2**), isolated from _Bentala plaphylla var. japonicum_, was evaluated against a variety of human cancer cell lines, and was found to show no cytotoxicity against the KB (human epidermoid carcinoma of the nasopharynx), K562 (leukemia), MCF7 (breast carcinoma), and COLO205 (colon carcinoma) cell lines. Interestingly, though (**2**) did not exhibit any cytotoxicity against KB-C2 (ocochine-resistant KB) cells (IC50 values >100 nM), it was found to show moderate cytotoxic activity (with IC50 ranging from 20.6 to 64.2 mM) in the presence of 2.5 mM colchicine. The enhanced cytotoxicity of octillone (**2**) against KB-C2 cells in the presence of 2.5 mM colchicine as compared with that in the absence of colchicine, suggesting that this triterpene might show some MDR-reversing effects [25]. For the trivellanae triterpenes, odorad (**4**) was the most active analogue exhibiting GI50 values in the rank of 10 mM. Replacing the hydroxyl group on C-3 of odoratol (**4**) by a ketone group in odoratome (**3**) caused a two fold decrease of the growth inhibitory activity against MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cell lines; however this structural alteration did not affect the growth inhibitory activity against the A375-C5 cells. On the other hand, transforming the _vic_ diol functionality on the furan ring of odoratol (**4**) into its acetonide (**5**) led to a loss of activity.

Concerning the limonoids, the most active analogue was cedredone (**12**), exhibiting GI50 values below 5 mM in all three cell lines. Although the capacity of cedrelone (**12**) to inhibit the _in vitro_ growth of human tumour cells have not been previously reported, this compound is known to demonstrate several other activities including insecticide [36], antifeedant [37] and antifungal activity [38]. Although its growth inhibitory effect was _ca._ two folds less than that of cedrelone, the structurally related limonoid 6a-acetoxy-14b,15p-epoxyazadironne (**11**) also exhibited strong growth inhibitory activity against all three cancer cell lines. Interestingly, Maneerat _et al._ [39] have found that 6a-acetoxyepoxyazadione, isolated from _Chisocheton siamsis_ and which differs from **11** only in the presence of the carbonyl group on C-16 of the former, was inactive against oral human epidermal carcinoma (KB), small cell lung cancer (NCI-H187) and breast cancer (MCF-7). Among the limonoids whose structure possessing the lactone moiety on the ring D, sedunin (**8**) was the only member which exhibited strong growth inhibitory activity against all three human tumour cell lines (GI50 <= 10 mM); however 7-deacetylgedunin (**9**) was inactive. Interestingly, Brandt _et al._ [40] have evaluated, among several analogues, gedunin (**8**) and 7-deacetylgedunin (**9**), obtained from necem oils, for their antiproliferative activity against MCF-7 and SKBr-3 breast cancer cell lines. While godun (**8**) was found to exhibit strong antiproliferative activity against both cell lines (IC50 = 8.84 +- 0.03 for MCF-7 and 3.22 +- 0.6 for SKBr3), 7-deacetylgedunin (**9**) showed only moderate activity (IC50 = 28.96 +- 4.48 for MCF-7 and 21.09 +- 5.95 for SKBr3). Godunin (**8**) was also shown to manifest anticancer activity _via_ inhibition of the 90 kDa heat shock protein (Hsp90) folding machinery [41] and to induce the degradation of Hsp90-dependent client proteins similar to other Hsp90 inhibitors [42].

In order to further elucidate the mechanism underlying the growth inhibitory activity of the most active compounds, they were assayed for their effect on the cell cycle profile of the NCI-H460 cells. Thus, NCI-H460 cells were treated with odoratol (**4**), gedunin (**8**), 6a-acetoxy-14b,15p-epoxyazadironne (**11**) and cedrelone (**12**) at their respective GI50 concentrations (values of GI50 for NCI-H460 from Table **1**) for 48 h and processed for cell cycle analysis. Results (Fig. **3**) show that the majority of the compounds tested (with the exception of **11**) affected the normal cell cycle distribution of the NCI-H460 cells. Odoratol (**4**) was found to induce a cell cycle ar 

## Page 6

rest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (from 48% cells in this phase upon DMSO treatment to 70% of cells following treatment with this compound), causing a decrease in the % of cells in the S (from 29% in DMSO treatment to 13%) and G2M (from 21% in DMSO treatment to 11%) phases of the cell cycle. Upon treatment with sodium (**8**), the cell cycle progression was blocked (arrested) in the S phase (from 29% in DMSO treatment to 60%), leading to a decrease in the % of cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (from 48% in DMSO treatment to 20%). Incubation with credclone (**12**) caused an accumulation of cells (arrest) in the S (from 29% in DMSO treatment to 40%) and the G2M (from 21% in DMSO treatment to 43%) phases of the cell cycle, with a concomitant decrease in the % of cells in G1 (from 48% in DMSO treatment to 20%). In addition, there were indications that odoratol (**4**), gedunin (**8**) and credclone (**12**) induced apoptosis because of the increase in the sub-G1 population of cells when compared to control. Therefore, a specific apoptosis assay was carried out.

Indeed, annexin-V-FITC/PI staining was performed to determine the % of cells in early and late apoptosis (and necrosis) by flow cytometry, following treatment of NCI-H460 cells with the selected compounds. Results showed that for all tested compounds, but very modestly for odoratol (**4**) and 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazidrone (**11**), the % of cells in early (annexin V positive, PI negative) or late apoptosis (annexin V-positive, PI positive) were increased upon treatment of cells with the GI90 concentration of the compounds (Table **2**). Gedunin (**8**) caused an increase in cell death from approximately 12.6% in controls for 11.2% in DMSO control) to 47.2% in cells treated for 48 h with the GI50 concentration of this compound. Indeed, credclone (**12**) was particularly effective in inducing programmed cell death, causing 80.3% of cell death upon 48 h treatment of the cells with its GI50 concentration. It would be interesting to further investigate the mechanisms involved in the observed apoptotic inducing effects, particularly the effects on caspase activation and PARP cleavage. In addition, the involvement of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway could be investigated, by analyzing the levels of Bax and other apoptosis related proteins, such as Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL. This would be possible by analyzing extracts of cells treated with the compounds (with or without caspase inhibitors) for the levels of apoptosis associated proteins, by Western Blot with appropriate antibodies, as has been carried out by others for example in order to study the molecular mechanisms of apoptosis induced by lupeol [43].

## CONCLUSION

Six triterpenes (two dammaranes and four triucallanes) and eight limonoids, isolated from the members of the families Meliaceae and Rutaceae, were evaluated by the SRB method for their cytotoxic effect against three human tumour cell lines. The triucallane triterpene odoratol (**4**) and the limonoids gedunin (**8**), 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazidrone (**11**), credclone (**12**) were the most active inhibitors of cell growth (GI50 less than 12 uM). Of these, credclone (**12**) has shown to be the most active growth inhibitor, presenting GI50 values below 4.20 uM in all three tested cell lines.

From the analysis of the cell cycle profile in NCI-H460 cells, it was possible to conclude that odoratol (**4**)** arrests cell cycle at the G1 phase, gedunin (**8**) causes cell cycle arrest at the S phase and credclone (**12**) at the S and G2M phases while 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazidrone (**11**) did not affect the cell cycle profile of these cells. In addition, analysis of programmed cell death indicates that odoratol (**4**) and 6a-acetoxy-14b,15b-epoxyazidrone (**11**) cause a very small increase in cell death but gedunin (**8**) and particularly credclone (**12**), are very potent inducers of programmed cell death. In conclusion, credclone (**12**) is very potent by causing cell cycle

Fig. (3). Cell cycle distribution of NCI-H460 cells following 48 h treatment with growth media alone (control), DMSO (solvent control) or with the compounds. Results are the mean +- SEM of at least three independent experiments.



## Page 7

arrest and programmed cell death, which makes it a very interesting compound for further studies in order to investigate its full potential as antitumor agent.

It is evident from the number of recent studies that triterpenoid compounds represent a promising and expanding platform for natural anticancer agents whose potential is currently still not fully exploited by pharmaceutical industry. As a number of recently studied triterpenoids compare very favourably with drugs in current use [44], it is foreseeable that attention of many research institutions and pharmaceutical companies will be drawn to this class of compounds.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Fundacao para a Ciencia e a Tecnologia (FCT), I&D 4040/2007, FEDER, POCI, Capes/FCT (GRICES) and FAPESP. The authors thank NCI (USA) for the generous gift of the NCI-H460 human tumour cell line. GMA is supported by FCT and the European Social Fund. IPATIMUP is an Associate Laboratory of the Portuguese Ministry of Science, Technology and Higher Education and is partially supported by FCT. Kantima Choosing thanks Rangsit University and the Post Graduate Program of Kasetsart University for the scholarships.

## References

* (1) Altmann, K.-H.; Gertsch, J. Anticancer drugs from nature-natural products as a unique source of new microtubule-stabilizing agents. _Nat. Prod. Rep._, **2007**, _24_, 327-357.
* (2) Baker, D. D.; Chu, M.; Oza, U.; Rajgarhia, V. The value of natural products to future pharmaceutical delivery. _Nat. Prod. Rep._, **2007**, _24_, 1225-1244.
* (3) Saklani, A.; Kutty, S. K. Plant-derived compounds in clinical trials. _Drug Discov. Today_, **2007**, _13_, 161-171.
* (4) Dzubak, P.; Hajduch, M.; Vydra, D.; Hustova, A.; Kvasnica, M.; Biedermann, D.; Markova, L.; Urban, M.; Sarek, J. Pharmacological activities of natural triterpenoids and their therapeutic implications. _Nat. Prod. Rep._, **2006**, _23_, 394-411.
* (5) Pisha, E.; Chai, H.; Lee, I. S.; Changwedera, T. E.; Farnsworth, N. R.; Cordell, G.A., Beecher, C. W.; Fong, H. H., Kinghorn, A. D.; Brown, D.M. Discovery of betulinic acid as a selective inhibitor of human melanoma than functions by induction of apoptosis. _Nat. Med. (N.Y.)_, **1995**, \(1\), 1046-1051.
* (6) Jeremias, I.; Steiner, H. H.; Debatin, A.; Harold-Mende, C.; Benner, A. Cell death induction by betulinic acid, ceramide and TRAIL in primary glioblastoma multiforme cells. _Acta Neurocher. (Wein)_, **2004**, _146_, 721-729.
* (7) Gopal, D. V. R.; Narkar, A. A.; Badrinath, Y.; Mishra, K. P.; Joshi, D. S. Betulinic acid induces apoptosis in human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cell line K-562 without altering the levels of Ber-AbL. _Toxicol. Lett._, **2005**, _155_, 343-351.
* (8) Fulda, S.; Scaffidi, C.; Susin, S. A.; Krammer, P.H.; Kroemer, G.; Peter, M. E.; Debatin, K.M. Activation of mitochondria and release of mitochondrial apopogenic factors by betulinic acid. _J. Biol. Chem._, **1998**, _273_, 33942-33948.
* (9) Wick, W., Grimmel, C.; Wagenknecht, B.; Dichgans, J.; Weller, M. Betulinic acid-induced apoptosis in glioma cells: A sequential requirement for protein synthesis, formation of reactive oxygen species, and caspase processing. _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther._, **1999**, _289_, 1306-1312.
* (10) Melzig, M.F.; Bormann, H. Betulinic acid inhibits aminopeptidase N activity. _Plannat Med._, **1998**, _64_, 655-657.
* (11) Wachsberger, P. R.; Burd, R.; Wahl, M. L.; Leeper, D. B. Betulinic acid sensitization of low pH adapted human melanoma cells to hypothermia. _Int. J. Hyperholomorphic_, **2002**, _18_, 153-164.
* (12) Glaser, T.; Winter, S.; Groscurth, P.; Safayhi, H.; Sailer, E. R.; Ammon, H. P. T.; Schabet, M.; Weller, M. Boswellic acid and malignant glioma: induction of apoptosis but no modulation of drug sensitivity. _Br. J. Cancer_, **1999**, _80_, 756-765.
* (13) Winking, M.; Sarikaya, S.; Rahmanian, A.; Jodicke, A.; Boker, D. K. Boswellic acids inhibit glioma growth: a new treatment option? _J. Neuroconol._, **2000**, _46_, 97-103.
* (14) Xia, L.; Chen, D.; Han, R.; Fang, Q.; Waxman, S.; Jing, Y. Boswellic acid acetate induces apoptosis through caspase- mediated pathways in myeloid leukemia cells. _Mol. Cancer Ther._, **2005**, \(4\), 381-388.
* (15) Kunmuhakarkara, A. B.; Nair, A. S.; Pandey, B. S. M. K; Aggarwal, B. B. Boswellic acid blocks signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 signaling, proliferation, and survival of multiple myeloma _via_ the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1. _Mol. Cancer Res._, **2009**, _118_-128.
* (16) Hoernlein, R.F.; Orlikkowsky, T.; Zehrer, C.; Niethammer, D.; Sailer, E. R.; Sommer, T.; Dannecker, G. E.; Ammon, H.P.T. Ace-yl-11-keto-b-bosswellic acid induces apoptosis in HL-60 and CCR-FCDL cells and inhibit topoisomerase I. _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther._, **1999**, _288_, 613-619.
* (17) Streffer, J. R.; Bitzer, M.; Schabet, M.; Dichgans, J.; Keller, M. Response of radioendemotherapy-associated cerebral edema to a phytotherapeutic agent, H15. _Neurology_, **2001**, _56_, 1219-1221.
* (18) Subbaramaniah, K.; Michaluart, P.; Sporn, M. B.; Dannenberg, A.J. Usolic acid inhibits cyclooxygenase-2 transcription in human mammary epithelial cells. _Cancer Res._, **2000**, _60_, 2399-2404.
* (19) Lee, H. Y., Chung, H. Y., Kim, K. H.; Lee, J. J.; Kim, K. W. Induction of differentiation in the cultured F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells by triterpene acids. _J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol._, **1994**, _120_, 513-518.
* (20) Niikawa, M.; Hayashi, H.; Sato, T.; Nagase, H.; Kito H. Isolation of substances from glossy privet (Ligustrum lucidum Ait.) inhibiting the mutagenicity of benzo[a]pyrene in bacteria. _Mutat. Res._, **1993**, _319_, 1-9.
* (21) Sohn, K. H.; Lee, H. Y.; Chung, H. Y.; Kim, K. H.; Lee, J. J.; Kim K. W. Anti-angiogenic activity of triterpene acids. _Cancer Lett._, **1995**, _94_, 213-218.
* (22) Reyes-Zurita, F.; Rufino-Palomares, E. E.; Lupianez, A.; Casante, M. Masslinic acid, a natural triterpene from Olea europex L.; induces apoptosis in HT29 human colon-cancer cells via the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. _Cancer Lett._, **2009**, _273_, 44-54.
* (23) Mizushima, Y.; Iida, A.; Ohta, K.; Sugawara, F.; Sakagichi, K. Novel triterpenoids inhibit both DNA polymerase and DNA topoisomerase. _Biochem. J._, **2000**, _350_, _757-763.
* (24) Qiu, S.X.; van Hung, N.; Xuan, L.T.; Gu, J.Q.; Lobkovsky, E., Khanh, T.C.; Sojeiraro, D.D.; Clardy, J.; Pezzuto, J.M.; Dong, Y.; Tri, M.V.; Huong, L.M.; Fong, H.H.S. A pregnate steroid from _Aglia lavii_ and structure confirmation of exdaleploid monoacetate by X-ray crystallography. _Photochemistry_, **2001**, _56_, 775-780.
* (25) Kashiwada, Y.; Sekiya, M.; Yamazaki, K.; Ikeshiro, Y.; Fujioka, T.; Yamagushi, T.; Kitagawa, S.; Takashi, Y. Triterpenoids from the floral spikes of _Betula pladhya_/lafa_ and _jmein_ reversing activity against multidrug-resistant cancer cell. _J. Nat. Prod._, **2007**, _70_, 623-627.
* speed countercurrent chromatography. _Phytochem. Anal._, **2008**, _26_, 77-81.
* (27) de Paula, J. R.; Castro-Gamboa, I.; Neto, J. O.; Silva, M. F.; Fo, E. R.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L. Chemistry of _Cedrela odorata_ graft and speculations on the induced resistance against _Hypophyta grandella. An. Acad. Bras. Ci._; **1998**, _70_, 737-742.
* (28) de Paula, J. R.; Vieira, I. J. C.; Silva, M. F.; Fo, E. R.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. Sesquiterpenes, triterpeneapolis, limonid-offavoids of _Cedrela odorata_ graft and speculations on the induced resistance against _Hypophyta grandella. Phytochemistry_, **1997**, _44_, 1449-1454.
* (29) Neto, J. O.; Agostinho, S. M. M.; Silva, M. F.; Vieira, P. C.; Fernandes, J. B.; Pinheiro, A. L.; Vilela, E. F. Limonoids from seeds of _Toona ciliata_. Phytochemistry, **1995**, _38_, 397-401.
* (30) Neto, J. O.; Silva, M. F.; Fo, E. R.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L. Vilela, E. F. Simmons, P. C.; Pinheiro, A. L. Limonoids from seeds of _Toona ciliata_. Phytochemistry, **1998**, _49_, 1396-1373.
* (31) Severina, V. G.; Cazal, C. M.; Forim, C. M.; Silva, M. F.; Rodrigues-Filho, E.; Fernandes, J. B.; Vieira, P. C. Isolation of secondary metabolites from Hortia oreadica (Rutaceae) leaves through high-speed counter current chromatography. _J. Chromatogr. A_, **2009**, _1216_, 4275-4281.



## Page 8

* [32]Skehan, P.; Storeng, R.; Scudiero, D.; Monks, A.; McMahon, J.; Vistica, D.; Warren, J. T.; Bokesch, H.; Kenny, S.; Boyd, M. R. New calorimetric cytotoxicity assay for anticancer-drug screening. _J. Natl. Cancer Inst._, **1990**, \(8\), 2107-1112.
* [33] Monks, A.; Scudiero, D.; Skehan, P.; Shoemaker, A.; Paul, K.; Vistica, D.; Hose, C.; Langley, J.; Cronise P.; Vagiro-Wolff, A.; Gray-Goodrich, M.; Campbell, H.; Mayo, J. Boyd, M. Feasibility of a high-flux anticancer drug screen using a diverse panel of cultured human tumor cell lines. _J. Natl. Cancer Inst._, **1991**, _83_, 757-766.
* [34] Palmeira, A.; Paiva, A.; Sousa, E.; Seca, H.; Almeida, G. A.; Lima, R. T.; Fernandes, M. T.; Pinto, M.; Vasconcelos, H. M. Insights into the _in vitro_ antitumor mechanism of action of a new Pynoxanathone. _Chem. Biol. Drug Des._, **2010**, _76_, 43-58.
* [35] Phongmaykin, J.; Kumamoto, T.; Ishikawa, T.; Suttisri, R.; Saifah, E. A new sesquiterpene and other terpenoid constituents of _Chisochen penadulliforms. Arch. Pharm. Res._, **2008**, _31_, 21-27.
* [36] Koul, O.; Isman, M. B. Toxicity of the limonoids allelochemical credence to nocutal larvae. _Entomol. Exp. Appl._, **1992**, _64_, 281-287.
* [37] Gopalakrishnan, G.; Singh, N. D. P.; Kasinath, V.; Malathi, R. Rajan, S. S.; Photooxidation of credence, a teratometrifterpenoid from _Toona ciliata. Photochem. Photobiol._, **2000**, \(7\), 244-466.
* [38] Govindachari, T. R.; Suresh, G.; Gopalakrishnan, G.; Masilamani, S.; Banumanthi, B.; Antifungal activity of some tetranortriterpenoids. _Fluoraterapia_, **2000**, _71_, 317-320.
* [39] Maneerat,W.; Laphookhieo, Koysomboon, S.; Chantrapromma, K. Animalarial, antimyobacterial and cytotoxic limonoids from _Chisocheno siamsensis. Phytomedicine_, **2008**, _15_, 1130-1134.
* [40] Brandt, G. E. L.; Schmidt, M. D.; Prisinzano, T. E.; Blagg, B. S. J. Gedunin, a novel Hsp90 inhibitor: semisynthesis of derivativesand preliminary structure- activity relationships. _J. Med. Chem._, **2008**, _51_, 6495-6502.
* [41] Lamb, J.; Crawford, E. D.; Peck, D.; Modell, J. W.; Blat, I. C.; Wrobel, M. J.; Lerner, J.; Brunet, J. P.; Subramanian, A.; Ross, K. N.; Reich, M.; Hirotzymus, H., Wei, G.; Amstrong, S. A.; Hagary, S. J.; Clemons, P. A.; Wei, R.; Carr, S. A. The connectivity map: using gene-expression signatures to connect small molecules, genes, and disease. _Science_, **2006**, _313_, 1929-1935.
* [42] Hirotzymus, H., Lamb, J.; Ross, K. N.; Peng, X. P.; Clement, C.; Rodina,A.; Nieto, M.; Du, J.; Siegmaier, K.; Raj, S. M.; Maloney, K. N.; Clardy, J.; Hahn, W. C.; Chiosis, G.; Golub, T. R.; Gene expression signature-based chemical genomic prediction identifies a novel class of Hsp90 pathway modulators. _Cancer Cell_, **2006**, _10_, 321-330.
* [43] Prasad, S.; Madan, E.; Nigam, N.; Roy, P.; George, J.; Shukla, Y.; Induction of apoptosis by lupool in human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells through regulation of mitochondrial, Akt/PKB and NFkappaB signaling pathways. _Cancer Biol. Ther._, **2009**, \(8\), 1632-1639.
* [44] Dzubak, P.; Hajduch, M.; Vydra, D.; Hustova, A.; Kvanica, M.; Biedermann, D.; Markova, L.; Urban, M.; Sarek J. Pharmacological activities of natural triterpenoids and their therapeutic implication. _Nat. Prod. Rep._, **2006**, _23_, 394-411.



