# 10.4067@S0717-97072009000300004.pdf

## Page 1

Identification of triterpenes and sterols from _pretrogyne nitens_ (Fabaceae-Caesalpinioideae) using high-resolution gas chromatography

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]

Luis Octavio Regasini, Gerardo Magela Vieira-Junior, Dan Cristina Fernandes, Vanderlan Silva Bolz, Alberto Jose Cavalheira, Alberto 

## Page 2

Figure 11: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ leaves [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.104 min); **6**-compested (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 17.479 min); **7**- stigmastered (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 18.494 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.571 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 22.999 min); **1**-_β_-amyrin (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 25.001 min); **3**-lupenone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 29.010 min)]

Figure 12: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of foliar epicircular wax from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.066 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.507 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 22.966 min); **1**-_β_-amyrin (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 24.958 min)) **2**-taarcerad acetate (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 27.783 min)]

Figure 13: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ leaves [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.104 min); **6**-compested (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 17.479 min); **7**- stigmastered (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 18.494 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.571 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 22.999 min); **1**-_β_-amyrin (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 25.001 min); **3**-lupenone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 29.010 min)]

Figure 14: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.104 min); **6**-compested (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 17.479 min); **7**- stigmastered (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 18.494 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.571 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 22.999 min); **1**-_β_-amyrin (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 25.001 min); **3**-lupenone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 29.010 min)]

Figure 15: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.128 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.580 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 23.009 min)]

Figure 16: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ leaves [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.128 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.580 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 23.009 min)]

Figure 17: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.128 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.580 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 23.009 min)]

Figure 18: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.128 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.580 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 23.009 min)]

Figure 19: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.128 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.580 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 23.009 min)]

Figure 15: Gas chromatogram (HRGC) on a SPR-50 column of the extract from _Pretoyyne nitens_ [**IS**- internal standard (cholesterol) (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 14.122 min); **6**-compested (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 17.479 min); **7**- stigmastered (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 18.494 min); **8**-_β_-sistosterol (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 20.571 min); **5**-germanicone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 22.999 min); **1**-_β_-amyrin (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 25.001 min); **3**-lupenone (R\({}_{\tau}\) = 29.010 min)]



## Page 3

were also characterized in all analyzed hexane extracts, except from the leaves. The pentacyclic triterpenes _b_-amyrin (**1**) and lupenone (**3**) were detected in the stems and flowers, whereas germinec (**5**) was identified in the leaves and stems; and _b_-amyroneone (**4**) was detected in the flowers extract. Further GC-FID analyses of foliar epicircular wax showed the presence of **1, 5** and, taraxerci acetate (**2**). These results clearly demonstrate that the hexane extracts from stems and flowers present higher chemodiversity than the others. On the other hand their chemical profile indicated common major constituents concerning sterols and triterpenes in the analyzed samples evidencing great similarity among the studied plant part extracts.

Altogether, these results corroborate differences in the secondary metabolites production by different plant tissues, which can be relevant from the point of view of the chemical interface between plants and the surrounding environment.18 In this context, several studies indicated variable production of secondary metabolites by medicinal plants.19 Zangerl and Bazzaz reported different levels of frameworks' on _Pastatic saxion syntax_ (Apiaaceae) leaves and roots.20 Likewise, Rees described flowers of _Hypercian hirsutum_ (Clusiaceae) contain five to ten times more hypercian that the leaves.21 Considering that young leaves and other growing plant parts are generally better protected by secondary compounds than mature tissues, young leaves of rosette plants of _Cynoglassum officinale_ (Boragaceae) were found to contain up to 53 times higher levels of pyrrolizidine alkaloids than older leaves.22

In the case of non-polar extracts, bioactivity has been often associated with complex mixtures of triterpenoid and/or steroid compounds23-35. However, no further analysis/identification of the mixture components is subsequently performed in most cases due to two reasons: Firstly, traditional phytochemical procedures, which include isolation of the components from isomeric mixtures, may be tedious, time-consuming and relatively expensive. Secondly, due to their structural complexity the analysis of triterpenes and sterols by spectroscopic techniques has been shown to be difficult in many cases. Gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC-MS) has emerged as the best technique for characterization of low-polarity compounds, including triterpenes, sterols, glycerols, waves, and derivatized fatty acids. However, this hyphenated analytical technique is still inaccessible to many research groups around the world. On the other hand, GC is more readily available and might also be employed as a preliminary procedure for rapid, simple, and relatively cheaper characterization of non-polar compounds from plant extracts, including epicircular wax. The present phytochemical screening using HRGC showed to be reliable and useful for the identification of triterpenes and sterols in complex matrices such as hexane extracts and foliar epicircular wax from _P. niens_ (Figure 2). Other interesting applications of this technique include the selection of plant extracts containing bioactive non-polar compounds for further phytochemical and pharmacological investigations, which may represent a crucial step in bioprospecting studies and corroborates its importance as a tool for conducting phytochemical studies.

Figure 2. Structures of triterpenes (**1–5**) and sterols (**6–8**) from _Pterogyne niens_.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|} \hline
**Compound** & **Leaves** & **Fruits** & **Stems** & **Flowers** & **Epicircular wax** & **RR\({}^{\bullet}\)** & **RR\({}^{\bullet}\)** \\ \hline _α_-amyrin & - & - & - & - & - & 1.326 & 2.006 \\ \hline _β_-amyrin & - & - & + & + & + & 1.290 & 1.774 \\ \hline _l_upeol & - & - & - & - & - & 1.326 & 2.163 \\ \hline _taraxercol_ & - & - & - & - & - & 1.261 & 1.710 \\ \hline _α_-amyrin acetate & - & - & - & - & - & 1.544 & 2.156 \\ \hline _β_-amyrin acetate & - & - & - & - & - & 1.464 & 1.928 \\ \hline _l_upeol acetate & - & - & - & - & - & 1.544 & 2.239 \\ \hline _b_a_uerenyl acetate & - & - & - & - & - & 1.704 & 2.511 \\ \hline _taraxercol acetate & - & - & - & - & + & 1.427 & 1.934 \\ \hline _friedelanoyl_ acetate & - & - & - & - & - & 1.785 & 2.887 \\ \hline _friedelin_ & - & - & - & - & - & 1.550 & 2.750 \\ \hline _l_upenone & - & - & + & + & - & 1.325 & 2.011 \\ \hline _α_-amyrone & - & - & - & - & - & 1.325 & 1.937 \\ \hline _β_-amyrone & - & - & - & + & - & 1.265 & 1.725 \\ \hline _g_granicone & + & - & + & - & + & 1.256 & 1.648 \\ \hline _c_ampesterol & - & + & + & + & - & 1.124 & 1.239 \\ \hline _s_tigmasterol & - & + & + & + & + & - & 1.167 & 1.314 \\ \hline _β_-sitosterol & + & + & + & + & + & + & 1.246 & 1.457 \\ \hline \end{tabular}

* RR = relative retention related to the internal standard (cholesterol): ‘SPB-5 column; ‘SPB-50 column. (+) presence of the compound; (-) absence of the compound.

Our results indicate that _β_-sitosterol (**8**) is present in all the analyzed extracts. Additional widely occurring sterols: campesterol (**6**) and stigmasterol (**7**), although the number of sterols in the analyzed extracts is _not_ greater than _β_.

\end{table}
Table 1.: Chemical composition of the hexane extracts and foliar epicircular wax of _Pterogyne niens_ from HRGC analysis (SPB-5 and SPB-50 columns)

## Page 4



## References

* (1) D. J. Newman, G. M. Cragg, _J. Nat. Prod._**70**, 461, (2007).
* (2) R. A. Mittermeier, G. A. B. Da Fonseca, A. B. Rylands, _Conserv. Biol._**19**, 601, (2005).
* (3) A. C. Pinto, D. H. S. Silva, V. S. Bolzani, N. P. Lopes, R. A. Epifanio, _Quim. Nova_**25**, 45, (2002).
* (4) J. T. Baker, R. P. Borris, B. Carte, G. A. Cardell, D. D. Soejarto, G. M. Cragg, M. O. Gupta, M. M. lwu, D. R. Madulid, V. E. Tyler, _J. Nat. Prod._**58**, 1325, (1996).
* (5) P. E. R. Carvalho Especies Florestais Brasileiras. Recomendacoes Silviculturias, Potencialidades e Uso da Madeira, Colombo, Piracicaba, 1994.
* (6) A. Bukart Las Leguminoss Argentina, Aeme-Agency, Buenos Aires, 1952.
* (7) H. Lorenzi Arvores Brasileiras. Manual de Identificacao e Cultivo de Plantas Arbores do Brasil, Plantarum, Nova Odessa, 1998.
* (8) M. Crivos, M. R. Martinez, M. L. Pochetino, C. Remorini, A. Sy, L. Teves _J. Elmobiol. Ethinomed._**2**, 1, (2007).
* (9) V. S. Bolzani, A. A. L. Gunatilaka, D. G. I. Kingston _J. Nat. Prod._**58**, 1683, (1995).
* (10) L. O. Regasini, D. H. S. Silva, I. Castro-Gamboa, M. Furlan, E. J. Barreiro, P. M. P. Ferreira, C. Pessoa, J. V. Costa-Loufro, M. O. Moraes, M. C. M. Young, V. S. Bolzani, _J. Nat. Prod._**72**, 473, (2009).
* (11) D. C. Fernandes, L. O. Regasini, J. C. R. Vellosa, P. M. Pauletti, I. Castro-Gamboa, V. S. Bolzani, O. M. M. Oliveira, D. H. S. Silva, _Chem. Pharm. Bull._**56**, 723, (2008).
* (12) L. O. Regasini, D. C. Fernandes, I. Castro-Gamboa, D. H. S. Silva, M. Furlan, V. S. Bolzani, E. J. Barreiro, E. M. Cardoso-Lopes, M. C. M. Young, L. B. Torres, J. C. R. Vellosa, O. M. M. Oliveira, _Quim. Nova_**31**, 802, (2008).
* (13) L. O. Regasini, C. M. Oliveira, J. C. R. Vellosa, O. M. M. F. Oliveira, D. H. S. Silva, V. S. Bolzani, _Afr. J. Biotechnol._**7**, (2008).
* (14) L. O. Regasini, J. C. R. Vellosa, D. H. S. Silva, M. Furlan, O. M. M. Oliveira, N. M. Khalil, L. L. Brunetti, M. C. M. Young, E. J. Barreiro, V. S. Bolzani, _Plyrochemistry_**69**, 1739, (2008).
* (15) V. C. Silva, A. O. Faria, V. S. Bolzani, M. N. Lopes, _Helv. Chim. Acta_**90**, 1781, (2007).
* Campus de Aaraquara
- Instituto de Quimica, 2006.
* Campus de Aaraquara
- Instituto de Quimica, 2007.
* (18) L. Gobbo-Neto, N. P. Lopes, _Quim. Nova_**30**, 374, (2007).
* (19) L. M. Schoonboven, J. J. A. van Loon, M. Dicke Insect-Plant Biology, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005.
* (20) A. R. Zangerl, F. A. Bazzaz Theory and pattern in plant defense allocation. In Plant resistance to herbivores and pathogens (ed. R. S. Fritz and E. L. Simms), Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 363-91, 1992.
* (21) C. J. C. Rees, _Ent. Exp. Appl._**12**, 565, 1969.
* (22) N. M. van Dam, R. Verpoorte, E. van der Meijden, _Plyrochemistry_**27**, 1013, (1994).
* (23) M. Gaertner, L. Muller, J. F. Roos, G. Cani, A. R. Snatus, R. Niero, J. B. Calixto, R. A. Yunes, F. Delle Monache, V. Cechinel-Filho, _Plytomedicine_**6**, 41, (1999).
* (24) M. F. Otuki, J. Ferreira, F. V. Lima, C. Meyere-Silva, A. Malheiros, L. A. Muller, G. S. Cani, A. R. S. Sabtos, R. A. Yunes, J. B. Calixto, _J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therap._, **313**, 10, (2005).
* (25) J. Patocka, _J. Appl. Biomed._, **1**, 7, (2003).
* (26) A. R. S. Santos, V. Cechinel-Filho, R. A. Yunes, J. B. Calixto, _J. Pharm. Pharmacol._, **47**, 56, (1995).



