# 10.5935@0103-5053.19960024.pdf

## Page 1

Antifungal Irridoids from the Stems of _Tocoyena formosa Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani_a, _Ligia Maria Vetoratto Trevisan_a, Clara Miti Izumisawa_b and Maria Claudia Marx Young_b

# Abstract

Un novo iridide, com aitividade antifingica, foi isolado dos caules de _Tocoyena formosa_, juntanente com outros très iridoides (apodantosideo, galiosideo e sua correspondente aglicona), uma saponina triterpenica, acido 3-O-b-D-glucopiranosil-28-O-b-D-glucopiranosil-quinovico e o flavonol glicosilado 3-O-b-D-ramnosil-3-O-metilquercetina, de estructuras conhecidas. A substancia nova foi caracterizada atraves de dados espectroscopicos como sendo ferulato de 11-O-_trans_-teuverena.

A new antifungal iridoid compound, together with three active known iridoids, galioside, galioside aglucone, and apodanthoside, as well as 3-O-b-D-glucopyranosyl-28-O-b-D-glucopyranoside alto

nosyl quinovic acid and quercetin-3-O-methyl-3-O-b-D-d-rhamnopyranoside, were isolated from the stems of _Tocoyena formosa_. This new compound was characterized by spectral data as 11-O-_trans_-feruloylteucerin.

## Introduction

Several tropical Brazilian Rubiaceae species from the rain forests and _cerrado_, produce phytoalexins in response to fungal inoculation [1]. Among the 15 assayed species, plants of the _Tocoyena formosa_ collected in Mogi-Guacu, in the state of Sao Paulo, showed positive phytoalexin response during the entire year except during winter [2], A positive response is not necessarily associated with the appearance of phytoalexins, but could be caused by inhibitns. After TLC bioassays the extracts obtained from the leaves and stems of this species revealed several different fungitoxic zones. Recently we reported the isolation and structural determination of four iridoids from the leaves of _T. formosa_. Two of them, _a_- and _b_- gardiol, showed inhibitory activity against fungal growth [3]. We now describe the isolation and characterization of four iridoids, 3-6, from the stems of _T. Formosa_, with antifungal properties, as well as the inactive, known compounds 1-2. The new iridoid 6 and the known iridoids 3-5 showed activity against the growth of _Cladosporium cladosporioides_ (Fres.) de Vries (Demiaaceae). This is a common phylolcladane fungus and a contaminant of many species of seeds [4]. Some strains of _C. cladosporioides_ appear to be weakly pathogenic [5]. In this paper we report the isolation and structural elucidation of this new iridoid.

## Experimental

IR spectra were obtained on a Perkin-Elmer Model 1600 spectrometer, 1H-NMR (200 and 400 MHz) and 13C-NMR (50 and 100.57 Mhz) spectra on a Brucker and a Varian Unity 400, respectively, at 25deg; EI-MS and HRMS: MS Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Virginia, USA.



## Page 2



### Plant material

Stems of _Tocoyena formosa_ were collected from preserved areas of a Brazilian _cerrado_ in the biological reserve of the Mogi-Guacu Ecological and Experimental Station, Sao Paulo, Brazil. A voucher specimen (# SP 178799) was deposited in the Maria Eneida Fidalgo Herbarium of the Instituto de Botanica de Sao Paulo.

### Extraction and isolation of the constituents

Dried and powdered stems (2.0 kg) of _T. formosa_ were successively extracted in soxhlet with hexane and EtOH. The hexane extract (310 mg) was fractioned by silica gel column chromatography (6.0 g) yielding sitosterol (10 mg), b-amirin (30 mg), and fatty material. The crude ethanolic extract (200 g) was solubilized in EtOH:H2O (8:2) and partitioned into hexane (30 g), CHCl3 (22 g) and n-BuOH (45.5 g). The n-BuOH soluble fraction (250 mg) was submitted to CC on silica gel (10 g) and eluted with CH2Cl2 with increasing amounts of MeOH. After TLC, some fractions were combined and submitted to prep. TLC developed with CH2Cl2:AcOEt (4:2) and CHCl3:MeOH:H2O (68:38:10) gave 1 (13.5 mg), **2** (14.0 mg), **3** (6.2 mg, colorless gum **4** (10.5 mg, mp 113-115deg, [lit. 110-115deg]), **5** (15.0 mg, colorless gum) and **6** (20.1 mg, colorless gum).

### Bioassay

Fungitoxic zones were detected using a spore suspension of _C. cladosporioides_12 on TLC silica gel plates developed with CHCl3:MeOH (7:3) and CHCl3:MeOH:H2O (68:38:10).

11-O-_trans_fenuloylteucren **6**. Colorless gum: [a]0 -65.5 (c = 0.1, MeOH); IR: \(\nu_{\rm Max}\)\({}^{\rm KB}\) (cm-1): 3294, 1680, 1605,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c} atom & \multicolumn{2}{c}{**6**} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{**7**} \\  & \({}^{1}\)H & \({}^{13}\)C\({}^{4}\) & \({}^{1}\)H\({}^{5}\) & \({}^{13}\)C \\
1 & 5.02 (1H d, 4.5) & 90.1 d & 5.87 (1H d, 4.3) & 91.5 d \\
3 & 6.35 (1H, s) & 140.7 d & 6.30 (1H, s) & 140.6 d \\
4 & - & 113.0 s & - & 1

## Page 3

1516, 1438, 1200, 1025, 986, 825; 1H-NMR [200, 400 MHz, (CD)2CO]: (Table 1); 13C-NMR [50, 100 MHz, (CD)2CO]: (Table 1); EIMS (70 eV) m/z (%): 336 ([M]+, 10), 167 (90), 163 (100), 149 (26), 139 (16), 135 (58), 109 (28).

## Results and Discussion

Column chromatography of the EtOH extract from stems of _T. formosa_ on silica gel resulted in six compounds 1-6, among which the iridoid **6** is being reported for the first time. The other five compounds1**-5**, are known compounds and were identified as the triterpene saponin (3-O-b-D-glu-copranosyl-28-O-b-D-glucopyranosyl quinovic acid) 16, the flavonol glycoside (quercetin-3-O-b-D-methyl-3-rhamnopyranoside) 27, and the iridoids galioside **38**, 9, galioside aglicone **4**, and apodanthoside **5**10, 11.

The iridoid **6** showed structural features very related with teucrein, which was isolated as an acetyl derivative from _Teucrium marum_ (Labiateae)13. The molecular formula of **6** was determined as C19H22O6 from its HRMS (m/z 346.1305; calc. 346.1314). The EI-mass fragments at m/z 163 [C6H2O3]+, 135 [C8H2O2]+ and 109 [C6H5O2]+ indicated the presence of a feurolyl unity in the side chain of **6**. The IR spectrum showed diagnostic absorption bands occurring at 3294 (vOH), 1680 (vC = O a,b-unsaturated ester), 1630 (vC = C), and 1605 and 1438 cm-1 (vC = C, aromatic unity). The presence of a _trans_-feruloyl moiety was confirmed by 1H- and 13C-NMR resonance spectral data (Table 1). Analysis of the 1H- and 13C-NMR spectral data of **6**, including DEPT 135 and HETCOR experiments also indicated that this compound bears an iridoidal skeleton, which was identified as teucrein **7**, by comparison of 

## Page 4

the \({}^{1}\)H- and \({}^{13}\)C-NMR chemical shifts with those reported in the literature\({}^{13}\). In the \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum of 6 relative to 7, H-1 (\(\delta\) 5.00) was shielded by 0.87 ppm, while in the \({}^{13}\)C-NMR spectrum C-1 (\(\delta\) 90.1) it was shielded by 1.4 ppm. The \({}^{1}\)H-NMR spectrum also showed resonances at \(\delta\) 4.70 d and 4.66 d (\(\delta\) 66.9), attributable to hydroxymethylene H-11, in agreement with structure 7. This observation indicated that C-11 should be the site of esterification and that in C-1 the hydroxyl group should be free. An HMDEC \({}^{1}\)H- \({}^{13}\)C-NMR (Fig. 1) correlation confirmed not only the substitution of _transfer_ly unity at C-11, but also confirmed that the hydroxyl group at C-1 is free. The structure of 6 was therefore established as the novel 11-O-_trans_-feruloylteucren.

The presence of aglicone iridoids with antifungal activity suggests that they can play a defensive role against fungal attack. However an additional study must be undertaken in order to prove whether these compounds are phytoalexins or inhibiting.

## References

* [1] Braga, M.R.; Young, M.C.M.; Ponte, J.V.A.; Dietrich, S.M.C.; Emerenciano, V.P.; Gottlieb, O.R. _Biochem. Syst. Ecol._**1986**, _14_, 507.
* [2] Braga, M.R.; Young, M.C.M.; Dietrich, S.M.C.; Gottlieb, O.R. _J. Chem. Ecol._**1991**, _17_, 1079.
* [3] Bolzani, V da S.; Trevisan, L.M.V.; Izumisawa, C.M.; Young, M.C.M., submitted for publication in _J. Nat. Prod._
* [4] Scott, P.M.; Van Valbeck, W.; Maclean, W.M. _J. Antibiol._**1971**, _24_, 741.
* [5] O'Donnell, J.; Dickinson, C.H. _Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc._**1980**, _74_, 335.
* [6] Aquino, R.; De Simone, F.; Pizza, C.; Cerri, R.; De Mello, J.F. _Photochemistry_**1988**, _27_, 2927.
* [7] Agrawal, P.K.; Mahesh, C.B. In _Carbon-13 NMR of flavonoids. Studies in Organic Chemistry 39;_ Agrawal. P.K., Ed.; Elsevier: New York, 1989; p 283.
* [8] Karikas, G.A.; Eureby, M.R.; Waigh, R.D. _Planta Med._**1987**, _53_, 223.
* [9] Bianco, A.; Passacantilli, P.; Guiso, M.; Iavarone, C.; Trogolo, C. _Gazz. Chim. Ital._**1987**, _108_, 13
* [10] Bailleul, F.; Rabararon, A.; Koch, M.; Delaveau P. _Planta Med._**1983**, _37_, 316.
* [11] Bailleul, F.; Delaveau, P.; Koch, M.; _Photochemistry_**1980**, _19_, 2763.
* [12] Homans, A.L.; Fuchs, A. _J. Chromatogr._**1970**, _51_, 325.
* [13] Bellesia, F.; Pagnoni, U.M.; Pinetti, A.; Trave, R. _J. Chem. Res., Synop._**1983**, 328.

Figure 1: Some selected HMDEC correlations of iridoid 6.



